Holiday Tomorrow
New Year's Day will be legally observed tomorrow.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office, 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, open.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION: No pickups, street cleaning or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Subways and buses on holiday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on regular weekday schedule.
Metro-North Railroad on combined Saturday and Sunday schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Rail service on holiday schedule.
Buses on Saturday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on combined Saturday and Sunday schedule.


Susan C. Genco, Mitchell Kamin
Susan Collard Genco, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael T. Genco of Buffalo, was married there last evening at the Garret Club to Mitchell Aaron Kamin, a son of Stanley R. Kamin and Pamela A. Baker, both of Los Angeles.
Rabbi Stanley Levy performed the ceremony, in which the Rev.
John W. Zeitler, a Roman Catholic priest, took part.
Ms.
Genco, 28, is keeping her name.
She is a director of business and legal affairs at Arista Records in New York.
She graduated from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she and her husband received law degrees from Harvard University.
Her father is the medical director of the Buffalo Medical Group.


Dec. 25-35; Finally, a Job for the Space Needle


Sign Language
HIS TERM AS GOVERNOR DOES not begin until today, but George E. Pataki has already taken a bold step to protect public spaces and curb juvenile delinquency.
Without making any formal announcements or adding to the budget deficit, he has begun the most impressive anti-graffiti campaign in the history of New York.
Traditionally politicians have dealt with the problem of graffiti by throwing money at it.
They've hired workers to sandblast it.
They've paid sociologists to study the self-esteem of urban youths who desperately try to attract attention and mark their turf by spray-painting their "tags" -- their gang colors and their names -- on public property.
But until now politicians haven't dealt with a root cause of graffiti: their own bad example.


INSIDE
China Told to Stop the Music
The United States threatened to impose $2.8 billion in tariffs unless China cracks down on the piracy of American music, films and computer software, but China warned that it would retaliate.
Page 14.
Bosnia Truce Confirmed
Both sides in the Bosnian conflict signed a pact to maintain a cease-fire for four months, improving the prospects of reaching a permanent peace agreement.
Page 8.


Coming Home
1946-1994 Lewis Burwell Puller Jr. picked up a gun one afternoon last May and killed himself.
He was 48, a winner of the Pulitzer Prize for his 1991 autobiography, "Fortunate Son: The Healing of a Vietnam Vet." His father was the late Gen.
Chesty Puller, the most decorated Marine in history.
To those who fought in Vietnam, the son displayed a different kind of heroism -- attesting to the horror of war.
Michael Norman
I NEVER MET OR TALKED TO LEW PULLER, BUT I KNEW him, the woeful part of him anyway.
We fought on the same ground at the same time, I-Corps, Vietnam, in the bloody year 1968.
I came home whole however.
He came home a mess, both legs gone, hands mangled, guts in a knot, his loss literally the result of a misstep, a booby trap.


Time to Retire the Filibuster
The U.S.
Senate likes to call itself the world's greatest deliberative body.
The greatest obstructive body is more like it.
In the last session of Congress, the Republican minority invoked an endless string of filibusters to frustrate the will of the majority.
This relentless abuse of a time-honored Senate tradition so disgusted Senator Tom Harkin, a Democrat from Iowa, that he is now willing to forgo easy retribution and drastically limit the filibuster.
Hooray for him.
For years Senate filibusters -- when they weren't conjuring up romantic images of Jimmy Stewart as Mr.
Smith, passing out from exhaustion on the Senate floor -- consisted mainly of negative feats of endurance.
Senator Sam Ervin once spoke for 22 hours straight.
Outrage over these tactics and their ability to bring Senate business to a halt led to the current so-called two-track system, whereby a senator can hold up one piece of legislation while other business goes on as usual.


Data Bank/January 1, 1995


The Elegant Winter Look of Cannes
THE city fathers of Cannes have thoughtfully placed scores of little wooden chairs along the broad sidewalk that runs the length of the Boulevard de la Croisette bordering the sea.
So, on a mild winter's afternoon, strollers can pause for a rest and enjoy the sight of boats in the bay.
Three weekends ago they would even have seen sunbathers playing cards on the wide beach.
But since this is Cannes, watching the show along La Croisette has long been thought more interesting.
For the best view, most people turn their backs to the sun, sea and sand.
After all, during the Cannes Film Festival every May, there are starlets to be gawked at.
In the summer, the young and beautiful show off their bodies.
And in winter, elderly promenaders offer fashion, elegance and pampered little dogs as entertainment.


Wall Street; 1994: Another Bad Year for Trees
MERRILL LYNCH &amp; COMPANY took the prize for killing the most trees in the name of research published in 1994, pumping out 6,527 reports.
That was up from 4,903 such contributions in 1993.
Nelson Publications, which keeps tabs on the analysts who keep tabs on public companies, said Lehman Brothers was the second-most-productive Wall Street firm in terms of the quantity of reports pumped out -- 4,520 in 1994.
Smith Barney, Goldman, Sachs and Prudential Securities made up the rest of the top five list.


Russians Enter Separatist Capital After Air and Ground Onslaught
Russian forces opened an all-out offensive against the capital of Chechnya today, storming into the town center and unleashing a relentless artillery and aerial bombardment that left many buildings in flames.
Russian tanks advanced from the outskirts to the center of the city, Grozny, in less than an hour under cover from helicopter gunships.
It was the first time gunships were used to attack Chechnya's capital since President Boris N. Yeltsin sent more than 40,000 troops into the secessionist republic on Dec. 11.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tues.
Purchasing managers' index, Dec.
61.2
60.5
Auto sales, Dec., mils., ann. rate
7.4
7.3
Wed.
Construction spending, Nov., pct. chg.
0.9
0.6
Thur.
Weekly jobless claims, thous.
322
320
Factory-goods orders, Nov., pct. chg.
-0.4
2.0
Fri.
Nonfarm payroll, Dec., chg., thous.
350
260
Unemployment, Dec., percent
5.6
5.6
Mon.: Markets closed for holiday Wed.: Congress returns from vacation Fri.: Greenspan testifies to Senate on derivatives


Culinary Crossroads Of the World
BECCO ** (212) 397-7597; 355 West 46th Street; $$; all major credit cards


Verbal Pollution?
To the Editor:
I cringed at the paucity of logic and honest thought in P. J. O'Rourke's smug misinterpretation of environmental regulations ("Ecology? Let's Talk Windshield Bugs," Viewpoints, Dec. 4).
His shallow view of issues like endangered species is only slightly more cogent than his earlier blabbering about the need of every real American man to drive a big four-by-four truck.


Striving Parents Send Children Mixed Message
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 28 front-page article on the devaluation of Advanced Placement exams reports on a widespread phenomenon.
We are pushing our children to work harder, so that they will do better, so that they can get into a better college, so that they can get a better job.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 4 about rural Japanese villages misstated the date of an invasion attempt on the Korean peninsula by Hideyoshi, a Japanese warrior.
It was the late 1500's, not the early 1600's.


Tastes for the New Year: Spicy Southwest, India and Morocco
THERE is nothing like spicy food to get the new year off to a warm start.
From the Southwest as well as India and Morocco, the following recipes are easy to make -- and out of the ordinary.
They are also low in saturated fat.
Moroccan tagines are an exotic form of stew, normally cooked in an earthenware pot with a conical lid.
A heavy skillet or shallow casserole that goes on top of the stove works equally well for the meatballs.
They simmer in a sauce that reduces to a thick gravy and goes well with couscous.


In Bosnia War, Blame Enough for Everyone
To the Editor:
As a freelance journalist who spent last winter traveling across Bosnia and Herzegovina with a relief convoy, I well appreciate "In Bosnia, the War That Can't Be Seen" (The Week in Review, Dec. 25), discussing difficulties of access and the dangers facing reporters there.


Op-Ed Columnists
The days on which Op-Ed columnists appear are customarily rotated every six months.
Here is the schedule through July 1:


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on Dec. 4 about tours of Budapest and Prague misstated the driving time to those cities from Vienna.
It is about three and a half hours to Budapest and four hours to Prague -- not 60 to 90 minutes.


Under the Covers: Noteworthy Books
Just as there was more to sports in 1994 than the Rangers winning and the World Series vanishing, there was more to sports books than the bound version of Ken Burns's "Baseball." Various members of the Times sports department offer what they consider were some of the best sports books published in 1994.
AROUND THE WORLD IN 18 HOLES Tom Callahan and Dave Kindred (Doubleday, $23).
This entertaining account of a 37,000-mile round of golf begins in Northern Ireland, ends at Augusta National and makes 16 other stops at locales both traditional (Moscow, Tokyo) and exotic (Calcutta, Nepal, Singapore).
Always, there is golf to be played and written about, from midnight tee times in Iceland to a scraggly nine-hole course in Katmandu.
But more than that, these two veteran sportswriters bring a discerning eye to the cultures of the places they visit and the characters that inhabit them.
BILL BRINK


Cooperative Education Head Calls Pay Fair
WHEN Dr.
Vincent T. Beni begins his new job as Superintendent of the Southern Westchester Board of Cooperative Educational Services on April 24, five works of art will accompany him.
They are framed pen-and-ink depictions of how children learn, drawn cartoon style by the artist Randi Gradisher, which were given to him by staff members of the Pearl River School District when he left his job as assistant superintendent in 1988.
One sketch he especially treasures shows a child's head sprouting flowers after a gentle watering.
Dr.
Beni, who was recently named to his new position by the seven-member Southern Westchester Board of Cooperative Educational Services with the approval of the State Education Commissioner, Dr.
Thomas Sobol -- has been closely involved with students throughout his 23-year career.
He has taught English and reading in elementary, middle and high schools in Thornwood and the Bronx, worked as an assistant middle school principal in Pearl River and currently serves as the Hastings-on-Hudson Superintendent of Schools.


Out of Chaos a Show Is (Sometimes) Born
IF YOU'RE INTERESTED IN THE process by which musicals sometimes get made, you may want to catch Harold Prince's production of "The Petrified Prince" playing at Martinson Hall in the Joseph Papp Public Theater until Jan. 15.
When I saw the show two nights before its official opening, it was a mess but, in this case, a certain amount of mess is allowed.
Though "The Petrified Prince" looks as if it cost a mint, and though the 27 cast members never miss cues or collide on stage, this is a workshop production: one of those early realizations of a stage piece that allows the various collaborators to see what they have done, to judge audience reactions and to decide whether the work will continue.


He Who Dances
1963-1994 John C. Russell, a harshly poetic commentator on the urban homosexual world, was a versatile playwright -- one of his works was about suburban high school kids.
For Russell, gay love was complex, passionate, often funny.
His plays were read at the New Dramatists and at Joe Papp's Public Theater; some were staged off-off-Broadway.
When he died of AIDS, he was just finding his voice.
In this scene from his last play, "Dante and Virgil Go Dancing," a character called He Who Dances in Shadow speaks.
HE WHO DANCES IN SHADOW: Don't know when it happened.
Well, I guess it was a Wednesday, but I have no month, no definitive time marker, no broad-based context.
Except I was in one of my transitional phases.
Restless and deadly curious.
I remember thinking I had to go out that night or my thirst for narrative would never be satisfied.
I could envision a volume of stories left unlived -- what a waste that would be.
I had to go out.
And of course, I was right.
If I hadn't gone out that night, I would never have met the boy from Albany, and if I had never met the boy from Albany, I would be a greatly diminished person.
I was flinging my body around wistfully, with camp aplomb, with my usual, let's call it "panache," at the club I went to every Wednesday night because I got on the guest list because I once slept with the D.J., who happens to be the best and corniest D.J. in New York, and as I spun around under the scarlet light and plunged my feet into the plank wood floor I kept catching the eye of a tall skinny guy with a leather cap on holding a juicy blond boy.
I kept throwing my eyes on them as I spun and they kept catching them.
I never know how to speak to people, so he spoke to me.
The skinny one.
The boy from Albany.
We held eyes and we danced and he did all the information.
He had a rebel voice, an outlaw voice, a man voice, with boy eyes and almost no hair.
I love a good hard voice spewing obscenities.
He had knowledge of the world and anger at it.
He had warmth towards people he didn't entirely respect.
He jumped as dancing, much like I do, and he was happy.
And that's what slayed me.
What I couldn't get.
Not for the life of me.
I stepped out of myself, out of my bouncing body and planned a whole interrogation which never happened.
As the light bathed me, as we kissed long and deep, as we threw our bodies across the dance floor, as we kissed and held the blond boy, and especially as I rooted my feet into the floor a foot away from his, leaving him briefly to dance his own dance, as I glared at his separateness, this incredible urge came over me to get the truth from him.


'Skunk Works'
To the Editor:
In his review of "Skunk Works: A Personal Memoir of My Years at Lockheed," by Ben R. Rich and Leo Janos (Nov. 6), Richard Perle mistakenly attempts to enlist Mr.
Rich against "critics of defense spending . . . who deplore 'black' programs that proceed in secret."
Even though Mr.
Rich was responsible for some of the most successful highly classified "black" programs, he makes it quite clear that he does not harbor an uncritical enthusiasm for Government secrecy.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
OUR FILMS, THEIR FILMS  By Satyajit Ray. Hyperion, $22.95.


International Misfits and Accidental Artists
THE MYTH MAN By Elizabeth Swados. 326 pp. New York: Viking. $21.95.


In Newark, Prologue to an Arts Center
IT is known officially as the New Jersey Performing Arts Center.
And the first building, now under construction in downtown Newark, is indeed that.
But considering the long-range plans, it might as well be called the New Jersey Office, Shopping, Dining and Performing Arts Center.
Ultimately, less than one-third of the floor area to be built on the site, or about 400,000 square feet, would be devoted to performances or subsidiary commercial uses.
The rest of the space, 1 million square feet, would be in two large office towers across Center Street, on land controlled by the arts center.


Khmer Rouge Threaten Cambodian Tourism
THE killings of six Western travelers in Cambodia last year and the continuing menace of the Khmer Rouge have threatened to cripple this nation's tourism industry just as it was recovering from a generation of civil war.
Travel to the nation's leading tourist attraction, the ancient stone temples of Angkor in northwestern Cambodia, is still generally considered safe.
And there have been few problems for visitors to Phnom Penh, the capital, and the southern port city of Kompong Som, also known as Sihanoukville.
But venturing almost anywhere else, especially by train or car, can be a risk.


Nets' Song for New Year Is a Beatles Tune: Help
The Nets need help immediately, and Willis Reed is working feverishly to get someone to fill the gap left by injuries to three starters and ineffectiveness by others as the team goes into the new year with a four-game losing streak.
With Kenny Anderson, Derrick Coleman and Kevin Edwards nursing injuries and with Chris Morris losing his starting role to P. J. Brown, Benoit Benjamin was the only member of Coach Butch Beard's original opening night lineup who started in the 96-79 loss to the Pacers Friday night at Indianapolis.


Manager's Profile; James K. Renck
Fund: Merrill Lynch Technology Fund, $900 million in assets; 6.5 percent sales load.
Manager since 1992 inception. (Sponsor: Merrill Lynch Asset Management, Princeton, N.J.)
Born: Feb. 7, 1957; New York City.


Save the Carquest Bowl
I WILL BE TRAINING TONIGHT AT THE Orange and Peach Bowls on NBC and ESPN for tomorrow's arduous schedule of the Citrus, Rose and Sugar Bowls on ABC, the Cotton and Fiesta on NBC, the Carquest on CBS (yes, the Carquest Bowl; it's been a rough year at CBS) and, if I can wake up by 11 A.M., the Hall of Fame Bowl on ESPN.
I'm a nut for TV football, and will even relive the best moments again in the Tuesday papers.
But my mind won't be entirely on sport.
While admiring the artistry of the athletes, I am always mindful that these gladiators have been hired -- for a song and a dream.
I see them carrying the banners of hypocritical schools that consider it a duty of education to entertain us football crazies, to nourish gambling, to enrich the coaches and to feed talent to professional football and basketball leagues.
And I am uncomfortably aware that all of us in the media, despite our occasional censure of the system, perpetuate and profit from its perversion of university functions and exploitation of the young performers.


On the Menu: Rights and Responsibilities
A NEW YEAR is a time of reflection that leads to a flurry of resolutions.
No more desserts.
No more cigarettes.
A half-hour jog a day.
That sort of thing.
In the spirit of taking stock, we hereby sort out a few things we all have a right to expect when we dine out, what our rights as diners are, what our responsibilities are, and what we might do to make our restaurant experiences more satisfying.


WHO WILL HELP THE BLACK MAN?
It's about time you opened a dialogue about the plight of black males in our society ("Who Will Help the Black Man?" Dec. 4).
Even if the participants were somewhat querulous, they launched a process that must be continued by blacks and whites.
We must start to find solutions.
We are all in this together.
BETTY LEVIN Board of Trustees Ethical Culture Society of Essex County Maplewood, N.J.


Safety in Numbers
No visitor to Paris can fail to notice the preponderance of policemen.
They stand around in packs on street corners and sit idling in idling buses all day in front of government buildings, waiting for riots or the return of Bonaparte.
In their faces you can see them dreaming of crime, or at least of respect: unlikely on both counts, since practically everybody else is a policeman too.
When not one but three transport police officers regularly appear at the top of the Metro stairs to inspect tickets, how worked up can even a ticketless passenger get?
Clearly each of these mild-mannered public servants packs only a third of the average adult's authority, or three of them wouldn't be necessary.
On the plus side, Paris policemen are nearly invariably tall, trim and handsome.
This seems to be a regulation, like the shapely pistols strapped to the hip of their charming, semimilitary uniforms.
Many of the younger men are fulfilling their national service requirement by being drafted into the police rather than the armed forces.
A pity, really, since what this country really needs is to press them into service as waiters.


NOW, Then
1920-1994 A professor of political science at the University of Wisconsin, Kathryn F. Clarenbach didn't confine herself to the classroom; she also helped to change state laws on sexual assault, divorce and marital property.
Her influence extended far beyond her home state, as Margaret Sanger's biographer stresses: As an organizer of the National Women's Political Caucus and the first chairwoman of NOW, Clarenbach was a founder of modern feminism.
By Ellen Chesler
KATHRYN F. CLARENBACH SAVED THE napkin, with its few hastily scrawled phrases, and thus the moment that breathed life into modern feminism.
It was June 29, 1966, in Washington; the occasion, the closing luncheon of what was supposed to be just another innocuous government conference on women.


Dec. 25-31: Advance Retreat; Gingrich the Author Returns a Christmas Gift
Newt Gingrich has a reputation for being able to admit mistakes and change course.
To his friends, the wonder of his $4.5 million book deal was that it took him so long to renounce it; to his critics, the wonder was that his political instincts flagged so much that he agreed to the deal in the first place.
Just before Christmas, Mr.
Gingrich, the next Speaker of the House, accepted the advance deal from HarperCollins for two nonfiction books.
Democrats attacked it as a gross exploitation of his new office.
Republicans froze.
On Thursday, Senator Bob Dole, the new majority leader, warned publicly that the deal could derail the Republicans' launch in Congress.


JUMPERS VS. REFERS
Max Frankel's article "Jumpers vs. Refers" (Word &amp; Image, Dec. 11), on the layout of The New York Times and other newspapers, is the best thing on this subject I have ever read in a newspaper.
In fact, it is the only thing.
Nobody in the business ever even talks about it.


BEST SELLERS: January 1, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
28
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
2
4
18
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
3
2
44
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
4
5
11
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work in their small Maine town.
5
3
5
WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World War II America.
6
6
8
THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote themselves to solving crimes.
7
8
125
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
8
12
25
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
9
10
13
TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching Hour" and "Lasher."
10
7
6
DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful Government agency.
11
11
23
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its inhabitants, as well as her own.
12
4
A CUP OF CHRISTMAS TEA, by Tom Hegg. (Waldman House, $10.95.) A book of verses, illustrated by Warren Hanson.
13
9
6
GOD'S OTHER SON, by Don Imus. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A 1981 novel about Billy Sol Hargus, a lecherous television evangelist from Texas.
14
14
13
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
15
13
15
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
13
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
2
2
9
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of belief, suffering and hope, and Christianity's relationship to other faiths.
3
4
14
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.
4
3
17
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
5
6
16
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the present.
6
5
54
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
7
7
12
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the country singer.
8
8
12
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
9
10
5
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
10
9
9
THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence affect American life.
11
11
13
BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An illustrated history of the game.
12
14
43
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
13
13
3
IT WASN'T ALWAYS EASY, BUT I SURE HAD FUN, by Lewis Grizzard. (Villard, $20.) A collection of essays by the late Southern humorist.
14
15
11
NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World War II.
15
12
2
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters of varied callings and backgrounds, reported in words and pictures.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
ILLUMINATA, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $20.) A celebration of the power of prayers, with examples of those fitting a variety of situations.
2
1
84
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
3
2
36
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
4
3
14
MAGIC EYE III, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 17, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE ART AND ARCHITECTURE OF ISLAM, 1250-1800, by Sheila S. Blair and Jonathan M. Bloom. (Yale University, $65.) A bold, competent and fresh attempt to rewrite the history of later Islamic art from scratch, with plenty of splendid color illustrations and other useful graphics.
BOREDOM: The Literary History of a State of Mind, by Patricia Meyer Spacks. (University of Chicago, $24.95.) A persuasive account of a concept invented in the 18th century; its roots include a growing concentration on "inner experience" as the locus of personal reality.
THE FIRST WORLD WAR: A Complete History, by Martin Gilbert. (Holt, $35.) Mr.
Gilbert's enormous breadth of view seeks to render this dreadful conflict as soldiers lived it on many fronts, often relying on the poetry and prose of the many gifted writers who saw action.
GENTLEMAN SPY: The Life of Allen Dulles, by Peter Grose. (Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $30.) A biography, full of new information, of the irresistibly charming (and manipulative) man who headed -- and embodied -- the Central Intelligence Agency from 1953 to 1961.
IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War, by Tobias Wolff. (Knopf, $23.) The follow-up volume to Mr.
Wolff's memoir "This Boy's Life" is a series of small, elegant, personal sketches of his year in Vietnam.
KONFIDENZ, by Ariel Dorfman. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $17.) This novel in dialogue reveals only gradually that its frightening political developments are taking place in 1939, suggesting that fear is always appropriate.
LONG WALK TO FREEDOM: The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela, by Nelson Mandela. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) On the evidence of his own version of his amazing life, the President of South Africa is no moralist or messiah but a pragmatic politician who always chose what might work over what was ideologically agreeable.
THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG, by J.M.
Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.
MASTER OF THE DAY OF JUDGMENT, by Leo Perutz. (Arcade, $19.95.) First published in Austria in 1921, after the empire's collapse in the Great War, this elaborate joke of a novel takes the genre itself as a stage for brilliant clowning.
A NATION UNDER LAWYERS: How the Crisis in the Legal Profession Is Transforming American Society, by Mary Ann Glendon. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A Harvard law professor sees hyperactive litigators and "romantic" judges as depriving the nation of lawyers' real talents: solving problems and designing social structures.
ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON: A Biography, by Frank McLynn. (Random House, $30.) A thoroughly detailed life, taking the most recent scholarship into account, of the great Scottish writer of English prose who died at 44 in 1894.


In Chicago, Ex-Felons Turn to a Life of Politics
Local pols have been going to prison for selling their offices, souls and almost everything else not nailed down for as long as anyone can remember.
But no one around here can recall so many convicted felons trying to make the reverse trip: from prison to politics.
At least five known former convicts, including a onetime street gang enforcer and a man who tried to hire a killer, are running for the Chicago City Council after spending time behind bars.
Technically, they are breaking the law again.


POSTINGS: White Plains Open Space; 70 Units on 5 Of 35 Acres
A developer is to begin marketing a 70-unit town-house condominium project this spring that will rise on just 5 acres of its 35-acre parcel in White Plains.
The rest will be a perimeter buffer zone.
Robert Fuller, site-improvement manager for the developer, Toll Brothers of Huntington Valley, Pa., said that the open space -- including two ponds and a corridor of wetlands and trees -- would offer "privacy and views." The units are expected to be priced in the $400,000 range.


Ardor in the Court
THE ADVOCATE'S DEVIL By Alan M. Dershowitz. 342 pp. New York: Warner Books. $22.95.


Rwanda Prison Fills With Targets of Political Vengeance
For three months, Kamana, a 12-year-old peasant whose parents were killed in the war, has been detained in prison.
Eugenie Murekatete, a 31-year-old secretary and mother of three children ages 3 to 10, has been held since July, when she was seized by soldiers at a hospital where she was a volunteer.


Looking Back, And Looking Ahead


Corrections
Because of a production error, the A La Carte column on page 11 of the Long Island Weekly today omitted the names of the restaurants listed.
They are Cafe La Strada, 352 Wheeler Road, Hauppauge; California Pizza Kitchen, 1140 Old Country Road, Westbury; China Gourmet, 285 North Broadway, Hicksville; Churrasqueira Bairrada, 273A Willis Avenue, Mineola; Doobie's, 20 Route 27, Southampton; Majors, 284 East Meadow Avenue, East Meadow; Ruschmeyer's Inn, Second House Road, Montauk; Me and Mom, 64 Broadway, Greenlawn; Taj Mahal, 315 Walt Whitman Road, Huntington, and The Fishermen's Reef, 355 Bayville Avenue, Bayville.


A Sex Expert at Sea
Monday.
A.M.
It's almost the new year and I'm still waiting for a call from the National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago.
How could they publish their definitive survey, "The Social Organization of Sexuality," without questioning me?
P.M.
The phone rings.
Probably those sex researchers.
It's about time.
I will reveal everything.
I say hello.
"Hello," says a voice.
They've already called 3,432 adults age 18 to 59 nationwide.
I don't know how they missed me.
"Cathy? It's me. Mom."


If the Weather Is Bad, This Kicker's Attempt Is Usually Up and Good
Snow may fall and blanket the field.
A chilly wind could be whipping off Lake Erie.
But New England's Matt Bahr will be feeling right at home at Cleveland Stadium for this afternoon's wild-card playoff game between the Patriots and Browns.
Bahr spent nine seasons in Cleveland, and his 16-year career has been spent kicking for six teams, including the Giants, Steelers, 49ers and Eagles.
And, on a team that has just eight players with playoff experience, Bahr is by far the most battle-tested.
He has appeared in 13 playoff games.


Under the Covers: Noteworthy Books
Just as there was more to sports in 1994 than the Rangers winning and the World Series vanishing, there was more to sports books than the bound version of Ken Burns's "Baseball." Various members of the Times sports department offer what they consider were some of the best sports books published in 1994.
WHEN THE COLTS BELONGED TO BALTIMORE: A FATHER AND A SON; A TEAM AND A TIME William Gildea. (Ticknor and Fields, $21.95).
As a former Brooklyn baseball fan, I have always considered the Baltimore Colts to be the moral equivalent of the Dodgers, the Lost Nation of Atlantis of football.
Gildea, a friend of mine, has written about the bond between him and his father, going to Colts games in the 50's, a ritual that was surely spiritual if not outright religious.
He also gives touching details of the homey relationship between the players and the fans, and introduces some loopy local characters.
GEORGE VECSEY


Wall Street; With the New Year, New Scams
AN investor stampede for mutual funds that invest in "Republican" investment plays?
A brokerage firm that cleans up selling its underwritings of Chinese cellular phone companies to United States municipalities?
Where will the financial scams, disasters and embarrassments of 1995 be found?
And will the D-word -- derivatives -- stay in the headlines?
Derivatives disasters no doubt will continue, the pros say, as will misleading enticements to investors who log on to the financial screens of on-line services.


Off the Beaten Path for the Up and Coming
"WE HAVE NO SINGLE esthetic agenda," says Linda Shelton.
"The Altogether Different series at the Joyce mirrors the basic season there -- but in miniature. We try to have attractions that are altogether different from one another."
Many dancegoers may nod in agreement, then wonder, "Who's Linda Shelton?" Yet she plays an important role in New York dance.
As executive director of the Joyce Theater, she supervises not only that theater's season as a whole but also its Altogether Different presentations of up-and-coming companies.
Altogether Different is now in its 10th year, and its latest series, featuring seven dance groups, will get under way on Tuesday night and continue through Jan. 22.


Anti-Corruption Team In Union City
As Mayor of the City of Union City, I must clarify a statement in the Dec. 11 article titled "After Scandal, New Officials Try to Restore Public Trust."
The article said, "In the past few years, elected officials from suburban Wayne and Parsippany have joined their convicted urban counterparts from Union City, Passaic, Newark and Jersey City in the corrections system."


White Dresses And Curtsies
International Debutante Ball, Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, Dec. 29.


'Several Steps' Ahead In Support Services
RIVER DELL Regional High School in Oradell has been a leader nationally in the teaching of death education.
Over the last 23 years, 2,400 students from this small school district in Bergen County have taken an elective course on death and dying, studying such topics as the difference between normal and destructive grief, the bioethics of life and death choices, people's views of life after death, the role of religion in death, and suicide prevention.
Conservative groups have charged that such curriculums collide with religious beliefs and might encourage suicide among impressionable youth.
But Dr.
Robert Stevenson, a social studies teacher and a well-known consultant on death education who teaches the class, says his course has avoided controversy, in part because he also works with parents closely.


Assemblyman Angelo Del Toro, 47, Is Dead
Assemblyman Angelo Del Toro, an influential East Harlem Democrat who has represented his community in the State Legislature since 1975, died on Friday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan while undergoing a routine kidney dialysis procedure.
He was 47.
Mr.
Del Toro died of a heart attack, said Vincent Marchiselli, a friend and former colleague in the Assembly.
He said that Mr.
Del Toro, who had been under treatment for kidney disease since the late 1970's and underwent dialysis every week, had survived two heart attacks earlier this month.


Eve in the garden of Aspen
1902-1994 The Chicago philanthropist Elizabeth Paepcke helped transform Aspen into a world-famous resort, but her vision was more idealistic than commercial.
With her husband, Walter, Paepcke founded the Aspen Institute and the Aspen Music Festival, which attracted legions of writers, composers, scientists and intellectuals to share their work.
But Aspen had changed by the end of Paepcke's life and become a Hollywood playground; her next-door neighbor was Jack Nicholson.
By TED CONOVER
DESPERATE TO DIVERT A HOUSEFUL OF GUESTS after a plumbing disaster at her Colorado ranch in 1939, Elizabeth Paepcke acted on a tip and led her friends on a ski outing to the lapsed silver-mining town of Aspen.
They hitched a ride partway up Aspen Mountain in the back of a truck filled with the area's last mining crew, pulled sealskins over their skis for traction and proceeded to herringbone uphill for five hours.


Three Teen-Agers Are Arrested In Shooting Death of Counselor
Three teen-agers were being held yesterday after law-enforcement authorities said they killed a 37-year-old social worker who had taken two of the boys into her home in Gansevoort, N.Y., about 35 miles north of Albany.
The social worker, Hope C. Fried, was found by sheriff's deputies at about 3 P.M.
Friday in the basement of her home.
She had apparently been shot to death, said Deputy Steve Barton of the Saratoga County Sheriff's Office.


Roll Out the Barrels (16) for This Champion
What would you get if you crossed the legendary speed skater Bonnie Blair with the legendary long jumper Carl Lewis?
"I guess you'd get me," said Patrick Leclerc of St.
Bruno, Quebec, who is the undisputed barrel-jumping champion of the world.
"My sport combines excellence in both speed skating and long-jumping."


'Philadelphia': Oscar Gives Way to Elegy
ONE YEAR AGO, IN THE FILM "Philadelphia," Tom Hanks portrayed the gay lawyer Andrew Beckett who, at the beginning of the film, was seen at an AIDS clinic for an outpatient visit.
As the IV drips, Andrew looks impassively around the room.
Then the camera pans the faces: a once-handsome man, now gaunt to concentration-camp proportion, jokes about how an obtuse waitress offered him Sweet 'n' Low.
"Do I look like I need an artificial sweetener, honey?" he says to the man sitting next to him.
Farther down the row, another man sits quietly.
He is a gentle, sandy-haired fellow of about 30, his face littered with lesions.


Russia Questions Westinghouse on Work on Nuclear Reactors
A Russian nuclear official has questioned whether the Westinghouse Electric Corporation has enough technical data to finish work on two Soviet-designed reactors at a nuclear plant in the Czech Republic.
Using American technology to complete the reactors near the Czech town of Temelin is the first step in a Clinton Administration program to improve the safety of about 60 reactors in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.


IT'S . . . LIAM NEESON!
In Dinitia Smith's article on the magnificent Liam Neeson, I was more than a little displeased at your pointed reference to Helen Mirren's being "seven years older" than Neeson (as a matter of interest? concern? importance?) in your discussion of their relationship ("It's . . . Liam Neeson!, Dec. 4). That he is more than seven years older than his new wife, however, was not considered worthy of mention.


In Ukraine, a Free-Market Lesson Learned Too Well
FOR three years, the United States lectured a recalcitrant and bankrupt Ukraine about the virtues of a market economy with little effect.
But some enterprising factories understood.
The trouble was, they understood too well.
Stylishly cut and well-finished women's wool coats from Ukraine became such hot items on Seventh Avenue that Washington slapped a quota on them in November.


When the Unusual Became the Norm
Quite simply, 1994 was a bazaar of the bizarre.
Has there ever been anything in sports so bizarre as no World Series, no September baseball?
Or odious threats of "replacement players" in major league uniforms next season because of a labor dispute that has lasted longer than the abbreviated season?


THE POPEMAKERS
Paul Wilkes's article "The Popemakers" (Dec. 11) is at best a good example of bad manners.
There is no evidence that John Paul II is about to die, as the article implies; but even if this were the case, does Wilkes think it is a good idea to divide up the inheritance among the siblings before the death of the parent?


HEPSTER
1907-1994 The trademark hit of Cab Calloway's big band was serendipitous: in 1931, during a broadcast from the Cotton Club in Harlem, he forgot the lyrics to "Minnie the Moocher" and scatted: "Hi-de-hi-de-hi-de-ho. Ho-de- ho-de-ho-de-hee." The audience went crazy.
The following excerpt is from his "Hepster's Dictionary," described in his 1944 introduction as "the general patois employed by musicians and entertainers in New York's teeming Harlem."
barbecue (n.): the girlfriend, a beauty.


How Can a Movie So Right Be So Wrong?
TWO IMAGES IN BERNARD Rose's new film about Beethoven, "Immortal Beloved," have the ring of truth: the sight of a crowd of Viennese mourners frantically straining to touch Beethoven's coffin as a hearse carries it away, and the sight of Beethoven as a young boy, floating in a lake, surrounded by reflections of the heavens.
The first image is a literal truth.
Beethoven's funeral was a public event attended by at least 10,000 mourners; his mythic stature was never in question.


Yeltsin's War: A Troubled Presidency Stained Indelibly
As Russian troops enter the bombed-out center of Grozny, the capital of the breakaway Chechen republic, this has inescapably become Boris Yeltsin's war.
It has gravely stained his presidency and damaged his reputation, and with elections scheduled 18 months from now, he is increasingly seen as a lame duck.
If Mr.
Yeltsin's nose operation on the eve of the invasion, Dec. 10, was an effort to hide from direct responsibility for Chechnya -- or, as some liberal democrats here suggest, without any evidence, the Russian President was pushed into war unwittingly -- he has identified himself with it now.
And it is not too soon to look at the likely aftermath.


Is the Administration Really Business Friendly?
To the Editor:
I was gratified to see recognition from a variety of business executives of the substantive progress achieved during the Clinton Presidency.


Keeping Residents Informed
WITH home values stagnating and the market still uncertain, it may become even more important in this new year for a condominium or co-op building to assure residents and prospective buyers that it is in competent hands.
One of the best ways of doing so is to circulate a newsletter.
Not doing so can become an invitation to trouble.


World Markets; Awaiting Mexico's Plan to Revive Peso
THE financial community awaits the address that President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon will make to the Mexican people -- not to mention their foreign creditors -- on Monday, discussing his plan for restoring confidence in the country's battered currency and economy.
Bankers and analysts in London and New York are unanimous in believing that the Zedillo and Clinton Administrations have mishandled the peso devaluation so far, turning a manageable crisis into a major monetary disaster that could hamstring the Mexican economy for years to come.


A Ballplayer's Ballplayer
To the Editor:
Agreed, Ty Cobb was no Pollyanna  [ "Ty Cobb Was Never Mr. Nice Guy," Nov. 27 ] , but there is another facet of his character worth noting.
In his last years Cobb lived a lonely life with a housekeeper in Atherton, Calif.
My family was among his closest neighbors.
We first met when I was home on leave from the United States Naval Academy.
Thereafter he never failed to invite me to dinner.
I sat at the foot of his huge dining-room table, and we never had an unpleasant moment.
One of his other frequent visitors was another pretty good hitter named Joe DiMaggio.
It was during one of these dinners that Cobb responded to a reporter's question: What do you think you could hit today?
"About 300," he said, "but remember I'm over 60 years old." RALPH GERBER  Bal Harbour, Fla.


Katherine Hoover, Christopher Lasch
Katherine Hoover, a daughter of Prof. and Mrs.
Charles W. Hoover Jr. of Summit, N.J., was married on Wednesday to Christopher Nelson Lasch, a son of Nell Lasch of Pittsford, N.Y., and the late Prof.
Christopher Lasch.
The Rev.
W.
Russell Savage, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the house of the bridegroom's mother in Pittsford.
The bride, 27, is studying psychology at Long Island University in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and received a master's degree in developmental psychology from Columbia University.
Her father is a professor of manufacturing engineering at Polytechnic University of New York in Brooklyn and Hawthorne, N.Y., and retired as an executive director at AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories in Whippany, N.J.
Her mother, Erna S. Hoover, retired as the head of a software department in the operations-support systems center at AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories in Liberty Corner, N.J.


F.Y.I.
Getting Taken for a Ride Q.  As a frequent user of the New York City transit system, I am somewhat mystified as to who is eligible to ride free.
I always thought it was a courtesy extended only to police officers, but I frequently see other people flashing their wallets and waltzing on in.
Can you explain exactly who is eligible for a free ride?


An Esthetic That Sells
To the Editor:
We live in a period of history that is unique in the pervasive lack of knowledge and experience of most people regarding music of our time.
I credit this state of affairs to a music business that seeks to create markets that have the greatest mass appeal.
How else would Gorecki's Third Symphony and Gregorian Chant now appear side by side with Pearl Jam in every record chain store?
Conversely, if a recording cannot sell in large quantities, it simply doesn't appear in record stores or on concert programs.
School music departments follow suit.


Louise Randolph, John Graziano
Louise Hubbard Randolph, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Syng Physick Randolph of Rosemont, Pa., is to be married today to John Peyton Graziano, a son of Angelique Graziano and John Arthur Graziano, both of New York.
The Rev.
John Halborg is to perform the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Ms.
Randolph, 38, is keeping her name.
She is the vice president and manager at Mabel's, a decorative accessories boutique in New York.
She graduated from the Moore College of Art.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in Philadelphia.


Is the Administration Really Business Friendly?
To the Editor:
Your article correctly gives credit to the Clinton Administration for its efforts on the trade front.
But, it is totally off the mark in asserting that "the Administration is given high marks . . . for reducing taxes on small business." The opposite is true.
The President's budget bill clearly did not lower taxes for thousands of small businesses.
Indeed, it raised taxes on all subchapter S corporations, a corporate form favored by small business and entrepreneurial growth companies.
The top rate for such entities was retroactively increased to an astounding 36 percent (39.6 percent if one dares to earn more than $250,000 a year).


A Measure of His Impact
1929-1994 Dr.
Vernon Houk was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal in 1985 for his research on lead poisoning in the blood.
He rose to become Assistant Surgeon General, the second-highest-ranking official in the Public Health Service.
Despite the success of his efforts to ban lead-based products from the home and workplace, Dr.
Houk was deeply concerned that inner-city children were still being exposed to dangerous amounts of lead, and compared them to canaries in a coal mine: "Let us not let the next generation be so cursed."


Triumph Leaves Talk Radio Pondering Its Next Targets
For the country's talk radio hosts, about 70 percent of whom call themselves conservative, the first signs of a bear market are starting to emerge.
Gone is Joycelyn Elders, the Surgeon General labeled "the condom queen" by many a drive-time talk jock.
Ditto Tom Foley and Dan Rostenkowski, the term-limits poster boys of the old Democratic Congress.


The Nation: Looking for the Enemy; For C.I.A., History Is the Big Traitor
The failure of R. James Woolsey Jr. as chief of American intelligence was a political horror movie: Return of the Vision Thing.
After the dust cleared from Operation Desert Storm back in 1991, President George Bush, who had run the Central Intelligence Agency himself not so long before, could not articulate where he wanted to take the United States.
And with victory in the cold war secured, Mr.
Woolsey had no vaulting vision of where to take the C.I.A., whose sense of mission has wandered off the map and whose morale is lower than Death Valley.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Prospect Park South; A Turn-of-the-Century Brooklyn 'Suburb'
BRICK stanchions topped with palm and English ivy, adorned with pine in winter and geraniums in spring, stand at the entrances.
They bear the letters "PPS" and lead into Prospect Park South, a landmark historic district in the northwest corner of Flatbush.
Along Buckingham Road, the turn-of-the-century houses include Tudor and chateau styles.
On Rugby Road, there is an English country garden and a Swiss chalet faces an Italian villa.
And on Marlborough Road a brick colonial has a stained-glass skylight in the bathroom, marble fireplaces and a carriage house.


The Ultimate Outsider
To the Editor:
The art program of the Connecticut Prison Association is proud to have helped Raymond Materson and other talented prisoners get their starts as respected artists  [ "From Scraps of Prison Cloth a Miniature World Grows," Dec. 11 ] .
Other Connecticut prison artists, among them Michael Iovieno, Dominic Vincenzo and Michael Reddick, are also receiving national recognition.


90's Anthem: So Many Gyms, So Little Time
AT first, there was just a handful of health clubs, and the only people who went to them were annoying jock types who talked about "the burn" and were to be avoided at lunch.
But over the last decade, grim health statistics about the sedentary set and the realization that Ben &amp; Jerry's won't slide off the hips by faith alone have resulted in an explosion of gym-goers.


The Nation; Epic Political Realignments Often Aren't
Newt Gingrich and the Republicans arrive at the Capitol this week for the opening salvo of a rightward revolution they say will bring about the biggest transformation in American politics since the New Deal.
Next target: the White House.
To hear it from many Republicans, there will be no turning back.


Under the Covers: Noteworthy Books
Just as there was more to sports in 1994 than the Rangers winning and the World Series vanishing, there was more to sports books than the bound version of Ken Burns's "Baseball." Various members of the Times sports department offer what they consider were some of the best sports books published in 1994.
FROM RED INK TO ROSES Rick Telander (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22).
Telander dissects what for more than 30 years had been an anomaly: successful Big Ten football in Madtown -- Madison, Wis.
After years of blissful incompetence, Coach Barry Alvarez's University of Wisconsin Badgers won the Rose Bowl last year for the first time since 1963.
But Telander doesn't provide another tiresome testimonial to King Football because in Madison, football -- make that sports in general -- had never really been king.
JACK BELL


A New Year's Forecast for the Economy
IT is the new year, but with it come some old anxieties.
Responses from several Westchester business leaders indicate that they are concerned about things like rising interest rates, government regulations and the cost of doing business in the months to come.
Q.
What major obstacle do you believe will affect the economic recovery of Westchester in 1995?


Sound Bytes; Staying Ahead of the Curve
IN the collective hearts and minds of the computer industry, there is a special place reserved for "early adopters" who not only purchase version 1.0 of a new product, but also put it to use.
Among these is Sheldon Laube, national director of information and technology for the accounting firm Price Waterhouse.
Mr.
Laube purchased the first 10,000 copies of the Lotus Development Corporation's groupware program, Notes, and now evangelizes for it at any opportunity.
But Mr.
Laube also has unusual resources.
At Price Waterhouse's technology center in Menlo Park, Calif., he heads a team of 45 whose task is to evaluate new software and hardware products for the firm.


Sound Bytes; Staying Ahead of the Curve
IN the collective hearts and minds of the computer industry, there is a special place reserved for "early adopters" who not only purchase version 1.0 of a new product, but also put it to use.
Among these is Sheldon Laube, national director of information and technology for the accounting firm Price Waterhouse.
Mr.
Laube purchased the first 10,000 copies of the Lotus Development Corporation's groupware program, Notes, and now evangelizes for it at any opportunity.
But Mr.
Laube also has unusual resources.
At Price Waterhouse's technology center in Menlo Park, Calif., he heads a team of 45 whose task is to evaluate new software and hardware products for the firm.


On Eve of Another Year, Reflections Amid the Revels
At Euro Electronic on Times Square, the prices of hats with 1994 emblazoned on them were cut from $8.99 to $3.99.
"They are obsolete now," said Ron Shlomo, the assistant manager.
"Please put this in the newspapers; maybe we can finish them out fast."


Use of Herbalism Increases
WHEN Bob Sperling of Southampton had flulike symptoms for almost a month last year, his doctor told him that he had a virus that "will have to run its course."
But hearing about an herbalist in the Chinatown area of Manhattan who had helped others with similar symptoms, Mr.
Sperling, though skeptical, went to see him.
The herbalist prescribed a combination of herbs to be boiled into a tea and drunk four times a day for three weeks.
"Within a few days I started to feel stronger and less tired," Mr.
Sperling said.
"By the end of a week I felt great."


In Brief Visit, Clinton Schmoozes at Renaissance Meeting
The "helpful hints" come on hot pink paper with the warning, "Ignore at your own risk." And for President Clinton and several hundred fellow movers and shakers gathered here for the annual festival of private navel-gazing and networking known as Renaissance Weekend, the injunctions are clear.
"If you call this family retreat a conference or convention, or, worse," are found "using your new Renaissance friendships for commercial or political purposes," one participant said the invitees' information packet proclaims, "you might do well to make plans to visit Port-au-Prince during future" New Year's weekends.


Ginger McKnight, Kevin G. Chavers
Ginger Laurie McKnight, an associate counsel at the Warner-Lambert Company, the pharmaceutical company in Morris Plains, N.J., was married yesterday to Kevin Gerald Chavers, the senior vice president of the Government National Mortgage Association, known as Ginnie Mae, in Washington.
The Rev.
Zan Holmes officiated at St.
Luke Community United Methodist Church in Dallas.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Haggray, a Baptist minister, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 31, graduated from Georgetown University.
The couple received law degrees from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elza McKnight Jr. of Dallas.
Her father retired as a social studies and mathematics teacher at Forest Ridge Elementary School in Dallas.
Her mother, Dr.
Mamie L. McKnight, is a consultant to the Dallas Community College District.


In Newark, Prologue to an Arts Center
IT is known officially as the New Jersey Performing Arts Center.
And the first building, now under construction in downtown Newark, is indeed that.
But considering the long-range plans, it might as well be called the New Jersey Office, Shopping, Dining and Performing Arts Center.
Ultimately, less than one-third of the floor area to be built on the site, or about 400,000 square feet, would be devoted to performances or subsidiary commercial uses.
The rest of the space, 1 million square feet, would be in two large office towers across Center Street, on land controlled by the arts center.


A Life in Collage
LILIANE Resurrection of the Daughter.
By Ntozake Shange. 288 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $18.95.


Nomination Of Gay Man Is Dropped
Because he is openly gay, it appears that James C. Hormel, a 62-year-old business executive, philanthropist and Democratic Party stalwart in San Francisco, will not be nominated by the Clinton Administration as the next United States ambassador to Fiji.
But just who is objecting to his homosexuality is harder to tell.


Looking Back, Looking Ahead, Brooklyn
BROWNSTONE BROOKLYN  On the Waterfront  Not an awful lot has actually happened there over the recent years, but the Brooklyn Heights waterfront -- or, more specifically, what to do with it -- is a perpetually, loomingly big story around the neighborhood.
The reason, quite simply, is a widespread fear that development will mean losing the passionately prized Promenade view that ties the Heights's identity as much to Manhattan as to the eastward vastness of Brooklyn.


Carolyn Yordan And Mark Castel
Carolyn Yordan, the senior vice president for public affairs at the Greater New York Hospital Association, and Mark Castel, the president of AEI Speakers Bureau, a Boston-based lecture organization, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Vincent Butler performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Loyola School Chapel in New York.


The World; In Europe, Touches of Leanness and Meanness
One of the joys of the holiday season for Western European salaried employees is something the Germans call "Christmas money" -- usually a whole 13th month's salary, sometimes less.
Like most of the social-welfare benefits introduced to help get Europe out of its post-World War II miseries, the bonus is now taken for granted.
You didn't get a 13th month's salary this year?
You probably didn't get the 39 paid holidays and vacation days that Germans get, either.
Even a first-year employee here gets four to five weeks' paid vacation, 20 to 25 days, often with "vacation money" thrown in.


Dec. 25-31: Pilot Returned; Home for Champagne, With North Korean Relations Still on Ice
The United States last week finally won the release of an Army pilot held by North Korea for 13 days, but not without the unexpected turns, brinkmanship and cold war rhetoric that comes with dealing with the world's last Stalinist regime.
Chief Warrant Officer Bobby Hall, who was captured after his helicopter strayed into North Korean territory, walked back into South Korea through the demilitarized zone Friday in time to make a New Year's celebration with his family in Brooksville, Fla.


WHO WILL HELP THE BLACK MAN?
Because whitey ain't going to give us a break." I would like to thank Ken Hamblin for sharing that insightful remark.


Verbal Pollution?
To the Editor:
P.
J.
O'Rourke's article must be applied to the health care conundrum.
Mr.
O'Rourke writes: "While the Government means groups, the market means individuals, each deciding what something is worth . . . people acting independently are more intelligent than people acting as a group." If this "market" precept was applied to health care, we would have had a workable solution.


Orange Bowl Stadium Sees Glory Slipping Away
With the city's skyline looming through the uprights of the goalpost, Ed Gooden painted a Fedex logo in the east end zone of the Orange Bowl stadium for what is likely to be the last chance ever for a college football championship to be decided there.
"Times are changing," said Mr.
Gooden, a 32-year-old groundskeeper who has worked at the stadium off and on for 11 years.
"Tradition don't matter. Money matters."


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE SORCERER'S APPRENTICE: Tales and Conjurations By Charles Johnson.
Plume, $9.95.
Magic is the theme connecting these eight short stories, which sometimes deal with contemporary sleight of hand and sometimes hark back to the ancient tribal powers of African wizards.
"Mr. Johnson's spell of a book comes on with the authority of a classic," Michael Ventura said here in 1986.
A DIFFERENT PERSON: A Memoir By James Merrill.
HarperSanFrancisco, $14.
This acclaimed American poet looks back on his youth, writing of the trip he made to Rome in 1950 at the age of 24.
There, he came to embrace more fully both his poetic voice and his homosexuality.
"What sets this memoir apart is the writing and the humor," Brigitte Weeks said here in 1993.
"Every page contains a sentence one wants to quote to a friend." Also reissued is Mr.
Merrill's (DIBLOS) NOTEBOOK (Dalkey Archive, $9.95), which takes the form of notes for a novel about the narrator's brother and his experiences in Greece.
In 1965 our reviewer, Wilfrid Sheed, called it "a disciplined, adventurous performance in the best tradition of fictional experiment."


U.S. Threatens $2.8 Billion Of Tariffs on China Exports
In the latest of an escalating series of confrontations with China over trade, the Clinton Administration threatened today to impose retaliatory tariffs against $2.8 billion of Chinese exports to the United States unless Beijing cracked down immediately on rampant pirating of American music, movies and computer software.
The move came after an end-of-the-year deadline ran out on negotiations with the Chinese Government, which has refused to close down 29 factories in southern China that churn out 70 million compact disks and other illegally copied products every year, at a cost to American industry that the Administration estimates at $1 billion in sales.
American businesses are especially concerned by Chinese exports of these illegal products to other countries in Asia.


How Two Pianists Remade (And Upheld) a Tradition
TRULY INNOVATIVE ARTISTS IN a given form clarify the questions that the form itself seems to be asking at the moment the innovators come along.
In the 20th century, such artists have often arrived in pairs, with conceptions that seem at first to be almost diametrically opposed -- Picasso and Matisse, Joyce and Stein, Fellini and Bergman.
Yet the tension between their sensibilities makes their common esthetic concerns stand out in bolder relief than they might otherwise have.
Such a pair were the pianists Thelonious Monk and Bud Powell, who together in the 1940's staked out the playing field for their instrument in what was known as modern jazz.
In styles as different as Goya's was from Manet's, Powell, who died at 41 in 1966, and Monk, who died at 64 in 1982, re-evaluated the piano's relation to its European heritage and reached nearly opposite conclusions.
Yet both emphatically reasserted the piano's role in jazz as a percussion instrument at a moment when jazz was changing from a dance music for big bands into a concert music for small groups.


Preserving the Vocal Recital
THE Marilyn Horne Foundation was established last year to revitalize the art of the vocal recital.
"The rapid extinction of this cherished art form is of deep concern to me," Ms.
Horne said.
"Unless we pay attention now, this vital part of our musical heritage could actually cease to be a living and practiced art form," she said.
"Our culture suffers from a tendency to book big name soloists and group attractions. We treat recital singing as an afterthought. Since so much of my own music making continues to focus on the vocal recital -- and since I can't imagine life without song -- I'm determined to do something about it."


That Reminds Me Of an Old Joke
To the Editor:
Your review of Pascal Bruckner's "Divine Child" (Nov. 27), a novel about a rebellious fetus that refuses to be born, brings to mind an old joke.
Two elderly men are bemoaning their fate, regaling each other with depressing proof of the proposition that life is really not worth living.
Finally, one of them bursts out: "Oy, sometimes I wish I had never been born!" "Yes," remonstrates the other, "but how many people are that lucky?"  LOUIS JAY HERMAN  New York


The Mountain People Dig In Over Recognition as Indians
Here in the rugged foothills of the Ramapo Mountains the people pledge loyalty to an elected tribal chief, count on a medicine man to cure a variety of ailments and gather for powwows each summer.
So, why doesn't the Federal Government consider them Indians?


POSTINGS: A TriBeCa Transformation; From a Nut-Roasting Factory, Residential Lofts
The land under 345 Greenwich Street, near Jay Street, has certainly run the gamut of real estate uses.
For the 250 years following 1654, when the Church of England gave the land to Trinity Church, it has had numerous owners and tenants, many of them farmers.
In this century it has done duty as a railway terminus, a warehouse for food products and, most recently, a factory for roasting nuts.
And now, two of the four industrial buildings on the TriBeCa site are poised to house people.


Here's to an Old Universe That's Full of Moist, Warm Worlds
To the Editor:
As misinterpretations of scientific discoveries go, Gregg Easterbrook's cheery "While We're Young" (Op-Ed, Dec. 23) is relatively benign.
But Mr.
Easterbrook's optimistic interpretation of the newly revised age of the universe is just plain wrong.


The New Hosts In Talk Radio
Re: "Talk Radio Bulldog Is Really Just a Pussycat, Friends Say" (Nov. 27), an article about Bob Grant:
He's a wonderful man, and he loves dogs and children.
Where have we heard that one before?
The ages have provided us with countless figures who were sweet to their families, friends, dogs and followers, while they were causing terrible trouble for the innocent.
Mr.
Grant is a very intelligent person who knows exactly what he's doing.


Why Democracy?
CONDITIONS OF LIBERTY Civil Society and Its Rivals.
By Ernest Gellner. 225 pp.
New York: Allen Lane/ The Penguin Press. $27.95.


Sunhee Lee, Laird Zacheis
Sunhee Lee, the daughter of Young Ja and Dr.
Jaedu Lee of Northport, L.I., and Laird Daniel Zacheis, a son of Carleton and Barbara Zacheis of Newton, Iowa, were married on Friday.
The Rev.
Gerald Phelan, a minister of the Reformed Church of America, performed the ceremony at the Three Village Inn in Stony Brook, L.I.
The bride, 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Columbia University and is a law student at Georgetown University.
Her father is a psychiatrist for the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Northport.


In Newark, Prologue to an Arts Center
IT is known officially as the New Jersey Performing Arts Center.
And the first building, now under construction in downtown Newark, is indeed that.
But considering the long-range plans, it might as well be called the New Jersey Office, Shopping, Dining and Performing Arts Center.
Ultimately, less than one-third of the floor area to be built on the site, or about 400,000 square feet, would be devoted to performances or subsidiary commercial uses.
The rest of the space, 1 million square feet, would be in two large office towers across Center Street, on land controlled by the arts center.


Inside the Moderate Wine Drinker's Heart
To the Editor:
The headline for your article on the health effects of red wine (Health page, Dec. 28) sounded too ominous a warning.


A Tahiti-Bora Bora Shuttle
Until recently, island hoppers in French Polynesia had two choices: fly (quick but costly) or board a freighter ferry (efficient but without glamour).
But a new option, the 450-passenger Ono-Ono mono-hull shuttle, promises a degree of comfort and economy ($58 for the five-hour Tahiti-Bora Bora run; $6 for a 10-minute cruise between Raiatea and Tahaa).
Besides a lounge with circular sofas, a snack bar and TV, the triple-decker shuttle has two air-conditioned decks with airplane-style seats.
Information: (689) 45-35-35 in Papeete.


Tastes for the New Year: Spicy Southwest, India and Morocco
THERE is nothing like spicy food to get the new year off to a warm start.
From the Southwest as well as India and Morocco, the following recipes are easy to make -- and out of the ordinary.
They are also low in saturated fat.
Moroccan tagines are an exotic form of stew, normally cooked in an earthenware pot with a conical lid.
A heavy skillet or shallow casserole that goes on top of the stove works equally well for the meatballs.
They simmer in a sauce that reduces to a thick gravy and goes well with couscous.


Under the Covers: Noteworthy Books
Just as there was more to sports in 1994 than the Rangers winning and the World Series vanishing, there was more to sports books than the bound version of Ken Burns's "Baseball." Various members of the Times sports department offer what they consider were some of the best sports books published in 1994.
ARNOLD PALMER, A PERSONAL JOURNEY Thomas Hauser (HarperCollins, $40).
A gorgeous coffee-table book for Arnie's Army with a text by Muhammad Ali's authorized biographer.
The pictures tell the story of Arnie's appeal, and there are some interesting prose insights, often between the lines.
ROBERT LIPSYTE BASEBALL AND MEN'S LIVES Robert Mayer (Delta, $12.95).
This book finds the game "an alternate reality parallel to the 'real' world. . . . It is the touch of the ball itself, usually at age seven, that opens through the palm of the hand the magic entry into this enclosed tunnel of time and history." R.L.
BRINGING THE HEAT Mark Bowden (Knopf, $25).
An Inquirer reporter's often brilliant unpacking of the 1992 Phildelphia Eagles.
It is a juicy, funny, harrowing broken-field run through class, race and gender.
R.L.
THE PRIZEFIGHTERS Arlene Schulman (Lyons &amp; Burford, $27.95).
In mesmerizing pictures and some surprisingly intimate words, the well-known boxing photographer captures the grit and "the dream dust" of these tough, romantic, dedicated champions and contenders.
R.L.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO
More Than 100 Years Of Luxury Linens
Can't find $2,000 sheets at the Macy's white sale?
For the last 100 years, celebrities and royals alike have known exactly where to find them -- down on Grand Street at the Harris Levy linen store.


Bookshelf
THE MAGIC SCHOOL BUS IN THE TIME OF THE DINOSAURS.
By Joanna Cole.
Illustrated by Bruce Degen.
Scholastic. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) They're back -- Ms.
Frizzle, the world's best-loved weird science teacher, and her whole class, even Arnold -- and this time they are headed to a dinosaur dig.
It's fun and fine science.
EDWARD IS ONLY A FISH.
By Alan Sincic.
Illustrated by R. W. Alley.
Holt. $14.95. (Ages 7 to 10) If you let yourself believe that Mr.
Billingsly's bathtub overflowed, allowing Edward the fish a chance to be a hero, here's a funny, easy-to-read story about a fish rescuing 14 cats.
It has a very happy ending and, for an implausible tale, plausible illustrations.


A County Legislator and Son Offer Advice to Troubled Youths
TWENTY years ago, when 15-year-old Michael Keith first entered the gates at Hawthorne Cedar Knolls, a residential-treatment center for troubled adolescents here, he was a drug-abusing rebel with a history of severe emotional and behavioral problems.
His youthful exploits -- by his own admission -- included robbery, drug sales and arson.
Two decades later, he re-entered those gates, now as Kareem Abdus- Salaam, a name he took on converting to Islam, and as the owner of a successful business in constructing affordable housing and parking structures.


Caffeine and Crackdowns: Dispatches From '94
STATIONED in the sky, the eye of a camera sweeping across New York would have looked down at a cranky but energized city in 1994.
Its residents hungering for order, the civic life of New York's neighborhoods evolved as both prickly and aggressive, amounting to a stiffening of civic resolve that sought control over the streets and an erasure of the decades-old impulse of shrugging off disorder.
Hearts hardened; community meetings often turned ugly.
Feeding off new commercial life swelling in neighborhoods from SoHo to the Upper West Side, Manhattan had a crisper feel, perhaps caffeinated by the new-style coffee bars that cropped up on some streets three at a time.
Huge stores took over the empty hulks that were the dreams of turn-of the-century retailers.
Themes and hooks were demanded, and the rollicking permutations of capitalism sometimes took bizarre forms.
Televisions turned up above urinals in restaurants.
One nightclub owner decided to have an earthquake night: the place shook at midnight as Los Angeles video imagery abounded.
When the venture failed, he tried a Latin American earthquake and the imagery turned Cuban.


It's Shaping Up as a Big Year for Lizardy Textures
SEEING in 1995 is like having a gigantic and very public 50th birthday party.
However big the celebration, underneath is anxiety: Can the century -- and can we -- really be that old?
It's bad enough that the 90's are already half over.
Even scarier is the rapid approach of the science-fiction sounding millenium.
What we want is somebody to pat our hands and, in soothing tones, reassure us about these awesome incoming years.


Christina L. Wood, Darren J. Feher
Christina Lynn Wood, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wesley T. Wood of Laurel Hollow, L.I., was married on Friday to Lieut.
Darren J. Feher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Feher of Berwyn, Pa.
Msgr.
Charles Ribaudo performed the ceremony at St.
Dominic's Church in Oyster Bay, L.I.


Striving Parents Send Children Mixed Message; Placement Tests
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 28 front-page article on the decrease in college acceptance of Advanced Placement credits did not sufficiently pursue the critical question of why an increasing number of colleges refuse to accept them.


Tastes for the New Year: Spicy Southwest, India and Morocco
THERE is nothing like spicy food to get the new year off to a warm start.
From the Southwest as well as India and Morocco, the following recipes are easy to make -- and out of the ordinary.
They are also low in saturated fat.
Moroccan tagines are an exotic form of stew, normally cooked in an earthenware pot with a conical lid.
A heavy skillet or shallow casserole that goes on top of the stove works equally well for the meatballs.
They simmer in a sauce that reduces to a thick gravy and goes well with couscous.


Prescience, In Black and White
1914-1994 The critic Cyril Connolly once defined a classic as a book still read a decade after it is published.
Ralph Ellison's "Invisible Man," which won the National Book Award in 1953, was instantly recognized as a masterpiece, a novel that captured the grim realities of racial discrimination as no book had.
Its reputation grew as Ellison retreated into a mythic literary silence that made his one achievement definitive.
Roger Rosenblatt
ONLY THE FAINTEST TREMOR OF WARNING prevented me from responding, "And I am the King of Siam." The man on the telephone had begun: "Mr. Rosenblatt? I'm Ralph Ellison." Friends of mine pull pranks like that.
As it happened, it was Ralph Ellison.
He was calling to correct something I had written about "Invisible Man" in a book.


Philadelphia
To the Editor: As a transplanted native of Philadelphia, I felt nostalgic for its row houses and tree-lined streets when I read "Ben Franklin's Favorite Town" (Nov. 13).
Budget travelers from New York City can leave Penn Station by New Jersey Transit, with a change at Trenton to a Septa train to Philadelphia, for a bargain off-peak round-trip fare of $22.
Both Septa and Amtrak trains arrive at 30th Street Station, whose classical architecture is a reminder of the lost grandeur of New York's Penn Station.
Since a recent restoration, it has become a site for exhibitions, cultural events and celebrations, and it now has a sophisticated food court, the Market.


Efficiency Comes to the High-Performance Engine
IN the distant days of leaded gasoline, bias-ply tires and backyard grease monkeys, engines produced tremendous horsepower while combusting great quantities of fuel.
Engine-displacement figures were given in cubic inches -- 302, 327, 350 and 454, to name a few.
Bigger was better, and bragging rights rose in proportion to engine displacement.
The Beach Boys melodically urged a big-block Chevy to "Giddyap, Giddyap, 409," helping to assure America's lust for horsepower a place in popular culture.


A U.F.O., or Is There an Explanation?
ON Oct. 30, Robert F. Coar says, the lights he saw in the night sky were not stars -- and the experience has haunted his dreams and waking moments ever since.
What he saw, he says, was an unidentified flying object that passed over his Fifth Avenue neighborhood here pursued by helicopters.
"I couldn't believe what I was seeing, but there it was, this thing about the size of a tractor-trailer, shaped like a shoe box with pulsating red and orange lights," said Mr.
Coar, 35, a self-employed sign painter and mural artist.
"It was about 100 feet up, about level with an old smokestack back there."


When Britain Ruled The Musical Waves Under Purcell's Flag
THREE HUNDRED YEARS AGO, Henry Purcell, arguably England's greatest composer, died at 36.
The occasion will be widely marked in Britain, with a range of events from local music festivals to opera at Covent Garden and the English National Opera, from small-scale concerts around the country to celebrations at the South Bank Center and the Barbican in London, and special Choral Evensongs in major cathedrals.
The year will also provide the occasion for a thorough reappraisal of British music, which is timely, for the reputation of British music abroad is not wholly positive.
The stigma bestowed by the contemptuous dismissal of pastoral English music from the start of this century as "cowpat school" (a phrase reputedly coined by one of the few British composers with strong Schoen bergian leanings, Elisabeth Lutyens) has stuck, and British composers are too often seen as backward-looking, provincial and out of touch, plodding around in the fields while the rest of the world streams down the highway.


Pony-in-Training


Doctors' Accounts Vary In Death of Libby Zion
When Dr.
Gregg Stone resumes testifying on Tuesday in the wrongful-death lawsuit brought by Sidney Zion against New York Hospital, he will be trying to bolster the defense's side even as he contradicts a co-defendant's account.
Mr.
Zion argues that his 18-year-old daughter, Libby, died within eight hours of being admitted to the hospital with a fever in 1984 because doctors ordered Demerol, a medication potentially fatal to patients who, like her, took an antidepressant called Nardil, and because they misdiagnosed and mistreated her.


The Short Flight of a Fighter Pilot
1965-1994 One of the Navy's first female combat pilots, Kara S. Hultgreen, 29, was killed in October when her F-14 Tomcat crashed into the sea off San Diego as she was approaching an aircraft carrier for a landing.
It was a controversial death: Hultgreen's pioneer position in that male bastion, the Navy, hadn't been achieved without resistance, and the accident raised questions about whether she had been adequately trained.
But fellow pilots praised her performance, noting that 10 F-14 aviators have died in accidents since 1992.
By Katherine S. Manegold
HERS WAS A DREAM denied, then deferred and finally granted, to fly with the elite in a fighter jet so fast, so complex and so advanced that its wings heave back and forth along its glinting body, shifting angles for attack, landing, takeoff and approach, a machine hurtling 35 tons of metal, raw speed and unspent ammunition toward a combat target or a floating landing field called home.


A Record Shop Where Customers Rival the Collection
TIM JACKSON shrank nervously as he recalled the time Courtney Love, the lead singer for the rock group Hole and Kurt Cobain's widow, walked into Adult Crash, the record store that he opened with his girlfriend, Carolyn Schmitt, last August.
"We had the National Enquirer article that showed Evan Dando and Courtney Love kissing taped to the window facing outside," he said.
"She came in, shopped, bought some stuff, walked by the counter really fast and said sarcastically, 'Nice window display.' "


Ideas &amp; Trends: Touching the Soul, Turning the Stomach; Between the Art and the Artist Lies the Shadow
Reports of the death of the playwright John Osborne last week, which chronicled a life of unrelenting venom, probably did not stir a great amount of soul-searching among those who loved his work.
The author of the 1956 play "Look Back in Anger" seemed to have looked forward, sideways, up and down in anger through his life, and gave rise to a school of British playwrights of such familiar bitterness they had their own acronym, the A.Y.M. -- Angry Young Men.
But why do suggestions that other artists whose work we admire -- writers, composers, painters, actors and singers -- had politics or personal habits we find despicable stir uneasiness within?
Why can the knowledge of the anti-Semitism of Edgar Degas or T. S. Eliot, or allegations of the near-criminal opportunism of Bertolt Brecht or of Picasso's misogyny cause such profound turmoil in many people?


A Homeless Man's Pride And the Family He Left
To the Editor:
As someone who grew up across the street from where George Brown camps out on a grate and who still spends much time in the neighborhood, I want to count myself among those who are less than enthusiastic about his presence ("Getting to Know George," Dec. 25).


Speaking the Unspeakable to Retirees
THE new Republican majority in Congress has vowed that this time things will be different.
Fear not, they say, now that we're in charge, Government spending will be brought under control.
The challenge they face, of course, is the inescapable arithmetic of Federal spending and deficits: The only way to bring spending into line with revenues is to limit the generosity of programs that automatically provide benefits to all who qualify.


[ APPEARANCES ] ; Angel Hair
"RAPUNZEL, RAPUNZEL, LET down your hair," pleads the prince at the foot of the unscalable tower, and, from the lone window at the very top, out it spills, a cascade of glittering gold.
And while the prince can't see that far, he knows that it's gold to its very roots, because this is a fairy tale and because damsels in distress (as well as angels and Madonnas) are born blond 99 percent of the time.
Natalie Kampen, professor of women's studies and art history at Barnard, says early Madonnas were dark-haired; they began getting "younger, cuter and blonder" beginning in Germany and France around the 12th century.
This trend continued into Tuscany, a fact confirmed in the current exhibit "Painting and Illumination in Early Renaissance Florence" at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, where all the angels and Madonnas are blond.
Fra Angelico's angel Gabriel and Virgin both have hair the color of apricot gold.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Writer Outgrows His B-25
NO matter the weather, no matter how much the bones may say, "Please, not today," every day Bernie Comfort, 71, takes his mile-and-a-half walk in East Hampton.


Equal Time
To the Editor:
Bernard Holland's essay "At Its Best, Music Warms the Heart, Not the Brain"  [ Dec. 11 ]  is a much needed antidote to the swarms of musical snobs clustered around classical music.
Since the 1950's I've been a music director in Washington, Detroit, San Francisco and now at Classical KKBK in Portland, Ore.
While I recognize the differences between the various forms, I hold Bach, Bartok, the Beatles, the blues and the Beastie Boys equal in the world of music.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  For 20 years, Gaspar Orengo was the "Mr. Wonderful" of 24 Fifth Avenue.
Now, he's bowing out.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  "Brailling the future," the prognosticating pros are the psychics to corporate America.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 9  Making Christmas tree mulch in Prospect Park; "Rhythm of the City" on the Upper East Side.
GOOD EATING 9  Culinary crossroads of the world: From bistro standards at Un Deux Trois to breewats at Lotfi's.
MOVIE CLOCK 10  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
SOAPBOX 11 Why cabbies often pass up blacks: the view from the driver's seat.
Plus, letters and Photographer's Journal.


Sheri B. Walzman, Leigh Schachter
Sheri Beth Walzman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Terry Walzman of Edison, N.J., was married on Monday to Leigh Raphael Schachter, the son of Drs.
Rozalie and Joseph Schachter of Flushing, Queens.
Rabbi Herschel Schachter officiated at the Sheraton Meadowlands Hotel in Secaucus, N.J.
Mrs.
Schachter, 24, is a candidate for a master's degree in audiology at Hunter College.
She and her husband graduated from Yeshiva University.
Her father is a vice president and the general manager of technical services at Nynex Mobile Communications in Orangeburg, N.Y.
Her mother was until recently a mathematics teacher at Rabbi Pesach Raymon Yeshiva in Edison.


Waiting for the Rebbe
1902-1994 Russian-born and Sorbonne-educated, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson salvaged an 18th-century Hasidic sect from the ruins of the Holocaust and transformed it into one of the most influential forces in the Jewish world.
He presided over the Lubavitch Hasidim of Brooklyn for 44 years, often making headlines, but the Rebbe had a global reach -- especially in Israel, where he exerted a nearly supernatural force.
By Clyde Haberman
IT REALLY DOESN'T matter that Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson never visited Israel.
At times, it feels as though he were alive and well there.


New Year and New Governor Create New Hopes
The arrival of a new year and a new government is starting to tickle New Yorkers.
Maybe it's chemical, like a low-grade spring fever.
But the change of seasons in Albany seems to be stirring among many a feeling not unlike hope.
"You have to be optimistic," said Joseph Mechanick, 48, a plumber who lives with his mother and son in Flushing.
"You get so depressed being anything else that you've got to hope."


Under the Covers: Noteworthy Books
Just as there was more to sports in 1994 than the Rangers winning and the World Series vanishing, there was more to sports books than the bound version of Ken Burns's "Baseball." Various members of the Times sports department offer what they consider were some of the best sports books published in 1994.
COBB: A BIOGRAPHY Al Stump (Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill, $24.95).
A far more rounded assessment of Ty Cobb's life and career than the memoir Stump wrote in the Georgia Peach 33 years ago.
The book is worth buying if only for the first chapter, recounting the months Stump spent as Boswell-cum-nursemaid to the aging, angry, gun-toting, booze-swilling Cobb.
RICHARD SANDOMIR LORDS OF THE REALM John Helyar (Villard Books, $20).
A highly readable look at how the business of baseball fell into the utter mess it is now in.
Not quite the baseball version of "Barbarians at the Gate," which Helyar co-wrote, but enough fly-on-the-wall information to fascinate.
R.S.


On Sunday; On the Outside Looking Back Inside Prison
THE hot new magazine editor in town has a criminal record and a captive readership, which he more correctly refers to as a "captured" market: the nation's prison population, 1.5 million and growing.
Its members spend more than $2 billion a year on commissary purchases alone before they clip mail orders from magazines for things yearned for from afar.
"They read a lot and buy a lot," notes Richard Stratton, editor in chief of Prison Life, a gritty new publication that presents an inside look at the nation's prison culture by tapping the experience of "behind bars" writers and "free world" contributors who, like Mr.
Stratton and his wife, Kim Wozencraft, the magazine's editor at large, are back outside prison.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE BARN  By Avi. 106 pp. New York: Orchard Books.


Is the Administration Really Business Friendly?
To the Editor:
Your article correctly gives credit to the Clinton Administration for its efforts on the trade front.
But, it is totally off the mark in asserting that "the Administration is given high marks . . . for reducing taxes on small business." The opposite is true.
The President's budget bill clearly did not lower taxes for thousands of small businesses.
Indeed, it raised taxes on all subchapter S corporations, a corporate form favored by small business and entrepreneurial growth companies.
The top rate for such entities was retroactively increased to an astounding 36 percent (39.6 percent if one dares to earn more than $250,000 a year).


The World: Auld Lang Syne; A Toast! To the Good Things About Bad Times
In Soviet times, the real living room was in the kitchen, a cramped, dingy space where friends laughed, drank, smoked, sang, quarreled and talked intensely into the night, night after night.
Back in the days when nothing was permitted, only relationships could really flourish.
Russians cultivated those friendships with fierce attention, focusing their ample free time and creative energy on the never-ending conversation in the kitchen.
Now the conversation has petered out.


New York City Crime Falls But Just Why Is a Mystery
Behind the bloodcurdling headlines about a firebombing on the No. 4 train, a drive-by shooting on the Brooklyn Bridge and the killing of a police officer in a botched bicycle store holdup, behind the back-to-back campaigns that elected a new Mayor vowing to improve the quality of life in New York City and a new Governor committed to bring back the death penalty, lies an often-overlooked fact.
Crime in New York City is dropping. And dropping fast.


Verbal Pollution?
To the Editor:
P.
J.
O'Rourke's article must be applied to the health care conundrum.
Mr.
O'Rourke writes: "While the Government means groups, the market means individuals, each deciding what something is worth . . . people acting independently are more intelligent than people acting as a group." If this "market" precept was applied to health care, we would have had a workable solution.


Dec. 25-31; The 'Black Rhino,' Dehorned
It was the amazing ricocheting bullet.
It began with an article in the Huntsville Times in Alabama that got picked up first by Newsweek, then by The Associated Press and then rocketed around and around the national media echo chamber last week.
Not even the facts could stop it.
David Keen, chief executive of the Signature Products Corporation, a little-known military contractor, announced he had developed two new high-technology bullets, one of which could pierce armored vests worn by police and then fragment terrifyingly into thousands of tiny pieces of shrapnel.
The ammunition would cause a "horrific wound" and guarantee that death would be "nearly instantaneous" wherever it struck the body, Mr.
Keen proclaimed.


Sex and Violence
To the Editor:
I enjoyed the article on "Disclosure" and thought it made interesting points about the relationship between female sexuality, male fear and power.


A Movable Salon
1914-1994 Leo Lerman's imperial sensibility reigned over the Conde Nast magazine empire, where he served for more than half a century as an editor, writer and arbiter of taste.
His West 55th Street apartment attracted literati and glitterati -- writers, royalty, movie stars.
His career was notable for its variety; he wrote books, reviewed dance and was briefly editor-in- chief of Vanity Fair early in its relaunch.
But to the writers and editors in his orbit, Lerman was an exemplar of high culture.
By Holly Brubach
IS OPEN-HOUSE evenings were frequented by W. H. Auden, Maria Callas, Truman Capote and the Sitwells, among others.
Marlene Dietrich went from room to room, emptying the ashtrays.
Leo Lerman was a figure in the landscape of New York, and he stood at its center, bringing people together, not only in his Manhattan apartment but also in the magazine pages he presided over at Conde Nast for nearly 40 years.
The guest list for both his pages and his parties reflected Leo's special brand of snobbery, a snobbery that seemed entirely benign because it wasn't based on money or social position or celebrity.
He claimed that he'd been born dead and resuscitated -- which, he said, had led him to conclude that every moment was "a bonus," too precious to be squandered.
As a result, he refused to suffer fools, but he wished them well, all the same.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
REMEMBERING ISADORA
In 1986 three Massachusetts women formed Dances by Isadora, a unique dance ensemble dedicated to preserving and performing the dances created by Isadora Duncan in the early years of this century.


Change of Identity


The Night Hunter Made History
The last of 360 checks for $4,166.67 arrived a couple of weeks ago.
One college education provided by a $25,000 annuity policy has been completed; another paid for by the other $25,000 annuity is nearly completed.
A third child is a few years away from college, but who knew to ask for an annuity to be named later?
Who knew anything that would come later, after Jim (Catfish) Hunter, free agent, signed with the Yankees 20 years ago last night?


How Christmas Trees Can Make Much Mulch
IT'S time to take down the Christmas tree.
But instead of tossing it out on the sidewalk, why not turn it into mulch?
This Saturday is the fifth-annual Chipping Day at Prospect Park.
Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts will be stationed at the park's entrances, ready to carry your tree to the "mulching trucks" at the Third Avenue entrance on Prospect Park West.


Japanese Baskets Shown in Washington
Utilitarian bamboo baskets made for Japanese farmers and fisherman are on exhibit at the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery in Washington through July 9.
The exhibition, "A Basketmaker in Rural Japan," celebrates the life's work of Hiroshima Kazuo, believed to be one of Japan's last professional basketmakers.
It is the first exhibition in the United States to focus on Japanese baskets as utilitarian objects.


Rallying Around the Unconventional Ducks
They have been endorsed by loggers, hippies, Miami and Nebraska.
Oregon does not lead Penn State in the electoral vote, but certainly in the popular.
There are underdogs and then there are the Oregon Ducks, who used to live and die for the Independence Bowl.
They are led by their cornerbacks, not their quarterback, and their most inspirational player wants a Harley-Davidson as his family car.


JUMPERS VS. REFERS
After months of experimentation, the weekday Atlanta Constitution went cold turkey on "jumps." No stories continue off any of five section fronts.
A reader wrote us to say, "Hurrah!" and to add, "I wish you had done this long before."


That's All, Folks!
It was a lethal year for cartoonists, who tend to lead fairly anonymous lives; the eccentric figures they bring into the world get all the fame.
Forrest (Bud) Sagendorf (1915-1994) drew Popeye for more than a quarter of a century, inheriting the job in 1958 from the celebrated muscleman's inventor, Elzie Segar.
Jack Kirby (1917-1994), born Jacob Kurtzberg, masterminded the Incredible Hulk with his partner, Stan Lee; he also contributed to the war effort in 1940 with Captain America.
That same year Woody Woodpecker made his first screen appearance courtesy of Walter Lantz (1900-1994).
The most famous creation of Harvey World Famous Comics, founded by Alfred Harvey (1913-1994), was Casper the Friendly Ghost; Harvey was also responsible for other heroes in the comic-book pantheon.
The whimsical figures of Richard Scarry (1919-1994) taught generations of children the basics; his books -- among them "Richard Scarry's Find Your ABC's" -- sold more than 100 million copies.


Anti-Abortion Groups Continue Radical Talk
A New Year's message on the National Pro-Life Newsline today offered up an image of America's abortion clinics as a world of death camps, contract killers and mass murder.
Another telephone line, the Pro-Life Action News in Chicago, predicted an end to laws protecting abortion providers in 1995 and the reversal of a series of measures designed to safeguard women's rights to terminate unwanted pregnancies, even those that resulted from rape or incest.


Andrea H. Price, Mark A. Pryal
Andrea Huston Price, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert E. Long of Alexandria, Va., and Allen Ingram Price Jr. of Chevy Chase, Md., was married on Friday to Mark Allen Pryal, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred Nels Pryal of Gastonia, N.C.
The Rev.
Linda Poindexter officiated at All Saints Episcopal Church in Chevy Chase.
Mrs.
Pryal, 23, is a social consultant to Mary-Stuart Montague Price, a bridal consultant in Chevy Chase who is the bride's aunt.
The bride graduated from the College of Charleston.
Her father is a mortgage banker at First National Mortgage Corporation in Bethesda, Md.


Is the Administration Really Business Friendly?
To the Editor:
I was gratified to see recognition from a variety of business executives of the substantive progress achieved during the Clinton Presidency.


Lisa Ann Rotmil, I. A. Schmelzer
Lisa Ann Rotmil, a daughter of Pauline and Allen Rotmil of Teaneck, N.J., was married on Thursday to I. Alexander Schmelzer, the son of Ruth and Dr.
Menachem Schmelzer of New York.
Rabbi Adam Mintz officiated at the Puck Building in New York.
Ms.
Rotmil, 27, is keeping her name.
She is studying for a Ph.D. in art history at New York University, from which she received a master's degree in that subject.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is a vice president of Professional Billing Resources Inc. in Hackensack, N.J.
Her mother is the administrator of the Melton Research Center for Jewish Education at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York.


Maker of Ammunition Defends Himself
Last week David Keen told the world that he had built two lethal bullets, one that could pierce bulletproof vests and and another that could shred flesh, and he accomplished something that few people, if any, ever have.
His handgun ammunition brought gun-control advocates and the National Rifle Association together on the same side -- against him.


Change of Plans


U.N. Dossier On Players In Balkans Full of Error
To Muslims and Croats across the former Yugoslavia, the name "Captain Dragan" conjures up images of terror and carnage.
It is used by Dragan Vasiljkovic, head of a Serbian paramilitary squad called the Red Berets, which has left a trail of violence across Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Diplomats say he would be a likely defendant in a future war crimes trial.


The Tragic Mulatto
1903-1994 Fredi Washington, an early African-American movie star, found her signature role in "Imitation of Life" (1934) as a mulatto who passes for white -- a subterfuge that enacts its own terrible retribution.
She also made her name in the theater, appearing in "Lysistrata" and "A Long Way From Home," an all-black production of Gorky's "Lower Depths." Race failed to define her -- or rather, defined her against her will.
By Veronica Chambers
BLACKS WHO WERE light enough to pass for white -- and did -- were, in pre-Civil Rights America, as titillating as any tabloid story is today.
Hollywood quickly picked up on the box-office potential of such tales and wrote scriptafter script about the "tragic mulatto," usually female, who suffered because of the "dualing bloods running through her veins." For Fredricka Washington, these roles would become her bread and butter.


In Ukraine, a Free-Market Lesson Learned Too Well
FOR three years, the United States lectured a recalcitrant and bankrupt Ukraine about the virtues of a market economy with little effect.
But some enterprising factories understood.
The trouble was, they understood too well.
Stylishly cut and well-finished women's wool coats from Ukraine became such hot items on Seventh Avenue that Washington slapped a quota on them in November.


Amy Bishop, Christopher O'Regan
Amy Susan Bishop, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Bishop of Southampton, L.I., is to be married there today to Christopher Edmond O'Regan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. O'Regan of New York.
The Rev.
Daniel G. O'Hare is to officiate at the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary Roman Catholic Church.


Down-to-Earth Answers Or No Answers at All
SOME of New Jersey's sightings of unidentified flying objects have turned out to have quite down-to-earth explanations.
Peter A. Jordan of Clark, the Union County director of the Mutual U.F.O.
Network, an international research group, cited reports in 1976 of strange lights and claims of extraterrestrial visitations along an abandoned railroad line in Long Valley, just outside Hackettstown.


The Executive Computer; When, Oh When, Will Computers Behave Like People?
ELEVEN years ago, Apple Computer Inc. said it would make personal computers easy to use and came close with the Macintosh.
A few years later, the Microsoft Corporation made a similar promise with Windows and then gave us, well, Windows.
In 1993 I.B.M. talked about improving the PC experience, and then spelled out a strategy called "natural computing," a label the company does not appear to have used since.


Airline Antitrust Suit Coupons in Mail
The coupons awarded to 4.1 million claimants in the airline antitrust suit should all be in the mail by now.
Dawn R. Smith, the special administrative master in the suit, said the first batch went out Dec. 15 and the mailing was scheduled to be complete by yesterday.
The coupons are a result of a settlement in which nine airlines, without acknowledging that they had collaborated to fix fares between Jan. 1, 1988, and June 30, 1992, agreed to provide $400 million in discounts to people who filed claims saying they flew on the airlines through major domestic airports during that time period.
Judge Marvin H. Shoob of the Federal District Court in Atlanta, who presided, reviewed the calculations and directed that the mailing be completed before postal rates rose today.


The Concealment of Sex
WOULD YOU CALL MADONNA A sex god?
Of course not.
Search through all the competing data bases -- Dialog, Nexis, Datatimes, Dow Jones News/Retrieval -- and you will find the enticing entertainer described thousands of times as a sex goddess, never a sex god.
Hold that thought about the -ess suffix as you read this letter from Andrew Hughes of New York:
"When I was young, we had movies that had actors and actresses. Now we seem to have nothing but actors. Even the women are called actors. The word actresses seems to have fallen into disrepute.


Ewing Is Stepping Up In a Timely Fashion
After undergoing off-season arthroscopic surgery on his right knee, it has taken Patrick Ewing nearly a third of the regular season to once again feel comfortable on the court.
As far as the Knicks are concerned, the 7-footer's resurgence could not have come at a better time.


Vikings' Defensive Coordinator Is Too Busy to Take Calls
The phone will ring.
Whenever a National Football League head coach is dismissed, the phone in the office of Tony Dungy, the Minnesota Vikings' defensive coordinator, rings off the hook.
But instead of an owner or general manager being on the other line, it's either a friend or reporter asking if Dungy has received any offers.
The answer, usually, is no.
With three head coaches already dropped since the season ended a week ago, it is a certainty that Dungy's phone will ring again.
But who will be on the line this time?


Wall Street; With the New Year, New Scams
AN investor stampede for mutual funds that invest in "Republican" investment plays?
A brokerage firm that cleans up selling its underwritings of Chinese cellular phone companies to United States municipalities?
Where will the financial scams, disasters and embarrassments of 1995 be found?
And will the D-word -- derivatives -- stay in the headlines?
Derivatives disasters no doubt will continue, the pros say, as will misleading enticements to investors who log on to the financial screens of on-line services.


Neighbor Is Sad and Angry Over Demise of Luchow's
To the Editor:
"End Is Near for the Old Luchow's," reported your Dec. 25 headline.
"And the neighbors couldn't be happier," said your text.


Schools Help When Children Lose Loved Ones
IN East Orange, a 6-year-old boy was so enraged with his father for not attending his mother's funeral, after she died of cancer, that he behaved uncontrollably in school and was finally expelled.
In Montclair, an 11-year-old boy and his 12-year-old sister started acting up at school and at home with their grandparents after both parents died of AIDS within a year.
What the three children share, in addition to their troubles, is that they were eventually helped by bereavement sessions in their schools.


The Nation; Two Losers Keep Running
The bitter elections for governor of Maryland and senator from California may be over, but the losing campaigners linger on -- and on, and on.
Last week, Ellen R. Sauerbrey, the Republican nominee who lost the Maryland governship to Parris N. Glendening by 5,993 votes out of more than 1.4 million cast, filed suit to invalidate the results or force a new election.


No Headline
"We don't see the shootings we saw before. You can walk in the streets. You don't feel like something is going to happen to you." -- MARIA LUNA, of Manhattan  [ 36:1. ]
Maybe I'm beginning to feel safer, but it's harder to take down your guard when it's been up so long. -- BRIGID MCGINN, of Brooklyn.  [ 36:4. ]


Under the Covers: Noteworthy Books
Just as there was more to sports in 1994 than the Rangers winning and the World Series vanishing, there was more to sports books than the bound version of Ken Burns's "Baseball." Various members of the Times sports department offer what they consider were some of the best sports books published in 1994.
THE LAST SHOT: CITY STREETS, BASKETBALL DREAMS Darcy Frey (Richard Todd/ Houghton Mifflin, $19.95).
In exploring Coney Island's basketball culture, Frey vividly describes how the zealous pursuit of hoop glory serves as an inner-city's version of the American Dream.
Frey's narrative offers perceptive portrayals, especially of two players from the powerhouse Lincoln High team: the bright, independent-minded Tchaka Shipp and Stephon Marbury, whose swagger is surpassed only by his great basketball talent.
NUNYO DEMASIO


Teddy Roosevelt Along as Pataki Begins Ride
When he ran for Governor, critics attacked him as the puppet of New York's Republican Party boss, a United States Senator who engineered his nomination and then made it clear after the election that he wanted to control patronage appointments.
George E. Pataki?
Hardly.
It was Theodore Roosevelt, Mr.
Pataki's predecessor as Governor by 96 years and the political idol whose portrait he hung in the Executive Mansion Friday night.


Towns and L.I.R.R. Gird for Snows
TAKING a lesson from the brutal storms of last winter municipalities and the Long Island Rail Road say they are better prepared to fight the snow this year.
But the National Weather Service predicts that the winter will be much milder, with temperatures and precipitation about average.
"All we can do is prepare for the worst and pray for the best," an L.I.R.R. spokesman, Michael Charles, said.


Speaking the Unspeakable to Retirees
THE new Republican majority in Congress has vowed that this time things will be different.
Fear not, they say, now that we're in charge, Government spending will be brought under control.
The challenge they face, of course, is the inescapable arithmetic of Federal spending and deficits: The only way to bring spending into line with revenues is to limit the generosity of programs that automatically provide benefits to all who qualify.


A Moment, Captured
1919-1994 George Tames was a photographer for The New York Times for nearly half a century.
He chronicled 10 presidents, producing what the film maker Ken Burns called "the DNA of our political story in the last 50 years." This photo of Robert F. Kennedy was taken in California in March 1968, three months before his assassination.
Howell Raines was Washington editor of The Times toward the end of Tames's career.
By Howell Raines
GEORGE TAMES would do anything to get a picture.
The priest who preached his funeral told of first meeting George as he lurked behind the altar during Christmas Mass, photographing by candlelight.
When it came to photographing earthly potentates, George was a master of position.
He liked to work up close.
Among photographers younger than he, George was famous for picking out choice spots and letting the shot come to him.
But I suspect that when he got this great shot of Bobby Kennedy, he had to wade into the scrum, slinging his elbows, to wind up at Kennedy's side.


Foreign Affairs; Come The Revolution
Today marks the return of the "Foreign Affairs" column to The New York Times.
"Foreign Affairs" is actually the paper's oldest column.
It was begun in 1937 by the remarkable Anne O'Hare McCormick and was originally called "In Europe." In those days "In Europe" was foreign affairs for most Americans, and it seemed perfectly natural that the paper's one overseas columnist was rooted on the European Continent.
Mrs.
McCormick's 1954 obituary in The Times said she got her start in foreign reporting "as the wife of Mr. McCormick, a Dayton engineer whom she accompanied on frequent buying trips to Europe."
Obviously, I was born in a very different era, one in which columnists only have to accompany their curiosity and engineers travel to Tokyo for buying trips, not Paris.
Both factors have led me to start my column from Japan.
While I have no intention of calling my column "In Asia," the thought did cross my mind.
Let's face it, when the history of the late 20th century is written, the most important event may not be the reconstruction of Europe, the cold war or the collapse of Communism, but rather the rapid modernization in one generation of two billion people from Japan to the border of India.
Never have so many raised their standard of living so far so fast.


The World: Breaking With the U.S.; France Wages a Lonely Battle With Radical Islam
THE shootout between French commandos and Algerian hijackers in Marseilles last week reflected not only the fact that France is again at war in Algeria but that it is pursuing a hard-line policy toward radical Islam that puts it at odds with the United States.
France views the rise of the Islamic militant movement in Algeria as a serious threat to its national security, which helps to explain its willingness to risk a bloodbath when the commandos stormed the plane, killing four hijackers and rescuing about 170 passengers.
France frames the conflict as a clash of civilizations.
It has carried the fight into the schools, where Muslim girls wearing traditional head scarves are expelled.


Under the Covers: Noteworthy Books
Just as there was more to sports in 1994 than the Rangers winning and the World Series vanishing, there was more to sports books than the bound version of Ken Burns's "Baseball." Various members of the Times sports department offer what they consider were some of the best sports books published in 1994.
OCTOBER 1964 David Halberstam (Villard Books, $24).
An intriguing sociology of an era told through a season.
Halberstam uses the classic 1964 Yankees-Cardinals World Series to trace the demise of the Yankees empire, largely due to the franchise's failure to grasp the implications of Jackie Robinson and the integration of major league baseball.
The Cardinals became something of a model of integration during the mid-60's.
WILLIAM C. RHODEN


Highlights of a Year Of Many Changes
AS concertgoers anticipate a full complement of artistic adventures this year, it is time to look back at some of the events that brightened last year.
Happy Marriage: American Ballet Theater and the Purchase College dance division announced a partnership to include performance, education, residence and summer programs at least over a five-year period.
Unfortunately, their first child was stillborn: the inaugural production of Tchaikovsky's "Nutcracker" was canceled shortly before its scheduled Dec. 12 opening, but the dance division dean, Carol Walker, said that the collaboration would proceed as planned.


Talk Radio or Hate Radio? Critics Assail Some Hosts
Talk radio thrived by allowing people to say the kind of things that were discouraged by liberal orthodoxy, according to many talk show hosts.
But, critics say, some programs have gone too far, bordering on hate talk.
The subjects that seem to bring out the most extreme passion are racial minorities, homosexuals and guns.


Making Resolutions? Don't Forget the Yard
THERE once was a tradition that the first day of the New Year was the time to make resolutions.
These promises were meant to insure a better year to come, and the list was usually one of self-betterment, personal resolves or something like that.
Presently, few adhere to this custom.
Those who do follow the tradition and make lists claim that the whole exercise is worthwhile.
But most couldn't be bothered.
The attitude is, who checks up anyway?


On the Weicker Watch: Stand Up or Stand Back?
AS a reporter covering Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. in Hartford, it was wise to get a firm and early grasp on the coded format of his news conferences: Would the Governor be standing in front of the fireplace?
Seated behind his desk?
On the couch?
Each variation carried a hidden message about the tone of the event and whether or not you could expect to have your head handed back to you for asking any particular question.
The couch was almost always best.
It conveyed informality.
The reporters sat.
Mr.
Weicker took his jacket off, and when he sank down into the cushions, his pants rode up his ankles, exposing his socks and making him seem almost folksy, or in any case less formidable.


Change of Scenery


Of Debutantes, Melodies And Amateur Reveling
DOWNTOWN -- Catherine and Charlotte Forbes, granddaughters of the late Malcolm Forbes, were the lead debutantes at last Thursday's International Debutante Ball.
On Wednesday, they were standing next to their fathers receiving guests at the Forbes Galleries on lower Fifth Avenue at a black-tie cocktail party.
"She's smart enough to see eye to eye with me," Malcolm Forbes Jr., the writer and the president of Forbes Inc., said of his daughter, Catherine, who works as an intern at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
UPPER EAST SIDE Listening to the City In All Its Varied Sounds
Next Sunday, the Museum of the City of New York will begin its "Rhythm of the City" musical series.


Anna M. Barrett, James McGowan
Dr.
Anna Mariya Barrett, a neurology resident at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York, was married yesterday to James Cyril McGowan, a film and television writer.
The Rev.
Stuart Sandberg officiated at Our Lady of Fatima Roman Catholic Church in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Dr.
Barrett, 30, is keeping her name.
She is also a writer and a poet.
She graduated from Harvard University and received her medical degree from New York University.
Dr.
Barrett is the daughter of Marijam Ismakoen Barrett and Benjamin Barrett of South Bend, Ind.
Her father retired as a freelance editor and writer there.
Her mother is a clerk at the St.
Joseph County voter registration office in South Bend.


Cheers to Boots, Ruth, Brother Rick
IT was a very good year for Boots, discovered by Carol Chesler last Independence Day homeless on Houston Street.
With the help of a friend and a homeless young man named Mike, Ms.
Chesler brought the jolly, fat black dog with the white forepaws home, and eventually matched him with a Union Square Greenmarket farm couple.
Now, when Carl and Ginny Jensen bring their jellies and baked goods to the city on Fridays and Saturdays, Ms.
Chesler walks Boots.
It always makes her smile, though Boots is acting more and more as if he's doing her a favor.
Boots is important to her.
She made a lot of new friends while finding him a home in a year in which her old cat, Sundance, died; her favorite politician, Mario M. Cuomo, was defeated, and Mike never found a home of his own.


Dec. 25-31; So, What Is That Leather Bustier Saying?
And you thought they were just clothes.
Little did you suspect what anthropological grist your closet offered: the Gap T-shirts, the baby-doll sweater set, the black leather jacket and the peasant blouse.
This is more than ever material for interpretation.
A plethora of folks out there sift through each season's fashion entrails, telling the nation, women in particular, that we're now mature enough to play insouciant ingenues or powerful enough to become leather dominatrixes.
A satin bustier makes a fine democratic statement under a severe suit, and rubber and lace combos do not a lady unmake.


Fire Investigator Is Praised In Apprehension of Suspect
The Norfolk police said tonight that a city fire investigator had captured a 22-year-old man wanted as a suspect in an attack on an abortion clinic here and in the killing of two women at an abortion clinics in Brookline, Mass.
Officer Larry Hill, a spokesman for the Norfolk Police Department, said that the fire investigator, Ken Harlan, "did a very, very outstanding job," in apprehending the suspect just two or three minutes after the attack on the Hillcrest Clinic here.


Sarajevo, Tired of Being 'a Big Prison Camp'
The feeling of existing beneath a malevolent gaze is inescapable in Sarajevo.
To walk about is to be watched, not as a human being but as a potential target.
Whose are those eyes that scrutinize you from the encircling hills and from apartment windows?
Through what madness have they come to reduce you to something as small and easy to knock down as a pin in a bowling alley?
The city plays tricks with your imagination.
It is jagged now, vestigial, twilighted.
After 1,000 days beneath the shells and bullets of the Serbs, its dark streets are easy to populate with ghosts.
But the danger is not imaginary.


The College Football Playoff Fantasy
Every year around this time the sports press spends a lot of energy and space arguing that college football needs playoffs, the better to establish a true national champion.
The irony of this annual debate is that it is liveliest not in the South, the Midwest and Far West, where most of the major teams are, but in media centers where the college game is largely viewed as a training ground for the National Football League.
In places where college football is most popular, fans show little inclination to turn it into a minor league version of the N.F.L.
But big-city sportswriters continue to declare that they cannot be truly happy until college ball has playoffs like the pros.


Urban Dangers Send Children Indoors to Play; A Chain of Commercial Playgrounds Is One Answer for Worried Parents
It is the week between Christmas and New Year's.
Schools are closed, it's cold outside, and parents are going nuts from all the kids and holiday debris underfoot.
Once upon a time, the words "Go play outside!" spoken with enough latent hysteria to ward off any back talk, would buy a few hours' peace and quiet.
But it's not that simple these days.
For many parents, outside equals anxiety, even in suburbs created in a quest for more closet space and free-range children.


Troubles In Accident Reporting
STATISTICS count, and never more than when they are about traffic accidents.
Decisions to improve dangerous roadways or intersections, for example, or to increase an area's anti-drunken-driving patrol often grow out of trends revealed by accident statistics.
And officials of four state agencies acknowledge that in New Jersey these statistics are often inaccurate, confusing and outdated by the time they reach the public.
Some of New Jersey's accident statistics of the last five years rise or fall by an implausible 30 percent or more each year, depending on which state or Federal agency is reporting them.
Highway safety advocates and state transportation engineers must wait up to four years for some statistics.


Evening Hours; Debutantes On Parade
The Cotillion and Christmas Ball at the Waldorf-Astoria, Dec. 22.


The Executive Life; A Perk From the Past For Filmdom's Elite
CHECK out your average studio executive's home this time of the year and you'll likely find a big videocassette stack of Oscar hopefuls waiting to be reviewed on a huge, razor-thin television with window-shattering digital sound.
But go higher in the hierarchy, and you'll slip back to another era, when the private screening room was a center of power and prestige.
For even now, a core group of Hollywood's executive elite still enjoy their very own home-projection rooms.
They are often used to screen "dailies" -- the footage printed each day from a movie in the making -- and to stay abreast of the competition.
And during the winter, they are mostly devoted to screening films being pitched for Academy Awards in late March.


Val P. Cook, Don K. Hanna
Edith Pope Cook and Col.
Don Keith Hanna were married on Wednesday at the Ritz-Carlton in Laguna Niguel, Calif.
The Rev.
David P. Comegys, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Hanna, who is known as Val, is a former vice president of Saks-Jandel, a women's specialty clothing company with stores in Chevy Chase, Md., and Washington.
She is now a consultant to the store.
She is the daughter of the late Harriet Brownell Barnett and the late George A. Pope Jr.
The bride's father was the chairman and chief executive of Pope &amp; Talbott Inc., a lumber and paper products manufacturer in Portland, Ore., and was a breeder of horses.
He owned Decidedly, the Kentucky Derby winner in 1962.


Fathers of Invention
The greatest inventions tend to go unnoticed.
It's not so much that they are frivolous or dispensable; rather, they are so essential that they merge instantly into the fabric of daily life while their discoverers go unremarked.
Sometimes a discovery transforms a landscape, sometimes it's just a phrase, but the world is never quite the same afterward.
Herewith a gallery of inventors we lost in 1994, quirky visionaries whose cry of "Eureka" would change Americans' lives.
MARCEL BICH


The Tipplers and the Temperate: Drinking Around the World
The wassail bowl and the champagne toast are synonymous with the end-of-the-year holidays, and beer frequently accompanies the end-of-the-season football game.
But by and large, Americans are a more or less temperate bunch.
Citizens of Luxembourg are another story.


Looking Back, Looking Ahead, Bronx
THE SOUTH BRONX  Up From the Fires  Depopulated to the tune of 300,000 people in the 1970's, the South Bronx became a national symbol of urban degradation and the city's neediest ward.


FROM MY WIFE'S ROOM
Few accounts have both the power and poignancy of Robert Kotlowitz's "From My Wife's Room" (Dec. 4), about his wife's struggle with cancer.
As an oncologist, I find myself both an active participant and a helpless observer when dealing with families facing decisions they know will impact a relative's life -- and death.
One of the most difficult aspects can be communication.
The patient and family members avoid "forbidden topics" that may be interpreted as unsupportive or defeatist.
At a time when there is so much to say, things are often left unsaid.
What results is a pas de deux of isolation and terminal illness.


David J. Silber, Theater Actor, 41
David J. Silber, an actor who appeared in plays on and off Broadway as well as in several touring and regional theater productions, died on Thursday at his parents' home in Brookline, Mass.
He was 41.
The cause was AIDS, said his mother, Kathryn.


Loner and Odd Man Out
On the back of John C. Salvi 3d's black pickup was an oversized picture of an aborted fetus.
It was a picture of Jesus Christ, Mr.
Salvi told people.
His neighbors and co-workers today described the 22-year-old suspect in abortion clinic shootings, who was a student at the Portsmouth Beauty School, as quiet and withdrawn.
They knew little about him, they said, other than that he was deeply religious and wanted to be a hairdresser.
Even law-enforcement officials said today that they knew little about his background, although they said that he did not appear to be connected to any anti-abortion groups.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BEYOND UHURA  "Star Trek" and Other Memories. By Nichelle Nichols. Putnam, $22.95.


Suspect in Clinic Killings Eludes Hunt But Is Caught in 3d Attack, in Virginia
The man suspected of gunning down two people and wounding five others at two abortion clinics here on Friday was arrested in Norfolk, Va., today, the police said, moments after opening fire on an abortion clinic there.
The suspect is John C. Salvi 3d, a 22-year-old man who had wanted to be a hairdresser in Hampton, N.H., and who was described as strongly opposed to abortion.
He is accused of pulling a rifle from a duffle bag and opening fire about 11:45 this morning, shattering the glass in two doors at the Hillcrest abortion clinic but causing no injuries.
A Norfolk fire department arson investigator saw Mr.
Salvi opening fire, and he was seized by the Norfolk police shortly afterward.


Philadelphia
To the Editor: As a native Philadelphian who returns often, I was sorry that Katherine Ashenburg didn't ask a local resident for guidance on where to get a good cheesesteak.
Although Sassafras is a lovely bistro, I'm not surprised that she found her cheesesteak bland.
First of all, the best cheesesteaks come from stands and shops devoted to this one sandwich.
Those you get in more general restaurants are just not the same; the meat's too lean, the bread doesn't have the right texture and crust.
Plus, they don't offer the extras: hot cherry peppers, raw or sauteed onions, pizza sauce.


Picking a Pied Piper to Lead a Thriving Larchmont Temple
IT was the most joyful moment in an evening so full of joyful moments that, at times, it seemed that the walls of the Larchmont Temple could not contain the emotion.
Rabbi Jeffrey J. Sirkman marched at the head of a happy procession, which wove its way through 400 men and women who stood and sang with gusto as the small parade passed up and down the aisles.


Eric DeJonge and Melissa Turner
Melissa Maria Turner, the daughter of Drs.
Maria and Raymond Turner of Washington, was married there yesterday to Dr.
Karl Eric DeJonge, the son of Joan and Karl DeJonge of Morton Grove, Ill.
The Rev.
Paul Kress performed the ceremony at the Chevy Chase Presbyterian Church.
Ms.
Turner, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Yale University and is studying for a master's degree in public health and a medical degree, both at Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is the vice president of clinical affairs at Health-Plus, a health maintenance organization in Greenbelt, Md.
Her mother is a senior medical officer in the dermatology branch of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.


Homesteading In the Bronx
To the Editor:
Your article "Bronx Homesteading: It's Grueling, but Rewarding" on Dec. 11 leaves the impression that everything was nice and smooth with 272 Alexander Avenue.
But that is far from the truth.


Amtrak Cuts Service On Many Long Routes
Traveling by rail has always meant checking what time of day the train runs, but beginning Feb. 1, on most long Amtrak routes it will also mean checking what day the train runs: Five major trains will be cut to three or four times a week, instead of daily.
In addition, 10 routes that once operated as extensions of major trains -- with cars that linked up to a cross-country train, or peeled off to take a spur line -- will be eliminated on April 1; so will three short routes.
And that is just the first round.
Amtrak, which announced the cuts on Dec. 14, plans more of them next year.


Justice Black's Constitutional Values
To the Editor:
Justice Hugo Black was indeed a frequent adversary of Justice Felix Frankfurter, as Yale Kamisar says in his review of Roger K. Newman's "Hugo Black: A Biography" (Nov. 6).
However, Mr.
Kamisar's description of Justice Black as an "advocate of judicial activism" is perverse.


Laura A. Guerra, Tucker McCrady
Laura Ann Guerra, the daughter of Frances and Anthony Michael Guerra of Upper Saddle River, N.J., was married yesterday to William Tucker de Bernieres McCrady, a son of Mazie McCrady of New York and Dr.
James Waring McCrady of Sewanee, Tenn.
Charles J. Child Jr., a retired Bishop of the Atlanta Episcopal Diocese, performed the ceremony at the All Saints Chapel in Sewanee.
The bride, 32, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from the State University at Buffalo and received a master's degree in international management from the American Graduate School of International Management.
She is a vice president of retirement and benefit services at Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
Her father is president af Richtone Cabinets, manufacturers in Suffern, N.Y.
Her mother is an assistant supervisor in the accounting department at the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company, the food retailer, in Montvale, N.J.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Karla Wadeson, Charles Falk
Karla Rae Wadeson, a daughter of Bernice and Gerald Wadeson of Fargo, N.D., was married on Friday to Charles Sheridan Falk, the son of Barbara Warner of Branford, Conn., and Herbert Falk of Pleasantville, N.Y.
The ceremony was performed at the office of the city clerk in the Municipal Building in Brooklyn.
Ms.
Wadeson, 24, is keeping her name.
She is a programs assistant at the Modern Language Association in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.


A Key Fee: What Can Tenant Do?
Q What kind of legal action can I take against the former tenant of my rent-stabilized apartment for the key fee he charged me?
The former tenant (who is not a real-estate broker) put a classified advertisement in a newspaper describing his apartment and the fact that a low fee would be charged.


Miami
This city is enjoying new prestige after the Summit of the Americas, a gathering of 33 heads of state from Latin America presided over last month by President Clinton.
Better known in recent years for Hurricane Andrew, tourist killings and waves of refugees, Miami and its metropolitan area have now been highlighted as a major international trading center that, according to the President, "represents the promise of hemispheric integration."
Visitors will benefit from the sprucing up that went on for the summit.
The $15 million or so spent on road improvements and landscaping means smoother, more scenic sightseeing.
Many hotels also underwent renovations.


Visiting India
To the Editor: Your report "Plague in India Giving Visitors Second Thoughts" (Oct. 16) states that many people in Bombay regard malaria as a greater scourge than the plague and "it may be more of a concern to travelers." The author says "bring your quinine tablets."
Malaria is a significant risk in many parts of India, with the exception of certain mountainous states, as is stated in the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention publication "Health Information for International Travel." Malaria risk occurs year round in the tropical cities of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras.
Malaria risk in more temperate New Delhi is essentially seasonal, with the major risk being from May to October.
I have under my care a traveler who spent two weeks in Bombay in October and did not take malarial prophylaxis.
One week after her return she developed malaria and required hospitalization.


Bland Computer-Game Music? He'll Have None of It
THEY call him the Fat Man.
It's not important that he isn't fat.
What's important is that they call him.
Computer software designers, video game companies and sound board manufacturers call the Fat Man -- also known as George Alistair Sanger -- when they want to add a rousing musical soundtrack to a new title or make sure that a rich orchestral score will emerge from a computer sound board sounding like an orchestra instead of an ice cream truck.


Verbal Pollution?
To the Editor:
I have not bought any of P. J. O'Rourke's writings since his graduation from the cautionary conservative school of whining.
Indeed, let the market decide on many matters of inconsequence.
Environmental free marketeers, however, are a special breed whose amorality approaches the criminal.


Man of the Year: High-Wire Artist Alan Greenspan
BURSTING a speculative bubble is easy for a central banker.
Doing so without killing a lot of innocent bystanders is not.
Alan Greenspan may have accomplished the task.
The operative phrase is "a lot," and there are many people who would disagree with it.
Certainly there were many speculators who suffered greatly as a result of the Federal Reserve's tightening of credit, including some who did not know they were speculating.
But the Fed managed to unwind huge speculation on interest rates with only minimal damage to the stock market and the economy.


LIGHTEN UP
Late last winter, sequestered in the middle of California redwood country, 20 people resolved to change their lives.
This is not unusual at a health spa, where strangers live, sweat and fight hunger pangs together.
But at this particular retreat, common purpose was established more quickly than usual.
The spa's program was built around strenuous half-day hikes -- some through steep trails in the shadow of the redwoods, others through endless rolling hills.
The terrain was as varied as it was daunting.
Sharing its challenge, we became a team; facing the food, we became a militant cadre.


Doctor's Bill


THE POPEMAKERS
Of the six Cardinals interviewed, the Belgian, Cardinal Danneels, is the most perceptive.
An emphasis on mercy was the objective of the reforms of John XXIII and the Second Vatican Council, but that purpose has been obscured by the current preference for moral rigor and discipline.
In some areas, such as those dealing with the status of divorced and remarried Catholics, the unqualified, punitive tone of the Vatican verges on cruelty.
CORNELIUS F. MURPHY JR.
Pittsburgh


Evening Hours; Recapturing the Past
A party at the St. Regis replicates an early town house in New York, Dec. 12.


A Time for Jubilation
Manhattan at holiday time means high-spirited dressing.
It means Russian women, in opulent Fendi fur coats, wearing their black leather caps hip-hop style.
An Italian tourist dangling tassels from a velvet pagoda headdress.
Or men leaving St.
Thomas Church in top hats.
One woman near the Plaza walked three dyed poodles -- an unmatched set in pink, turquoise and white.
Asian bridal parties in full splendor braved the throngs to pose in front of the Rockefeller Center tree.
A jazz band played.
Crowds lined up.
And in the window of Variazioni on West 57th Street, a diapered baby mannequin cavorted under panels proclaiming the New Year.


Habitats/Out of the Depths; 'The Best Day of My Life'
WHEN Milagros Marrero's first husband died, they hadn't been together for a while, she says.
"I was homeless for three years, and it was all his fault."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  RUSSIA HITS CHECHEN CAPITAL  Russian forces drove into the center of the capital of Chechnya, with bombing by helicopter gunships.
The Parliament was burning and casualties were heavy. 1


Making Resolutions? Don't Forget the Yard
THERE once was a tradition that the first day of the New Year was the time to make resolutions.
These promises were meant to insure a better year to come, and the list was usually one of self-betterment, personal resolves or something like that.
Presently, few adhere to this custom.
Those who do follow the tradition and make lists claim that the whole exercise is worthwhile.
But most couldn't be bothered.
The attitude is, who checks up anyway?


Wall Street; 1994: Another Bad Year for Trees
MERRILL LYNCH &amp; COMPANY took the prize for killing the most trees in the name of research published in 1994, pumping out 6,527 reports.
That was up from 4,903 such contributions in 1993.
Nelson Publications, which keeps tabs on the analysts who keep tabs on public companies, said Lehman Brothers was the second-most-productive Wall Street firm in terms of the quantity of reports pumped out -- 4,520 in 1994.
Smith Barney, Goldman, Sachs and Prudential Securities made up the rest of the top five list.


Montana Blinks First in Duel With Marino
Of all the stunning ends, of all the least likely scenarios that could have been scripted for today's dream matchup, these would top the list: Joe Montana is intercepted at the goal line and Marcus Allen has the ball stripped from his grasp.
With precisely that improbable one-two punch, the Miami Dolphins turned back two fourth-quarter Kansas City drives and defeated the Chiefs, 27-17, in today's American Football Conference first-round playoff game at Joe Robbie Stadium.
With the victory, the Dolphins advanced to next week's second round, traveling to San Diego to play the Chargers.


Science Fiction
Even in a genre noted for youthful prodigies, Samuel R. Delany stands out.
His first novel was published in 1962, when he was 20 years old.
The next three years saw the appearance of a wildly ambitious trilogy now known as "The Fall of the Towers"; before the end of the decade, five more novels (among them "The Einstein Intersection," which won a Nebula Award) and some innovative short stories, including the Nebula-winning "Aye, and Gomorrah," had secured Mr.
Delany's reputation as one of science fiction's most important writers.
Although he has reined in the rhetorical excesses of his early years, he has never ceased to experiment with form and content.
His subjects have included love and sex in their many guises and the central role of language in the human comedy.
He has written a stylistically and thematically challenging novel that reached a wide audience ("Dhalgren"), autobiography so frank it verges on pornography, and some of science fiction's most thoughtful criticism.


New Effort to End Lockout
The National Hockey League lockout concluded its third full month yesterday with no negotiations between the subcommittees representing the team owners and the National Hockey League Players Association.
"Don't read anything into that," said someone with knowledge of the bargaining, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
"The talks will resume at noon on Sunday."
Jeff Pash and Brian Burke, two senior vice presidents who are lawyers, are expected to represent the N.H.L.
John McCambridge and Bob Riley, also lawyers, are expected to represent the union.
The site was not disclosed.
Both sides have agreed to a news media blackout on the details.


Curse You, Red Baron!
To the Editor:
In the Dec. 4 issue, you have a favorable review of "The Primary Colors," by Alexander Theroux, but your reviewer, F. Gonzalez-Crussi, fails to give the author his entire due.
If the excerpt from the book at the bottom of the page is to be believed, Mr.
Theroux has performed the remarkable feat of counting the wings on an airplane and missing by two.
Manfred von Richthofen, the Red Baron, flew, and died in, a red Fokker triplane, not a monoplane.


Residential Sales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GRAMERCY PARK AREA $855,000
1 Irving Place
(Zeckendorf Towers)
4-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,400-sq.-ft. penthouse condo in a 8-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room, windowed kitchen, high-ceilings, 3 exposures; common charge $1,372; taxes $8,600, listed at $950,000, 13 weeks on market (Brokers: J.R. Realty; William B. May)
TRIBECA $1.765 million
143 Reade Street
6-bedrooms, 6 1/2-baths in a 5-story, mixed-use brick building; elevator, dining room, eat-in kitchen, library, 2 fireplaces, commercial space on the first floor; taxes $3,500, listed at $1.868 million, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Eychner/Tribeca)
UPPER EAST SIDE $875,000
422 East 72d Street
(Oxford)
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,844-sq.-ft. condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, pool and health club; common charge $854; taxes $6,606, listed at $983,000, 23 weeks on market (Brokers: The Marketing Directors; City Living Inc.)
WEST SIDE $164,000
205 West End Avenue
(Lincoln Towers)
1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,010-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining area, terrrace, Hudson River view; maintenance $919, 59% tax-deductible, listed at $190,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Residence Resource Ltd.)
BRONX
BAYCHESTER $173,000
4523 Hoxie Street
2-family, 57-year-old, detached, wood-frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement; taxes $1,650, listed at $179,000, 5 weeks on market (Broker: Albert R. Bryan Real Estate)
RIVERDALE $155,000
6203 Spencer Terrace
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old semi-attached brick town house; dining area, basement; taxes $3,488, listed at $198,000, 39 weeks on market (Broker: Trebach Realty)
BROOKLYN
DITMAS PARK $300,000
312 Rugby Road
2-family, 85-year-old, detached, wood-frame house; 5 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in primary unit; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; eat-in kitchen in each; 2-car garage; taxes $1,759, listed at $315,000, 26 weeks on market (Brokers: J. Shayovitz Real Estate; Century 21/Greenfield II)
PARK SLOPE $710,000
870 Carroll Street
7-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 4-story, attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 studios, fireplace, original moldings and detail; taxes $3,490, listed at $785,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Heights Berkeley Realty)
SHEEPSHEAD BAY $190,000
4344 Bedford Avenue
3-bedroom, 3-bath, 48-year-old, attached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, front and rear porches, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,400, listed at $229,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)
QUEENS
BRIARWOOD $295,000
135-07 Coolidge Avenue
2-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2-baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath hospitality suite in basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,200, listed at $339,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Kingdom Realty)
OZONE PARK $250,000
97-29 94th Street
4-family, 25-year-old, semi-attached, brick house; 2 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit, 1 bedroom, 1 bath in others; eat-in kitchens in each; 1-car garage; taxes $5,804, listed at $274,900, 3 weeks on market (Broker: F.H. Realty Executives)
STATEN ISLAND
WESTERLEIGH $213,500
112 Crystal Avenue
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old, dutch colonial, dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, rear patio, 1-car garage; taxes $1,700, listed at $225,000, 21 weeks on market (Broker: Vitale-Sunshine Realty)
WESTCHESTER
ARMONK $1.2 million
29 Frog Rock Road
4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 9-year-old contemporary; 2-story entry hall, wet bar, den, Jacuzzi; 2.18 acres; taxes $24,445, listed at $1.295 million, 28 weeks on market (Brokers: Vannier Real Estate; Houlihan/Lawrence)
BEDFORD $665,000
413 Harris Road
5-bedroom, 4-bath, 74-year-old farmhouse; pool, barn, terrace, den, 6.42 acres; taxes $10,210, listed at $700,000, 7 months on market (Brokers: Renwick &amp; Winterling Realty; Houlihan/Lawrence)
NORTH SALEM $250,000
209 Hardscrabble Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 64-year-old ranch; front porch, family room, 2 fireplaces, attached 1-car garage; 7.8 acres; taxes $7,947, listed at $259,000, 14 weeks on market (Broker: Houlihan/Lawrence)
PLEASANTVILLE $223,500
25 Leland Avenue
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 52-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, deck; 1/3 acre; taxes $7,591, listed at $239,900, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Holmes &amp; Kennedy)
CONNECTICUT
DARIEN $385,000
15 Casement Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 55-year-old, aluminum-sided, colonial; remodeled kitchen, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $2,885, listed at $405,000, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Kelly Associates)
GREENWICH $217,500
102 Halstead Avenue
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 8-year-old condo; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, c/a, finished basement; common charge $50; taxes $1,640, listed at $230,000, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Prudential Connecticut)
NORWALK $150,000
6 New Street
(Vantage Point)
2-bedroom, 2-bath condo in a 16-year-old building; dining area, eat-in kitchen, car port; common charge $269; taxes $4,712, listed at $189,000, 49 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Corporate Property Management)
RIVERSIDE $471,250
64 Arch Street
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 34-year-old, contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, cathedral ceiling in living room, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $6,008, listed at $495,000, 6 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott)
NEW JERSEY
FAIR LAWN $244,000
40-23 Terhune Place 3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 32-year-old split level; c/a, covered patio, 1-car garage; taxes $5,456, listed at $248,900, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: T.P. Mabey Realty; Re/Max Property Center)
MILLTOWN $176,000
54 Cortlandt Street
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 55-year-old colonial; h/w floors, new siding; taxes $4,435, listed at $244,900, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert)
MONTVALE $405,000
40 Sunrise Drive
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 31-year-old split level; deck, fireplace, c/a; taxes $7,129, listed at $409,900, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Higgins; Noah/Hearthstone)
OCEAN CITY $105,255
3697 Pembroke Road
5-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; screened porch, attic storage, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $1,650, listed at $109,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: The Richards Agency)
LONG ISLAND
JERICHO $216,000
456 South Marginal Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 27-year-old ranch; dining room, den, fireplace, 2-car attached garage; taxes $6,300, listed at $234,900, 76 weeks on market (Brokers: North Site Realty Corporation; ERA Gatewood)
LONG BEACH $130,000
40 Nebraska Street, 4-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old high ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage; taxes $3,700, listed at $149,990, 12 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Long Island; Levittown Equities)
MILL NECK $480,000
20 Frost Mill Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 70-year-old colonial; dining room, basement, attic, 2-car attached garage, 3 acres with 2 ponds; taxes $4,400, listed at $625,000, 24 weeks on market (Brokers: Douglas-Elliman-Jane Hayes; Piping Rock Associates)
WILLISTON PARK $200,000
126 Harvard Street
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 65-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, finished attic, 2-car garage; taxes $2,600, listed at $220,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Atanas Realty)


What's the Symbol on That Banner? Why, It's the Family Pet
SANTA CLAUS, a leprechaun, Easter eggs, Uncle Sam, a wheelbarrow and a sea horse have one thing in common.
All these seasonal symbols have appeared in recent years on brightly colored banners that flutter on flagpoles outside houses.
Now the banners have taken on a new twist, making direct statements about people who display their preference for pets, sports, hobbies, colleges or even a penchant for having tea (a cup of tea, a scone and a strawberry).


For Kwanzaa, A Celebration of Africa
Hall of Ocean Life, American Museum of Natural History, Dec. 28.


Streetscapes/The Haughwout Building; Restoring a Richly Sculpted Venetian Palace
IT once seemed as though the rusty, brooding Haughwout Building, built in 1857 at Broome Street and Broadway, would remain unrestored forever.
Now Staples, the office-supply store, has moved in, and the restoration of a dreary cast-iron pile that is one of New York's most outstanding landmarks has been set in motion.
In 1856 Walter Langdon began putting up a large structure on his land at the northeast corner of Broome and Broadway.
He must have been in touch with his future tenant, Eder V. Haughwout (it's usually pronounced HOWitt), because the resulting building was clearly custom-designed for what The New York Times described as "the greatest china and porcelain house in the city."


Ms. Goldschmidt, Mr. Diament
Elizabeth H. Goldschmidt, a daughter of Alfred and Louise Goldschmidt of London, and Nathan J. Diament, a son of Rabbi Louis and Hermine Diament of Lynbrook, L.I., are to be married today.
Rabbi David Miller is to officiate at the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Jerusalem.
The bride, 27, graduated from Manchester University.
She received a postgraduate diploma in Jewish history from Oxford University and is studying for a master's degree in museum education at the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father is the principal partner in Alfred Alexander &amp; Company, a London insurance brokerage.
Her mother is amarketing representative for the Jerusalem Report, a magazine in England.


Big Environment Hits a Recession
CONSUMERS respond listlessly to much of their marketing and research.
Revenues are tumbling.
Energetic competitors are making inroads into the core customer base.
In Washington, credibility and clout are at a low point.
An assessment of a flagging industrial corporation?
Hardly.
Rather it is a summary of the dismal performance that made 1994 the most troubling year ever for many of the nation's largest environmental organizations.


Legal Maxims for Our Times
1902-1994 Long before Court TV, the American public was given a peek inside the courtroom through the eyes of one of the original celebrity lawyers, Louis Nizer.
During his 71 years of practicing law, the shrewd and flamboyant New York attorney represented such diverse clients as Mae West, Charlie Chaplin, Salvador Dali, Johnny Carson and the basketball star Julius Erving.
A master at presenting legal arguments, Nizer wrote many books on his courtroom battles.
His 1961 best seller, from which these excerpts are drawn, defined "My Life in Court."
THERE ARE NUMEROUS strategies in breaking down a witness.
The classic one is to "go for the jugular," to skip the unessential and concentrate on the essence of the direct testimony.
Another technique is to demonstrate that the witness has told a series of untruths which, though trivial individually, cumulatively discredit his veracity. . . .
Another favorite strategy in cross-examination is to begin with a strong contradiction, shaking the witness at the outset and bleeding him of his confidence.


January a Good Month To Renew Passports
Travelers with passports expiring in 1995 might make a resolution to renew them this month.
Waiting until the last minute is now costlier: The State Department on Oct. 1 added a $30 charge to the fee if a passport must be issued within three days, bringing the cost of a new passport to $95 and a renewal to $85.
This extra charge was paid by 33,000 people in the first month.
The department says its new mail office in New Hampshire can turn around a renewed passport in seven days, not including mail time, in this slow season.
March, April and May are the busiest months.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


New York on One Floor
Beginning Jan. 31, visitors to the Empire State Building can tour some of New York City's other celebrated attractions, from Coney Island's Cyclone roller coaster to the Statue of Liberty's torch, without venturing beyond the building's second floor.
The tour is, in fact, a new motion simulation ride.
Shown in two theaters, each seating 40, a video panorama of New York City whizzes by "riders," who sit on moving platforms and gaze at screens two stories high.
When the camera dives, say, from the top of Times Square to the street, the platforms tilt, intensifying motion and image.
Tickets -- $7.95, $5.95 for children -- include admission to the real-life, non-simulated observation deck upstairs.
Information: (212) 564-2224.
TERRY TRUCCO


What You Didn't See on the 6 O'Clock News
To the Editor:
Thanks for "Beyond Evil, Looking for Good" by Frederick Buechner (Op-Ed, Dec. 26), which questions why, for the most part, only negative news is considered real news.


Visiting India
To the Editor: The plague scare, which caused platoons of tourists to cancel trips to India, turned out to have a different effect for those of us who packed our tetracycline tablets and disregarded predictions of imminent doom.
Having returned in November from a 22-day tour of Nepal and northern India that was put together for a group of us by International Ventures and Travel of New York, I can report that even the most opulent, hard-to-reserve hotels such as the Taj in New Delhi, the Rambagh Palace in Jaipur and the Umaid Bhawan in Jodhpur (a gigantic domed building that combines Castle Howard with the Baths of Caracalla) were temporarily underbooked.
If you had ever wanted to stay in these extraordinary former palaces on short notice, this was the moment.


Man of the Year: High-Wire Artist Alan Greenspan
BURSTING a speculative bubble is easy for a central banker.
Doing so without killing a lot of innocent bystanders is not.
Alan Greenspan may have accomplished the task.
The operative phrase is "a lot," and there are many people who would disagree with it.
Certainly there were many speculators who suffered greatly as a result of the Federal Reserve's tightening of credit, including some who did not know they were speculating.
But the Fed managed to unwind huge speculation on interest rates with only minimal damage to the stock market and the economy.


Speed Demons in Disguise
"BUT officer, the school Christmas pageant starts in 10 minutes, and my daughter forgot her halo."
This excuse for going 45 in a 30-mile-an-hour zone is unlikely to make much headway if you are driving, say, a swoopy new Camaro.
But it might work if you are behind the wheel of a Plymouth Voyager, with the built-in infant seat and Raffi tapes in the cassette player.
But, then, hardly anyone would be tempted to speed in a mini-van.


Shooting The Moon
To the Editor:
The production company Clavius Base mentioned in the chart accompanying the article "Film Production Companies: What Price Vanity?"  [ Dec 11 ]  was not named after the otherworldly planet in Stanley Kubrick and Arthur Clarke's "2001: A Space Odyssey." The name derives from the very high-tech lunar base depicted early in the film.
Clavius is a huge crater (146 miles in diameter) formed early in the history of the moon and situated roughly 75 degrees south latitude, 25 degrees west longitude, as viewed from Earth; i.e., toward the bottom of the lunar face, slightly west of center.
It can be seen with a decent pair of binoculars or a small telescope.
The crater is big enough to contain the whole of Switzerland.
SAUNDERS B. KRAMER  Gaithersburg, Md.


World Markets; Awaiting Mexico's Plan to Revive Peso
THE financial community awaits the address that President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon will make to the Mexican people -- not to mention their foreign creditors -- on Monday, discussing his plan for restoring confidence in the country's battered currency and economy.
Bankers and analysts in London and New York are unanimous in believing that the Zedillo and Clinton Administrations have mishandled the peso devaluation so far, turning a manageable crisis into a major monetary disaster that could hamstring the Mexican economy for years to come.


A Multicultural Medley of Styles, 1920 to 1945
CRAFTS IN AMERICA flourished increasingly at the grass-roots level between 1920 and 1945, with artisans spurred on midway by Federal money in the New Deal era.
The work they produced was distinctively varied: Colonial-style chairs, Mondrian-like quilts, Hispanic images of saints, cornhusk dolls dressed as flappers and Pueblo pots bearing political statements.
Now such objects can be seen in "Revivals! Diverse Traditions: 1920-1945," an ambitious, if disjointed, exhibition at the American Craft Museum in Manhattan through Feb. 26.
Five curators chose the objects and wrote much of the catalogue, published by the museum and Harry N. Abrams ($49.50, cloth; $29.95, paper).
The show, the second of eight in the museum's series on the history of 20th-century American crafts, was financed mainly by a grant from the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund.


At the End of a Bountiful Year, 10 of the Best Choices
LAST year the message from diners was clear.
They wanted to continue to eat out as often as ever but pay less.
Many opted for casual informal restaurants rather than fancy elaborate expensive ones.


Correction
An article on Dec. 11 about the exhibition "Karl Friedrich Schinkel: The Drama of Architecture," at the Art Institute of Chicago, credited the curatorship incompletely.
The curators were John Zukowsky and Kurt Forster, not Mr.
Forster alone.


The Vichyssoise Of Ice Cream
1912-1994 Reuben Mattus, the Polish immigrant who invented Haagen-Dazs, started out as a teen-ager with a horse and wagon, peddling the product that would make his fortune in the Bronx.
It only took a foreign-sounding name to turn good old American ice cream into an exotic treat.
By Ruth Reichl
IN 1959, REUBEN MATTUS invented Haagen-Dazs.
Most people thought it was ice cream.
They were wrong.
It was a new way to sell food to a nation convinced that everybody else in the world ate better.
Call it the vichyssoise strategy.


New Year's Wishes for a Better New York
Sure It Can Seem Hopeless Around Here Sometimes.
But Everyone's a Philosopher, and Everyone Has a Solution.


A Prima Ballerina Takes a Final Bow
HEATHER WATTS SITS AT A rear table in the restaurant near Lincoln Center that used to be the Ginger Man, sipping white wine, lighting one of the cigarettes she keeps intending to give up and talking about her impending retirement.
Twenty-four years have passed since Ms.
Watts joined the New York City Ballet and came to be one of the few ballerinas well known outside the rarefied world of dance, one who seemed to embody the vitality and contradictions of a contemporary woman.


Business Diary
It Makes Perfect Sense to Be a Good Neighbor Looking at it from a coldly practical angle, this nation can't afford to have the Mexican economy fall apart.
Just as a ramshackle house stains a whole neighborhood, a tattered Mexico would be a big headache for its mighty cousin to the north.
So it made total sense last week when Washington decided to pump billions into Mexico to prop up the battered peso.
And President Ernesto Zedillo soon saw the necessity of some falling on swords, accepting the resignation of his Finance Minister, Jaime Serra Puche, whose prints were all over the currency mess.
Mr.
Zedillo also announced a drastic emergency plan, including deep concessions from labor, big spending cuts and a slowdown of economic growth.
As it happens, Mr.
Serra's replacement, Guillermo Ortiz Martinez, tried in the fall to show the need for an orderly devaluation, but no one listened.
They are now.
Give and It Shall Be Taken From Britain, today's lesson: Never, ever underestimate the public's willingness to take full advantage of anything that's free.
A mobile-phone company called Mercury One-2-One wanted a catchy promotion for its "personal communications services" -- it's among the first in the world to offer this radio-wave-based phone technology -- so it offered free calls on Christmas for new subscribers.
What it no doubt figured on: customers merrily making a few calls to relatives, then getting back to the day's festivities.
What it got: jammed lines, 10 times normal volume, 12-hour international calls, some people making 100 calls, others not able to get through at all.
In short, chaos.
Japan's Humbled Self-Image Japan strikes a bit less terror in American hearts these days, and even the Japanese admit that their mighty economic machine has been badly humbled.
Just three years ago, 53 percent of Japanese said they expected Japan to lead the world economic pack for quite a while.
A recent poll shows, though, that that's plummeted to 25 percent.
And what's the next powerhouse?
A big difference of opinion on that one -- fully a quarter of the Japanese, but a scant 4 percent of Americans, picked China.
One feeling persists in Japan, though: 83 percent of Japanese believe their blue-collar workers work harder than Americans -- and that number's held pretty steady.
Mr.
Pataki Seems to Mean It George Pataki sent some powerful signals last week that he is dead serious about his economic vision for New York.
First he named a new budget director, Patricia Woodworth, who as Michigan's budget director has zeroed in on cutting taxes and state spending.
A key item on her resume: Michigan's move this year to end local schools' dependence on property taxes.
She said that approach would be tough in New York, though.
Mr.
Pataki also found a Commissioner of Social Services in Mary Glass, who holds the same job in Westchester (she'll have to work fast; she's returning to that job in three months).
On her watch, 60 percent of those on home relief were dropped for failing to work.
The ship of state is clearly shaping up as a tight one.
The West, Yes; the Coast, No It's really true.
Though New Yorkers persist in thinking they are at the center of the universe, New York, alas, has suffered the indignity of falling behind Texas to be No. 3 on the state population list.
But Census figures out last week also highlighted an interesting aspect of this nation's great tilt westward: it stops before it gets to the ocean.
The big growth spurts are coming one or two states in from the West Coast, like Nevada, up 5.4 percent, and Arizona, up 3.3 percent.
And how about California?
Yes, it's still easily No. 1, but it now ranks just 35th in growth.
The state's sour economy is clearly no draw these days.
Mutual Funds: Doing Fine (So Far) The public made a startling discovery last year: mutual funds are not invincible.
Investors scurried away from bond funds, but a sickly stock market couldn't stop stock funds from slogging ahead.
True, the net $3 billion that flowed in in November was the lowest since 1991, but that marked the 49th straight month that more has come in than gone out -- easily the longest streak ever.
Maybe people, even when gloomy, can't think of a better place to put their cash.
Shoppers Always Show Up It makes no sense.
Stores panic in early December, then run sales even before Christmas, and -- wonder of wonders! -- the hordes arrive.
Don't retailers know that this nation's citizens are genetically programmed for holiday excess?
They have to show up, always at the last minute.
So it was that retailers, tallying it all up last week, found that sales weren't bad but profits were poor -- because of markdowns.
One footnote: plastic was big.
Visa and Mastercard both reported hefty increases in credit-card purchases.
Maybe people are using cards more for their daily bread, but it could also spell empty stores now as people wrestle those Visa bills back to earth.
Something Completely Different On New Year's Day, this page would be incomplete without a roundup of Top Stories of '94.
On second thought, that's a dumb idea.
Instead, here's an exclusive look at what will surely be the Top Story of '95: All the people who made money on derivatives (if billions were lost, billions had to be made, right?) will be overwhelmed by remorse and holiday spirit and send checks to Orange County.
BRITS ZIP UP TMS.
SQ.!
It's called the zipper, that ribbon of lit-up news on the 43d Street end of Times Square.
And even in an age when people get up-to-the-second news practically piped into their brains, the passing throng can easily be seduced into watching the headlines emerge, word * by * rolling * word.
In 1928, soon after it was born, the zipper carried news of Hoover's victory, and with a few interruptions, it's been blinking ever since.
But Newsday, which has run the billboard since 1986, pulled out recently, raising the possibility that zipper junkies would go headline-less come New Year's Eve.
Relax.
Last week Pearson, the British conglomerate that puts out The Financial Times and The Economist, picked up the lease.
Senate to House: Drop Deal Newt Gingrich's sojourn in the land of big-bucks publishing was a brief one.
Last week Bob Dole raised his powerful eyebrows at Mr.
Gingrich's $4.5 million deal to write two books for a publisher owned by Rupert Murdoch, who happens to have regulatory business with Congress.
Mr.
Gingrich soon scrapped the deal, saying he'd take just a $1 advance and patiently await his royalties.
He had to "do what's good for the country," Mr.
Gingrich said; even though it was a "legal and ethical deal," he didn't want the new Congress "to be slowed down or distracted," even for a second.
David Bonior, the Michigan Democrat who is showing signs of being a feisty anti-Gingrich, said Mr.
Gingrich "finally got the message." Insurance With a Difference Life insurance.
It conjures images of endless mailings and sales pitches -- and it's the last thing people want to think about anyway.
So selling it is tough, and many agents don't last.
But a New York sales agent named Steven Genovese, prosecutors say, had a better idea.
An indictment last week asserted that for years he presented phony applications, wrote bad checks for a few payments, and pocketed his commission -- perhaps half the first year's premium.
If a policy's canceled, part of the commission should be returned, but that didn't happen this time -- and no procedure was in place to track such fraud.
Agents can job-hop leaving barely a footprint.
Even Mr.
Genovese's lawyer admitted that the system "could almost seduce people into fraudulent conduct." A Bullet Too Far Well, David Keen decided last week that the world did not need, just yet, a bullet that not only pierces armor but splits into razorlike shards and does all sorts of nasty, nasty stuff.
Mr.
Keen, who heads an Alabama company called Signature Products, backed down after stiff police opposition to the company's bullet, which he says is needed because criminals often wear bulletproof vests.
Of course, some people say that his bullet isn't even possible, that it's all a hoax, that he was helping the gun-control lobby more than anyone.
The one thing that's certain: he got a lot of attention.


Dec. 25-31: Clinton vs. Paula Jones; Hardest Campaign Interview Could Be With the Lawyers
Appearing Solomonic, a Federal district judge in Little Rock ruled last week that President Clinton cannot claim absolute immunity from a sexual harassment lawsuit but is immune from a trial while he remains in office.
The judge said that to preserve the rights of the plaintiff, Paula C. Jones, a former Arkansas state employee, her lawyers could prepare for trial by interviewing witnesses and gathering other evidence.


In Praise of Amateurs
To the Editor:
I am sorry that David Levinson, a professional anthropologist, is vaguely insulted, to use a phrase from his letter (Oct. 9), by a reviewer who called someone "a self-taught anthropologist" and by others who call themselves "amateur anthropologists."


The World; Ah, Sweet Mystery, Thy Name Is Italy
Yet another Italian government has fallen on its face, giving outsiders yet another chance to reinforce their stereotype of Italy as Europe's court jester.
But that's not entirely how the Italians see it.
Since the Second World War, 52 governments have come and gone, like players on a gaudy stage, but the real business of being Italian -- skirting the rules, securing advantage, making way in an untrustworthy world -- has continued despite them.


Amy L. Karlen, Joseph Neuman
Amy Landsborough Karlen, a daughter of Sven and Laura Karlen of Woodstock, Conn., was married on Friday to Scott Joseph Neuman, the son of John and Carolyn Neuman of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Michael O'Connor performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection in Rye.
The bride, 23, teaches the fourth grade at the Town School for Boys in San Francisco.
She and her husband graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is the general partner of Grandview Partners, an investment firm in Boston.


Addressing the Needs of Patients Not Ready to Return Home
IN the last six months, Norman Koeller of Wayne has survived a serious motorcycle accident and undergone four surgical procedures.
He is a patient at the Rehabilitation Institute of Morristown Memorial Hospital.
There, he starts each day with a visit from the floor nurse who dresses his wounds.
In the morning and early afternoon, Mr.
Koeller, a 64-year-old bookkeeper, spends a total of three hours in physical therapy, working to regain his ability to walk.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 1, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
16
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
1
THE CHRISTMAS BOX, by Richard Paul Evans. (Steinway, $4.95.) When a young family moves in with an elderly widow, they all learn about the significance of Christmas.
3
33
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
4
6
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young student's mysterious drowning in Victorian England.
5
29
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
6
14
THE VAMPIRE LESTAT, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Eerie carryings-on in a tale ranging from ancient Egypt to the 20th century.
7
9
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery writer's happy family life -- and the madman determined to take his place.
8
5
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $4.99.) The romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
9
18
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's death.
10
14
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of a young boy creates a crisis.
11*
26
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly in North Vietnam.
12
11
THE QUEEN OF THE DAMNED, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Continuing the author's chronicle of 6,000 years of vampirism.
13
4
MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $6.50.) Archy McNally on the trail of a malefactor at large in a Palm Beach mansion.
14
21
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
15
1
NATURAL CAUSES, by Michael Palmer. (Bantam, $5.99.) The ordeal of a physician after she is accused of being responsible for the deaths of pregnant women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
15
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of "Seinfeld."
3
14
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
4
51
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
5
10
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
6
10
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
7
3
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
8
49
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
9
582
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
10
33
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade teacher.
11
18
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
12*
8
ARMORED CAV, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $15.) A "guided tour" of an armored cavalry regiment.
13
14
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
14
37
THE CAT WHO CAME FOR CHRISTMAS, by Cleveland Amory. (Penguin, $8.95.) A self-styled curmudgeon's memoir of a cat.
15
97
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
13
HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
1
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1995. (World Almanac/Funk &amp; Wagnalls, $8.95.) The latest edition of the reference work.
3
14
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
4
5
THE CURSE OF MADAME "C," by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) A collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 17, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Commercial Property/The Year in Review; The Industry's Hailing a Strong and Fast Recovery
THEY do not agree on the underlying causes, or on what it all portends.
But real estate executives are unanimous about one thing: 1994 was one heck of a good year.
"I knew we were recovering, but I never expected it to be this fast," said Douglas Durst, president of the Durst Organization, whose buildings are almost entirely leased.


At Work; Toning Those Moral Muscles
MOST people ponder the cosmic, big picture issues early in life, at least by the end of high school or college.
Certain questions -- Does Bigfoot make a noise in the forest when there's no one around to hear?
Does God exist, and if so, how do you explain velvet paintings? -- just don't seem to come up once you move out of a dorm and away from the philosophical ambience created by really loud music and mass quantities of cheap beer.
But just because the cosmos looks hazier off campus does not mean it does not exist.
If anything, questions of values and ethics loom larger as they become less abstract.
Every day, in communities and on the job, people make ethical decisions, by design or by default.
The problem, says Rushworth M. Kidder, author of the new book "How Good People Make Tough Choices" (William Morrow, $22), is that few people are prepared for the types of ethical challenges they face.
Americans lack "ethical fitness." We have, Mr.
Kidder contends, let the analytical muscles that help us traverse life's moral mazes go flaccid.


AGAINST ANDROGYNY
Androgyny.
One of the more popular buzzwords of the 1980's (About Men: "Against Androgyny," Dec. 11).
In questioning its value as a panacea for couples in troubled relationships, Michael Norman sounds a reasonable note of caution.
Traditional masculine and feminine variations add spice to the stew.
In suggesting, however, that androgyny may be responsible for the dissolution of marriages when "disaffected" wives "simply become bored" with their androgynous (read monotonous) husbands, he goes too far.


The Executive Computer; When, Oh When, Will Computers Behave Like People?
ELEVEN years ago, Apple Computer Inc. said it would make personal computers easy to use and came close with the Macintosh.
A few years later, the Microsoft Corporation made a similar promise with Windows and then gave us, well, Windows.
In 1993 I.B.M. talked about improving the PC experience, and then spelled out a strategy called "natural computing," a label the company does not appear to have used since.


Huskers, Hurricanes, Elephants, Oh, My!
Of all the forces that have stood in the way of a University of Nebraska national championship throughout Tom Osborne's 22 seasons as coach, none have been more imposing than the one the Cornhuskers may be forced to contend with here in the 61st Orange Bowl on New Year's night.
This obstacle could be bigger than the championship-caliber opponents that have helped create Nebraska's seven-game bowl losing streak.
Bigger than the task of facing the University of Miami once more on its home field, where the Hurricanes have won 62 of their last 63 games.
This obstacle could be more formidable than Osborne's decision to attempt a 2-point conversion near the end of the 31-30 loss to Miami in 1984, and even larger than his decision to start Tommie Frazier over Brook Berringer at quarterback after Frazier's season appeared over because of blood clots in his right leg.


Goodbye, 'Mr. Wonderful'
WHEN Michelle Cousin's husband died of a heart attack 30 years ago on Christmas morning, Gaspar Orengo rushed to her third-floor apartment.
"He tried to revive him," Ms.
Cousin said.
"Neither of us knew he was dead. Gaspar was overcome with grief."
When Pauline Landberg fell in the lobby several years ago, a number of people came to her aid.
"I said, 'Get Orengo, get Orengo,' " Ms.
Landberg recalled.
"I didn't trust anyone else. Orengo helped me up."
To the 2,000 residents of 24 Fifth Avenue, an elegant 17-story building on the northwest corner of Ninth Street, Mr.
Orengo was more than a doorman.
More than a trusty sentinel who discouraged burglars.


Down but Not Out, And Still Eyeing '95
Switching sports as nimbly as he scrambles out of the pocket, Joe Montana compared himself with a championship boxer today.
He didn't specify the weight, but the Miami Dolphins would surely call him a heavyweight.
Montana became a figurative boxer after his Kansas City Chiefs were beaten, 27-17, by Dan Marino and the Dolphins in the wild-card round of the playoffs this afternoon.
The game itself wasn't a knockout, but by the end it was a unanimous decision.


Bland Computer-Game Music? He'll Have None of It
THEY call him the Fat Man.
It's not important that he isn't fat.
What's important is that they call him.
Computer software designers, video game companies and sound board manufacturers call the Fat Man -- also known as George Alistair Sanger -- when they want to add a rousing musical soundtrack to a new title or make sure that a rich orchestral score will emerge from a computer sound board sounding like an orchestra instead of an ice cream truck.


Sports of The Times; Minus 1: New Number For Barry Sanders
WHEN Barry Sanders was asked recently how he wanted to be viewed, his answer was as succinct as he is.
"As No. 20 for the Detroit Lions," he said.


Big Environment Hits a Recession
CONSUMERS respond listlessly to much of their marketing and research.
Revenues are tumbling.
Energetic competitors are making inroads into the core customer base.
In Washington, credibility and clout are at a low point.
An assessment of a flagging industrial corporation?
Hardly.
Rather it is a summary of the dismal performance that made 1994 the most troubling year ever for many of the nation's largest environmental organizations.


'Baby': Aspects of Parenthood in Song
"BABY," at the Forum Theater, is a little musical about big things: "the journey that begins when the egg is released," in the words of the show's book writer, Sybille Pearson, the sensation of a fetus's first kick, the sound of a new heartbeat, the mystery of the "determining genes." The show's most recurring phrase is "the chain of life."
In his second production of "Baby" in almost a decade, the theater's producing artistic director, Peter J. Loewy, cuts to the moving parts, sparing us the coyness of Ms.
Pearson's introduction, a textbook tour from conception to birth.
Graceful in design, Bill Motyka's multipurpose set surpasses that in the 1983 Broadway production, which was often a clinically derived eyesore.


Remembering the Past to Help Others in the Future
In the shadowy hallway of a South Bronx apartment building, Maggie V. has posted a message to remind herself of past struggles.
Its bold letters read, "Housing is a Human Right." At 30, Ms.
V. is a single mother studying to become a social worker.
Her goal is to help other women from Puerto Rico, her homeland, find affordable housing and avoid the battles she had to fight not long ago.
She came to New York from Puerto Rico in 1987, and for the first two years she stayed with relatives in a crowded apartment.
But in 1988, Ms.
V. became pregnant, and her family told her to find new housing.
She searched for months, but nothing was affordable.
She ended up renting a room in a cheap motel in Queens, where the manager sexually harassed and robbed her.


Gabriela Power Porto, Peter Castaldi
GABRIELA POWER PORTO, 34, a professional flamenco and ballet dancer, and Peter Castaldi, 34, a baritone with the Magic Circle Opera Company in New York, are the sort of people you often encounter in the Lincoln Center neighborhood.
They have perfect posture and beautiful voices, so they sound as if they are reciting poetry even if they are just giving directions to the nearest subway station.
They met through a friend a year and a half ago, and their courtship, like flamenco dancing and opera, was filled with formalities, drama and roses.


German Politician's Death is Reinvestigated as Possible Murder
More than seven years after a former German state premier was found dead in the bathtub of a Geneva hotel room, fully clothed, German prosecutors have stopped insisting that he was a suicide and reopened a murder investigation into the case.
The shift was followed by news reports this week suggesting that the former premier, Uwe Barschel, had been involved in the weapons trade and was being watched by the Central Intelligence Agency and the secret services of both East and West Germany before he died in October 1987 at the age of 43.


Mutual Funds; Summing Up a Gruesome Year
CALL it ugly.
For mutual funds, 1994 was ugly in terms of performance -- most stock and bond investors lost money.
And from the industry's viewpoint, it was ugly as one scandal followed another and even uglier as the cascading cash inflows of the previous year began to falter.


It's Commercial TV That Needs Fixing
To the Editor:
I applaud your Dec. 25 editorial on public television.
As a viewer and the parent of viewers, I can't imagine a bleaker landscape than that of television without PBS.


Bosnian Muslims and Serbs Agree to Four-Month Truce
Leaders of the Muslim-led Bosnian Government and their Bosnian Serb enemies signed an agreement today to stop fighting for four months, during which they would seek to negotiate a permanent peace.
The senior United Nations envoy to the former Yugoslavia, Yasushi Akashi, announced the signing in Sarajevo.
Mr.
Akashi said the Bosnian President, Alija Izetbegovic, signed the accord at his office there.
The envoy then took the agreement to Bosnian Serb leaders at their headquarters in nearby Pale, where they signed it.


Verbal Pollution?
To the Editor:
I have not bought any of P. J. O'Rourke's writings since his graduation from the cautionary conservative school of whining.
Indeed, let the market decide on many matters of inconsequence.
Environmental free marketeers, however, are a special breed whose amorality approaches the criminal.


After a Fatal Accident, Grief in the Navajo Way
Traditional Navajos do not speak about their dead because they fear their spirits are dangerous and will return to haunt the living.
So not much is known about the final hours of eight members of the Navajo Nation who died on a northern Arizona highway the day after Christmas.
The crash on a clear, dry section of a remote reservation road was one of the worst in the state's history.


Spotlight On Harassment
To the Editor
Michael Crichton claims that he wrote about harassment from the male point of view to illuminate the issue, not to make light of it  [ "Tales From the Corner Office," Dec. 11 ] .
I think that the movie (whose scriptwriter, Paul Attanasio, is no relation to me) succeeded in pointing up the problem.
Demi Moore's character is established as highly skillful and even ruthless in playing office politics.
During the seduction scene, I felt the evil of the situation much more strongly than I would have if it had been portrayed more conventionally, with a woman as victim.
It's fair to criticize "Disclosure" for improbable plot turns and overexplicit point making, but its heart is in the right place.
RICHARD ATTANASIO  Peekskill, N.Y.


Sports of The Times; Ice and Grass Tales: Postcards From '94
ANY year that begins with a knee-whacking is not normal.
I think we can all agree on that.
This was supposed to be the year the exotic datelines would come to us: the World Cup would be held right in our backyard.
But even a soccer buff like me would admit that other events captured our attention, and many of the events were not exactly on the schedule.
MIAMI, JAN. 2 Hours after Florida State beats Nebraska in the Orange Bowl, the voters choose good old Bobby Bowden's team as the national college football champion, thereby sticking it to Notre Dame, which had beaten Florida State during the season.
DETROIT, JAN. 6 Are we trapped in an Elmore Leonard novel?
Nancy Kerrigan is whacked on the knee by an unknown male assailant at the national figure-skating championships.
As they sit down to write, many reporters make jokes that Tonya Harding might be involved; to their credit, they do not type out their suspicions.
DETROIT, JAN. 8 After toying with us for a while, a personable deputy chief named Benny Napoleon reveals that Detroit police are investigating leads in several cities -- including, he casually adds, Portland, Ore.
The writers start digging out their Harding notes about her hometown.
They know she invites trouble.
IRKUTSK-ON-NIAGARA, JAN. 15 That's what I call Buffalo on a day when the wind chill factor is minus-32.
I develop a huge respect for the Bills and their loyal fans on their fourth straight trek toward defeat in the Super Bowl.
HAMAR, NORWAY, FEB. 16 The idealistic tone of these Winter Games is personified by a speed skater named Johann Olav Koss.
He wins the 1,500 meters and promptly gives away his $30,000 in bonus money to charity.
HAMAR, NORWAY, FEB. 17 On to seamier stuff.
Implicated by her former husband in the attack on Kerrigan, Harding arrives for a practice session.
Kerrigan smiles grimly, while hundreds of flippant journalists like me jam the tiny rink.
Not our finest moment, but somebody's got to be there.
HAMAR, NORWAY, FEB. 18 Dan Jansen takes a victory lap with his daughter, Jane, in his arms after finally winning a gold medal, six years after his sister Jane died while he was in Calgary.
HAMAR, NORWAY, FEB. 23 With her usual gusto, Bonnie Blair wins her fifth gold medal in speed skating to become the leading American female gold medalist in history.
HAMAR, NORWAY, FEB. 25 Aching from a collision only 32 hours earlier, Oksana Baiul improvises two complicated moves at the end of her routine to take the gold medal away from Kerrigan.
The 16-year-old orphan from Odessa cries, and many fans cry with her.
Harding makes a spectacle of herself by once again coming out unprepared.
LILLEHAMMER, NORWAY, FEB. 27 Why are Norwegian fans cheering for Vladimir Smirnov, a Kazakh skier, even before he wins the gold medal in the 50-kilometer cross-country?
"We've got enough medals of our own," says a fan camped out in the snowy woods.
The Winter Games are ending, but I will always remember the idealistic people as much as the beautiful countryside.
CHARLOTTE, N.C., APR. 3 In a dramatic news conference, Nolan Richardson of Arkansas uses his bitterness at his slow ascent as a black coach to demand respect for his team.
The next night, Arkansas will beat Duke for the national title.
LOUISVILLE, Ky., MAY 7 All week long, the trainer Nick Zito has talked about winning the Derby and his beloved New York Yankees winning the pennant.
Go For Gin does his part, but Zito has no way of knowing baseball will call off its pennant race before the home stretch.
NEW YORK, JUNE 1 In one of the great performances in Madison Square Garden, spindly Reggie Miller scores 25 points in the fourth quarter and taunts the moviemaker Spike Lee at courtside.
NEW YORK, JUNE 14 At 11:04 P.M., the Stanley Cup is displayed in New York for the first time in 54 years, in the deserving hands of Mark Messier.
PONTIAC, MICH., JUNE 18 For the first time, a World Cup game is held indoors -- in oily air but on acceptable grass in the Silverdome.
Eric Wynalda scores on a free kick as the United States ties Switzerland, 1-1.
HOUSTON, JUNE 22 Huge events overlap.
I watch the first half on the tube as the U.S. is in the process of stunning Colombia, 2-1, in the World Cup.
Then I go out to courtside as the Rockets beat the Knicks, 90-84, for the N.B.A. title.
The Knicks cannot admit it, but this was their best shot with this cast of players.
WASHINGTON, JUNE 28 I'm writing about a soccer game when word comes that Doc Gooden has flunked another drug test.
This smiling sad-sack has not yet figured out that drugs are going to wreck his life.
CHICAGO, JULY 2 Word arrives that Andres Escobar, the Colombian who inadvertently kicked in a goal for the U.S. 10 days earlier, had been gunned down near Medellin.
Germany beats Belgium.
Who cares?
PASADENA, CALIF., JULY 3 Romania beats Argentina, which is without Diego Armando Maradona, the seedy, aging genius who was bounced when illegal drugs were found in his system.
Maradona is disgraced, but he does not understand.
PALO ALTO, CALIF., JULY 4 The U.S. loses, 1-0, at Stanford, and is eliminated in the second round of the World Cup.
The wandering Yanks did all right for a nation without a major league.
FOXBORO, MASS., JULY 5 Courtesy of the red-eye, my fourth game in four cities in four days, I see Roberto Baggio beat Nigeria, 2-1, with goals in the 89th minute and overtime.
He saves the Italian team from a potentially ugly early return home.
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J., JULY 13 As soon as Italy has beaten Bulgaria in the semifinals, the ground crew starts removing the beautiful grass to uncover the hideous artificial turf.
Big-time soccer is gone from New York, for a very long time.
PASADENA, CALIF., JULY 17 Brazil beats Italy, 3-2, in penalty kicks after a scoreless tie.
Americans criticize the method of breaking a tie, but the world soccer organization has never found a better method, nor have I.  NEW YORK, AUG. 11 The Yankees play the last baseball game before the players go on strike.
Petulant millionaires strike against petulant millionaires, putting hard-working vendors and the ushers out of work.
NEW YORK, SEPT. 30 Given a window of opportunity without a World Series, the hockey owners promptly shut down their own sport, refusing the players' offer to go the entire season without a contract.
Are they nuts?
NEW YORK, NOV. 6 Most runners dedicate their New York City Marathon to Fred Lebow, the visionary racedirector who died on Oct. 9.
WASHINGTON, DEC. 22 The owners invoke the salary cap, thereby plunging baseball into an even uglier legal and moral stalemate, with the prospect of replacement players.
The spirit of knee-whacking remains in the air.
Where is the World Cup when we really need it?
Anyway, Happy New Year, and let's hope this one is more fun.


Jacqueline Olich, Andrew Kennedy
Jacqueline Marie Olich, a daughter of Jack and Jean Olich of Jefferson Valley, N.Y., was married yesterday to Andrew Weren Kennedy, the son of Harris and Alice Kennedy of Portland, Me.
The Rev.
Gordon Lyall performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Chapel of the Cross in Chapel Hill, N.C.
Ms.
Olich, 24, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Lafayette College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a doctoral candidate in modern Russian history at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, from which she received a master's degree in that subject.
Her father is the founder and chief executive of Diba Industries, a medical-instruments manufacturer in Danbury, Conn.
Her mother teaches the first grade at Mohansic School in Yorktown Heights, N.Y.


Katrina Yamin and Jeffrey P. Yolen
Katrina Yamin, the daughter of Martina and Michael Yamin of New York, was married last evening to Jeffrey Packer Yolen, a son of Barbara and Fred Yolen of Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Amy Ehrlich performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-el in New York.
The bride, 27, and her husband, 28, graduated from Harvard University, she magna cum laude and he cum laude.
She is a senior consultant in Boston in the management consulting group at Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm.
Her father is a senior partner in Kaufmann, Feiner, Yamin, Gildin &amp; Robbins, a law firm in New York.
Her mother is an art conservator in New York.


Corrections
A photograph of the Mall of America in Bloomington, Minn., in the Week in Review last week carried an erroneous credit.
The photograph was taken by Jack Kurtz of Impact Visuals, not Martin Parr of Magnum.


Oh, Shut Up, Voltaire
MADAME DU DEFFAND AND HER WORLD  By Benedetta Craveri.
Translated by Teresa Waugh.
Illustrated. 481 pp.
Boston: David R. Godine. $35.


LIVES WELL LIVED
WHEN JOHN Bardeen died in 1991, a scholar said, "There are very few people who had a greater impact on the whole of the 20th century," and he was right.
Bardeen was a co-inventor of the transistor, heart of the electronics revolution.
He was a pioneer in superconductivity physics.
He was the first person to win two Nobel prizes in the same field.
Reading all that in his obituary made a film director named David Frankel wonder how someone could be so important yet not be better known.
Shouldn't there be some way, he asked himself, to recognize lives that have had special impact on the world?
The question wouldn't go away.
Ultimately, Frankel shared it with friends at The Times Magazine; this issue is our answer.


The Quality of Mercy in 1995
Just over a decade ago, Walter Mondale spoke honorably in a losing Presidential campaign of the need for fairness in Government policy.
Democrats in those days talked about the "compassion gap" in a Reagan Administration that conceived of budget cutting mainly as an exercise in taking from the poor.
By 1988 the Republican candidate, George Bush, was talking of blending fiscal stringency with a caring heart.
The election of Bill Clinton in 1992 seemed a declaration that Americans wanted a government that lifted the needy instead of punishing them.
But as 1995 dawns, a new band of hard-talking officeholders and social engineers has created a compassion crisis in American political life.
Their political energy flows in part from the well-crafted fiction, originally promulgated under President Reagan, that the wealthy are embattled.
In fact, of course, wealthy Americans have never been more numerous or more cosseted by Congress, the executive branch and the Federal Reserve Board.


Wrestling With Billy Two Rivers
To the Editor:
In Richard Tillinghast's review of Paul Muldoon's "Annals of Chile" (Dec. 11), a reference is made to the Mohawk wrestler Billy Two Rivers.
Mr.
Tillinghast suggests that Mr.
Muldoon's poem "My Father and I and Billy Two Rivers," specifically a line referring to the Boston Tea Party, is meant to make the reader question this Indian's identity (which "may be no more genuine than the sport of professional wrestling") and the nature of cross-cultural identity.


Cornwall
To the Editor: I was interested in the article on Cornwall in the Travel Section ("In Cornwall, a Castle of One's Own," Aug. 21).
I grew up in North Cornwall and most of my ancestors on my mother's side are buried in St.
Kew churchyard.
All of them are spinning in their graves at being called "English." Once you cross the Tamar, you leave England and are in the land of Saints and Sinners, as the Cornish are sometimes called.
We Cornish are as Celtic as Scots, Irish, Welsh and Bretons and we don't like other descriptions.
To many Americans "England" is synonymous with "United Kingdom," but it should be the editorial policy of The Times to see that the appropriate adjective is applied.
This is a small criticism of what was otherwise an excellent article.
MARGARET ANN SULLIVAN  Stony Brook, L.I.


Arts Group Faces Suit by Ex-Director
A TRIUMPHANT year of expansion for the Northern Westchester Center for the Arts ended in acrimony and legal action last month, after the board of the 16-year-old organization voted by a slim margin to oust Bira Rabushka, the group's founder, as executive director.
Ms.
Rabushka, who spearheaded the organization's move last September from a 4,000-square-foot former schoolhouse in rural Goldens Bridge to a 50,000-square-foot former newspaper building on bustling Route 117 here, was accused of improperly withdrawing a $60,000 loan she had made to the center.


Corina L. Larkin, Nigel E. Dawn
Corina Leone Larkin, a daughter of Donald and Victoria Larkin of Scituate, Mass., was married yesterday to Nigel Edward Dawn, a son of William and Elizabeth Dawn of Sheffield, England.
The Rev.
George Salzmann performed the ceremony at St.
Paul Roman Catholic Church in Cambridge, Mass.
The bride, 29, graduated from Cornell University.
Last month she received a master's degree in international relations and an M.B.A. degree from a joint program of Johns Hopkins University and the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father retired as an art teacher at Weymouth (Mass.) Public High School.
Her mother is an art teacher in the public schools in Marshfield, Mass.


With Cuomo's Voice Still Echoing in Albany, Pataki Polishes His Delivery
When George E. Pataki puts together his list of top 10 worst moments in this year's campaign, the Citizens Budget Commission speech will certainly be near the top.
The Sept. 28 speech on tax cuts was to be his most important policy statement of the race, and the rewriting went late.
Too late.
When the final draft was rushed from the copy machine to the candidate, its pages were shuffled out of order.
Twice Mr.
Pataki stopped reading for as long as nine seconds as he searched vainly for his place, leaving the packed hall silent except for the sound of his own breathing, amplified through the microphone.


Carol L. Blum, Stephen Mackauf
Carol Lynn Blum, a psychology student at New York University, was married on Thursday to Stephen H. Mackauf, a partner in Gair, Gair, Conason, Steigman &amp; Mackauf, a New York law firm.
Rabbi Gayle Pomerantz performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother and stepfather, Mr. and Mrs.
Ed Dublin, in Miami Beach.
The bride is also the daughter of the late Col.
Milton R. Blum.
She is a soprano who has sung with the Miami Opera and the Miami Philharmonic.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Miami.
Her father, a lawyer, served in the United States Army.
Her mother, known professionally as Ethel Blum, is a travel writer.
The bride's two previous marriages ended in divorce.


Is the Administration Really Business Friendly?
To the Editor:
Leslie Wayne's "Yes, Even Now, There Are Pro-Clinton C.E.O.'s" (Dec.4) further illustrates establishment insensitivity to the November election results.
The seven pro-Clinton chief executives mimicked what remains of a further-left Congressional remnant among Democrats, holding that their partisan electoral troubles simply stem from a "failure to communicate" what they see as the good news of Mr.
Clinton's pro-business record to the rest of us.
How purely pathetic.


A Doyen Continues to Present Its Classics
LA COQUILLE in Manhasset has been celebrating its 25th anniversary.
At a time that restaurants open one year and close the next its longevity is impressive.
This French doyen is a pretty place with lace curtains, silver bud vases holding red roses and tiny shaded lanterns on every table.
Gilt-framed paintings and mirrors add to the opulence.
Crisscrossed French and American flags are hung over pictures and doors.


In the Region/Westchester; '94 Home Sales Were Hot, but High Rates May Hurt
AS one of the best home-selling years in Westchester County draws to a close, brokers are looking to the new year with some trepidation that a rise in interest rates could halt the sales momentum.
"I couldn't sleep the other night," said Savo Fries, president of the Westchester Multiple Listing Service.
"I was dreaming about Greenspan saying he was going to pull the plug on all of us by raising interest rates again. It was horrible."


May the New Year Be Happy and Full of Worms
LAST weekend, on Christmas Eve, my sister asked me if I was going to take my worms to church.
A friend who was going with me to hear the music at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church on Fifth Avenue asked the same thing.
"No," I said. "But they have their little red bows on."


David J. Lose and Karin E. McNulty
Karin Elizabeth McNulty, a daughter of Comdr. and Mrs.
William D. McNulty of Berkeley Heights, N.J., was married yesterday at St.
John's Lutheran Church in Summit, N.J., to the Rev.
David Jeremiah Lose, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
John F. Lose of Myerstown, Pa.
The bridegroom is a pastor at the church.
His father performed the ceremony, in which the Rev.
Dr.
Franklin D. Fry, an uncle of the bridegroom, took part.
Mrs.
Lose, 25, is a certified public accountant and was until recently a senior accountant in Morristown, N.J., at Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm.
She graduated from Colgate University and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Her father, a former aviator in the United States Navy, also retired as a district account manager at the AT&amp;T Corporation in New York.
Her mother, Thelma K. McNulty, is the parish secretary at St.
John's Church.


Pain at Holiday Time for Mothers Who Have Lost Custody of Their Children
THIS is the hardest time of year for mothers who have lost custody of their children.
"People say any day can be Christmas," Diana Lupo of Port Jefferson Station said.
"But Christmas is one day, and it's special."
New Year's is, too.
The holiday represents another year of missing the squeals of delight when a birthday present is opened or applauding the first solo in a school play.


Making Resolutions? Don't Forget the Yard
THERE once was a tradition that the first day of the New Year was the time to make resolutions.
These promises were meant to insure a better year to come, and the list was usually one of self-betterment, personal resolves or something like that.
Presently, few adhere to this custom.
Those who do follow the tradition and make lists claim that the whole exercise is worthwhile.
But most couldn't be bothered.
The attitude is, who checks up anyway?


Manager's Profile; James K. Renck
Fund: Merrill Lynch Technology Fund, $900 million in assets; 6.5 percent sales load.
Manager since 1992 inception. (Sponsor: Merrill Lynch Asset Management, Princeton, N.J.)
Born: Feb. 7, 1957; New York City.


Homesteading In the Bronx
To the Editor:


From Archery to Paddleball to Yachting, Winners All
Archery  World Champions
Men's Olympic Bow Field -- Andrea Parenti, Italy.
Women's Olympic Bow Field -- Jenny Sjouall, Sweden.
Men's Compound Bow -- Tom Henriksen, Denmark.
Women's Compound Bow -- Michelle Ragsdale, Tucson, Ariz.


AGAINST ANDROGYNY
Norman mentions that his wife "pummeled" him during a domestic argument.
It is disconcerting the way he so casually mentions this fact.
Had his wife written an article that described a beating her husband had inflicted on her, it is likely Norman would have suffered severe criticism.
JAMES S. BROWN Chicago


Looking Back, Looking Ahead, Queens
WEST QUEENS  Invasion of Hunters Point?
It is the closest point in Queens to midtown Manhattan, and therein lies what many consider this neighborhood's promise and others its possible demise.
In September, ground was broken on the Queens West project, which is to transform a 74-acre site along the East River in Hunters Point by adding a touch of Manhattan to this industrial and residential area: a 42-story apartment tower, a four-block hotel-and-office complex catering to the United Nations, myriad parks and plazas.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen 99.73
100.13
111.80
per Dollar
German Mark1.5495
1.5790
1.7382
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.4014
1.3994
1.3251
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.5665
1.5450
1.4760
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$382.80
$380.50
$390.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Playoff Isn't the Sole Path to No. 1
The idea is older than Joe Paterno, drawn from the horse-and-buggy era when the opposite end of the continent was days and days away and snowbirds needed an incentive to seek some sun and smell the roses.
Someone in Pasadena thought of one: If you smash mouths, they will come.
And thus a modest post-Depression industry of sugar and cotton and oranges, boosted eventually by that wondrous triple option of television, jet airplanes and artificial light, became bigger, richer and more powerful than anyone could have imagined.
Also fatter, and more stubborn and out of step.
We now live in a single-elimination culture.
We all reside a few hours from a warm beach.
We ask for a neat, clean, prime-time outcome to the college football season.
We want a Super Bowl with better bands.


Budget Cuts Paying Off For Premier Of Alberta
Despite imposing some of the severest economic cutbacks in Canada since the Depression to eliminate a budget deficit, the government of Alberta enjoys more support today than when it was elected 18 months ago.
The changes have been driven by Alberta's Premier, Ralph Klein, who has cut welfare rolls in half, eliminated free dentures and other subsidies for wealthy seniors, encouraged private medical clinics, eliminated thousands of hospital beds, imposed fees for kindergartens and forced campers to pay for wood at campgrounds.


'Skunk Works'
To the Editor:
Richard Perle praises Lockheed's Skunk Works stealth facility and chides critics of secret "black" programs to read Ben R. Rich's memoir to "see how well it can be done." As the executive director of the Project on Government Oversight, the nonprofit watchdog group that exposed the overpriced hammer Mr.
Perle derides (actually, it was $435, not $600), I would like to point out the shortsightedness of his enthusiasm.


Clean Slate
Over our heads the words hung down with giant sparkling margins.
I was try trying again every day of my life.
That's why I've been followed by stacks of blank notebooks, why any calendar page with nothing written on it strikes me full of ravenous joy.
When a year changes, the little stuffed man pitches into the flames, his paper bag body fattened by half-finished lists, old mail.
Between 8 p.m. when I scrawl the going year on his chest and midnight, we fall in love.
His rueful grin, his crooked hat!
He burns fast in the backyard pit.
Then a deep quiet plucked by firecrackers under a weirdly lit city sky.
No plans come to mind.
I just stand there with my hands out in smoke while something else wonderful dies.


Three New Hotels in the Caribbean
Several hotels have opened or reopened in the Caribbean this fall, among them the Caesar Park Cancun Beach and Golf Resort in Cancun, Mexico, the Rockhouse Hotel in Jamaica and the Crystal Cove in Barbados.
The 427-room Caesar Park Cancun Beach and Golf Resort, opened by Westin Hotels and Resorts in October, is situated on 250 acres on the Yucatan Peninsula.
Features include an 18-hole golf course, five restaurants, seven swimming pools and two tennis courts.
Rates for double rooms depend on the date of stay, and range from $160 to $320 a night.
Reservations: (800) 228-3000.


Philadelphia
To the Editor: Katherine Ashenburg, after her weekend in Philadelphia, describes the cheesesteak as a "rather dull combination of Italian bread, fried sandwich steak, fried onions and neutered cheese that has become the city's dubious claim to culinary fame."
The Philadelphia cheesesteak, a fresh (preferably Amoroso brand) hoagie roll filled with thinly sliced rib-eye steak smothered with fried onions and mushrooms, and covered generously with melted provolone or mozzarella, should be enjoyed at emporiums that specialize in it.
Jim's on South Street is within walking distance of the historic area.
Pat's King of Steaks and Geno's are a short cab ride away.


The Good, the Bad and the Uncertain
ECONOMIC indicators looked good -- but not that good -- for Westchester in 1994, with analysts saying that despite some gains, the county continued to lag behind the rest of the state and the nation.
The county's future is also problematic, and Frank M. Surdey, a regional economist for the State Department of Labor, said, "There are still some gray clouds on the horizon."


Dec. 25-31; A Third-Ranked State of Mind
Texas last week officially elbowed past New York to become the second most populous state in the nation.
The Census Bureau, confirming a Texas demographer's projection last spring, said the change reflected the continued growth of the country in the South and the West.


Festive Dining
THE SEA GRILL * (212) 246-9201; 19 West 49th Street; $$$; all major cards


At Work; Toning Those Moral Muscles
MOST people ponder the cosmic, big picture issues early in life, at least by the end of high school or college.
Certain questions -- Does Bigfoot make a noise in the forest when there's no one around to hear?
Does God exist, and if so, how do you explain velvet paintings? -- just don't seem to come up once you move out of a dorm and away from the philosophical ambience created by really loud music and mass quantities of cheap beer.
But just because the cosmos looks hazier off campus does not mean it does not exist.
If anything, questions of values and ethics loom larger as they become less abstract.
Every day, in communities and on the job, people make ethical decisions, by design or by default.
The problem, says Rushworth M. Kidder, author of the new book "How Good People Make Tough Choices" (William Morrow, $22), is that few people are prepared for the types of ethical challenges they face.
Americans lack "ethical fitness." We have, Mr.
Kidder contends, let the analytical muscles that help us traverse life's moral mazes go flaccid.


Word for Word / Calendars; Have a Revved-Up, Far Out 'n' Funky, Kitty Cat 'n' Pup New Year
TIME -- what a concept.
You probably celebrated its onward march last night, and today of course is another big day in its passage: It's time to break out the new calendars.
In Western civilization, the calendar biz used to be left up to caesars and popes and such, but now any number can play the date game.
In stores, in mailboxes -- even on computer networks -- calendars today are a ubiquitous method of spinoff merchandising or promotion, or both, embraced by all manner of profit and nonprofit enterprise.


A Frosty Trek Through Dornburg
NO English.
No oompah bands.
No pictures, please.
The hefty, flush-faced farmer does not consider it a photo opportunity as his draft horses pull a cart through the village to work in the fields beyond.
Dorndorf, population 1,200, one of a network of villages within Dornburg, an hour's drive northwest of Frankfurt, doesn't advertise its rural charms.
It doesn't entice or expect you.
If you're lucky, you just happen to show up.
I show up and discover an area long known to citizens of Frankfurt as prime trekking country.
They prize the bucolic setting, clean air, the gentle roll of hill and valley that provide long walks with soothing views at an easy pace.
From village to village across fields and along tractor paths, in areas forbidden to traffic, entire German families equipped with syncopated walking sticks partake in the spaziergang.


Corrections
An article on page 28 of The Times Magazine today about the late Lawrence E. Spivak, the broadcaster, misidentifies his position at the time he originated the program "Meet the Press." He was then a producer for the Mutual Broadcasting System, not a CBS radio reporter.


The Other Ledyard: One-Room Schools
TO the thousands of people who flock there daily, the town of Ledyard is synonymous with the Mashantucket Pequot's gambling casino, the most successful venture of its kind in the nation.
But outside the glitter of the gaming empire on the 1,220-acre reservation is another Ledyard that visitors see only briefly as they drive by in the rush to wager -- and mostly lose -- their money.
This is the Ledyard that fairly shouts of rural Eastern Connecticut, a big (40.5 square miles) and traditional community of twisting roads, craggy hills, and, oh yes, one-room schoolhouses.


The State Could Lend Expertise to Jail Inquiry
I am writing to you about the Dec. 18 article "Conditions at Jail Complex Under Scrutiny" as chairman of the Board of Legislators' Committee on Public Safety and Criminal Justice and as the Board's liaison to the Marbach Commission, which is investigating issues regarding the Westchester County Jail.
I am serving as board liaison at the request of County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke.
First, it was I, as chairman of the Public Safety Committee, who requested a state investigation, with the support of our Board chairman, Stephen Tenore.
Even though I am an ex-officio member of the Marbach Commission, I saw a possible state investigation as another way to insure independence and expertise.
So far, the state has declined the request, but in the meantime, I intend to work diligently as a part of the Marbach Commission.


The Executive Life; A Perk From the Past For Filmdom's Elite
CHECK out your average studio executive's home this time of the year and you'll likely find a big videocassette stack of Oscar hopefuls waiting to be reviewed on a huge, razor-thin television with window-shattering digital sound.
But go higher in the hierarchy, and you'll slip back to another era, when the private screening room was a center of power and prestige.
For even now, a core group of Hollywood's executive elite still enjoy their very own home-projection rooms.
They are often used to screen "dailies" -- the footage printed each day from a movie in the making -- and to stay abreast of the competition.
And during the winter, they are mostly devoted to screening films being pitched for Academy Awards in late March.


The Smallest Museum in Russia: Akhmatova Lived Here (and Lives Here Still)
THE most moving of all the museums in Russia, right now, is also the smallest and the most unlikely.
Niched with no fuss whatever in what was a communal apartment high in the annex of the former Sheremetyev Palace in St.
Petersburg, it is devoted to a great Russian poet, Anna Akhmatova (1889-1966).
A quiet and almost secret place, it has in it virtually no object of intrinsic value.
Its installation is rudimentary.
But it is her own room, with her belongings all around, nothing added or subtracted.
The linden trees outside the window are the ones whose agitated shadows she remembered in times of trouble.
How could her presence not be felt to an almost overwhelming degree?
From 1925 to 1952, it was the nearest thing to a permanent home she had.
Here between 1935 and 1940 she composed "Requiem," a sequence of poems from which posterity will know what it was to be in St.
Petersburg during the Stalinist terror and to live in dread from day to day.
And in this apartment she later wrote much of the long "Poem Without a Hero," a phantasmagorical and often cryptic or coded autobiography into which people, places and incidents from her past come crowding.


Patricia D. Acha, Mark E. Kishler
Patricia Denise Acha, a daughter of Juanita Acha of Arlington, Va., and the late Dr.
Pedro N. Acha, and Mark Edgar Kishler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Kishler of East Lansing, Mich., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
James Gould performed the ceremony at St.
Agnes Roman Catholic Church in Arlington.
The bride, 33, graduated from Northwestern University, as did the bridegroom, and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is a lawyer in the international division of the Miller Brewing Company in Milwaukee.
Her father was the area director of the Health Services Infrastructure at the Pan American Health Organization/World Health Organization in Washington.


S. Steven Brody, 75, Designer of Jewelry
S.
Steven Brody, co-founder and former president of Cadoro Jewels Corporation, a Manhattan-based costume-jewelry manufacturing company, died on Dec. 23 at Beth Israel North Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 75 and lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
The cause was pneumonia, and he had been in declining health, said his companion, Max Frescoln.


Smoke-Free Flights Increase
SMOKE-FREE flying suddenly looks a lot more real.
Beginning today, Delta Air Lines will be the first United States airline to ban smoking on all flights.
On the heels of Delta's announcement in November, six other United States airlines and two foreign lines moved toward banning smoking on trans-Atlantic flights, petitioning the Department of Transportation to be exempted from antitrust prosecution if they jointly agreed to do this.
And, on March 1, an agreement by the United States, Australia and Canada will take effect, banning smoking on all scheduled nonstop flights between the countries.


Assembling an Administration: Old Friends, Campaign Comrades
George E. Pataki begins his term today as the 53d Governor of New York with a team of top advisers who were mostly outsiders to state government.
Of the appointments Mr.
Pataki has made so far, only one, a holdover from his Democratic predecessor, has held a top position in the New York State executive branch.
Instead, Mr.
Pataki has turned to a mixture of old friends, local officials, campaign comrades, business people and associates from the Republican minority in Assembly.
He recruited two aides -- his budget director and health commissioner -- from out of state.


The Coaching Picture, in Black and White
When Rick Neuheisel was selected to succeed Bill McCartney as head coach of the Colorado football program, he viewed himself as fortunate considering that he had less experience than the other three candidates, all Colorado assistants.
But Neuheisel's good fortune was perceived by others as the clearest illustration of a pattern of exclusion and discrimination in intercollegiate athletics.
Neuheisel, 33 years old and in his first season at Colorado, was selected over Bob Simmons, a 46-year-old black coach with 19 years of experience, including 7 years at Colorado.
Simmons had the title of assistant head coach, was one of the school's top recruiters and had been one of two recommended for the top job by the incumbent head coach, Bill McCartney, who also recommended the offensive coordinator, Elliot Uzelac, who is white.


Jackson Heights Views Diversity as Source of Pride
To the Editor:
In your Dec. 18 article "Boundaries Keep Shifting, but Fears Remain the Same," you imply that hordes of "ethnically diverse" criminals from Jackson Heights are storming the neighboring community of Woodside in a desperate attempt to reach the "mostly white" bastions of Sunnyside, Maspeth and Long Island City.


Mutual Funds; Summing Up a Gruesome Year
CALL it ugly.
For mutual funds, 1994 was ugly in terms of performance -- most stock and bond investors lost money.
And from the industry's viewpoint, it was ugly as one scandal followed another and even uglier as the cascading cash inflows of the previous year began to falter.


Laura L. Caffaro, Francisco Torrado
Laura Lynn Caffaro, the daughter of Mary Caffaro of Brooklyn, was married on Friday to Francisco Jose Torrado, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Miguel Torrado of Singapore.
Msgr.
Dino M. Zeni performed the ceremony at Regina Pacis Votive Shrine in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Torrado, 26, is an associate at Robinson Silverman Pearce Aronsohn &amp; Berman, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from Albright College and New York Law School.
Her mother retired as an executive assistant at Drexel Burnham Lambert in New York.


A Match for Robert Maxwell
A MIND OF MY OWN  My Life With Robert Maxwell.
By Elisabeth Maxwell.
Illustrated. 536 pp.
New York:  HarperCollins Publishers. $25.


Tastes for the New Year: Spicy Southwest, India and Morocco
THERE is nothing like spicy food to get the new year off to a warm start.
From the Southwest as well as India and Morocco, the following recipes are easy to make -- and out of the ordinary.
They are also low in saturated fat.
Moroccan tagines are an exotic form of stew, normally cooked in an earthenware pot with a conical lid.
A heavy skillet or shallow casserole that goes on top of the stove works equally well for the meatballs.
They simmer in a sauce that reduces to a thick gravy and goes well with couscous.


Lions Out Of Bounds And Out Of Playoffs
It all came down to one play, in the final seconds.
When the Green Bay Packers and the Detroit Lions get together, it often does.
They have played each other in 64 consecutive years.
They have met five times in this calendar year.
This time, the game breaker came with 1 minute 45 seconds left at historic Lambeau Field.
Detroit trailed Green Bay by 16-10 and had the ball at the Packers' 17-yard line.
Fourth down.
Thirteen yards to go for a first down.
So, Detroit went to its go-to man in the passing offense, the 6-foot-3-inch receiver Herman Moore, and he leaped high in the back of the end zone and caught the ball and landed out of the end zone.
Unfortunately for Moore, his feet did, too.
And safety George Teague was there to provide an extra nudge and make sure Moore was out.


Dec. 25-31: Cancer Wars; At Least in the Lab, A Way to Stop Tumors
The annals of medicine are filled with cancer discoveries that looked exciting in the lab but failed when tested in humans.
And so experts expressed both excitement and reserve last week about an advance reported at the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif.
Researchers found that an injection of either of two types of proteins led to regression of a wide variety of human cancers grafted onto laboratory animals.


Making Resolutions? Don't Forget the Yard
THERE once was a tradition that the first day of the New Year was the time to make resolutions.
These promises were meant to insure a better year to come, and the list was usually one of self-betterment, personal resolves or something like that.
Presently, few adhere to this custom.
Those who do follow the tradition and make lists claim that the whole exercise is worthwhile.
But most couldn't be bothered.
The attitude is, who checks up anyway?


In Hartford's Schools, a Company Installs Symbols of Change
Sometime next month, Education Alternatives Inc., the corporation hired by Hartford to help manage its public schools, hopes to open its first showcase of its ability to transform education here.
In 2 of the city's 32 schools, the company, based in Minneapolis, will start up computer laboratories, renovated and equipped in only three months, that will enable 1,000 children from some of the city's poorest neighborhoods to practice math and reading on computers every day.
By September, the company pledges, every school will have labs providing 1 computer for every 10 students.


Ms. Milon and Mr. Rodriguez
Maryellen Milon, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph J. Milon of Lodi, N.J., was married on Wednesday to Christopher Rodriguez, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Rodriguez of Caguas, P.R.
The Rev.
Theodore Gray performed the ceremony at Stella Maris Roman Catholic Church in Condado, P.R.


Is the Administration Really Business Friendly?
To the Editor:
Leslie Wayne's "Yes, Even Now, There Are Pro-Clinton C.E.O.'s" (Dec.4) further illustrates establishment insensitivity to the November election results.
The seven pro-Clinton chief executives mimicked what remains of a further-left Congressional remnant among Democrats, holding that their partisan electoral troubles simply stem from a "failure to communicate" what they see as the good news of Mr.
Clinton's pro-business record to the rest of us.
How purely pathetic.


Paul Silverstein and Kimberly Morris
Kimberly Jane Morris, a daughter of Barbara Schiff and Dr.
Robert Morris, both of New York, and Paul Jonas Silverstein, a son of Leo and Carol Silverstein of New York, were married on Thursday at the Essex House in New York.
Rabbi Judah Nadich performed the ceremony.
The bride, 29, graduated from New York University.
She is the director of recruiting for Paradigm Systems Corporation, a software services and products company in New York.
Her father is the director of obstetrics and women's health services at New York University Hospital.
Her mother is a broker at Alice F. Mason Ltd., a real estate brokerage in New York.
The bride's stepfather, Nelson Schiff, is an executive vice president at Smith Barney in New York.


Scorned No Longer, Synthetics Go Modern
O Brave new year that has such fabrics in it!
For the hippie generation, despising artificial fabrics came naturally, but technology is now hip.
So, after 20 years of revering natural materials, designers have finally taken the sin out of synthetics, embracing new materials that are sleek, shiny, techno-chic and supercool.
On the international runways, plastic or vinyl-coated fabrics give a modern edge to regular clothes.
Fashion's avant-garde has gone techno, from Helmut Lang's seminal dress fusing latex and lace to Marc Jacobs's vinyl tank top, Gianni Versace's metallic-sprayed suits and Dolce &amp; Gabbana's transparent vinyl trench coats.


Who Will Be The New Ralph Fiennes, The Next Hugh Grant?
NOT LONG AGO, DANIEL Day Lewis and Kenneth Branagh were the British names on everyone's lips when it came to actors; more recently, Hugh Grant and Ralph Fiennes have dominated Hollywood's imagination.
Which raises the inevitable question: Who among current British actors are poised to become the next Hugh Grant and the next Ralph Fiennes?
Luckily for England, a country of waning industries, stage actors are a renewable resource.
There are dozens of promising actors, including the Shakespearean leading man Toby Stephens; the rangy, contemporary Ben Daniels; and the classically skilled yet hip Jude Law.
But among the dozens of rising actors who have appeared in London's big subsidized theaters or on the West End, five stand out in the roles they have landed and the critical attention they have received.


New Year's Wishes for a Better New York
THIS is a city generous with glamour and with grit, where every great leap forward often seems to mean another pothole to avoid, another bureaucratic logjam to ford, another panhandler to set the conscience spinning.
Yes, much seems better around here these days: the subways are faster and cleaner, crime is dropping, the restaurants are crowded and more creative than ever.
But there is also an abiding sense of disarray in the streets, where the lights shine down on litter swirling in the traffic's wake and the homeless bundled in their rags.
Life stacked upon life, like cans on a shelf, means there is at least as much potential for conflict as for community.
It's life in the big city, and without regard to season, the living can be queasy.


Nela Wagman and Edward Vilga
Nela Wagman, the founder and artistic director of the Watermark Theater, a theatrical production company in New York, and Edward Paul Vilga, the company's producer, were married last evening at the Puck Building in New York.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel performed the ceremony, in which the Rev.
Giles Spoonhour, a Roman Catholic priest, took part.
The bride, who will be known as Nela Wagman Vilga, recently directed "Blaming Mom," a play that the bridegroom produced at the Ohio Theater in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University and studied drama at the Circle in the Square Professional Program.


Journal; Kennedy Center Dishonors
It takes ingenuity to make the Kennedy Center Honors more mortifying with each passing year.
In a jaw-dropping low during the 1993 show, two honorees, Georg Solti and Stephen Sondheim, were serenaded by a band playing what sounded like a Tijuana Brass rendition of "America" from "West Side Story" -- in blissful ignorance of the facts that Mr.
Solti conducted Beethoven and Mahler for the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, not show tunes for the Boston Pops, and that Mr.
Sondheim wrote the lyrics of "America," not the music.
But such gaffes seem trifling next to the dim 1994 Kennedy Center gala seen by official Washington early last month and disseminated to the masses on television on Wednesday night.


Verbal Pollution?
To the Editor:
I cringed at the paucity of logic and honest thought in P. J. O'Rourke's smug misinterpretation of environmental regulations ("Ecology? Let's Talk Windshield Bugs," Viewpoints, Dec. 4).
His shallow view of issues like endangered species is only slightly more cogent than his earlier blabbering about the need of every real American man to drive a big four-by-four truck.


Happy Republicans, In From the Cold, Gather for Pataki's Inauguration
After 20 years in the political wilderness, thousands of jubilant Republicans converged on Albany today to install one of their own, George E. Pataki, as New York's 53d Governor, and to witness the first Republican inauguration since Nelson A. Rockefeller took the oath in 1971.
After a day marked by happy reunions and partisan pride, Mr.
Pataki took the oath of office tonight in a private ceremony witnessed by about 100 family members, friends and political supporters in the drawing room of the Executive Mansion, the 40-room house he moved into on Friday night.
Although Mr.
Pataki wore gray pin stripes, the scene was casual enough that the eldest of his four children, 15-year-old Emily, came barefoot and in bluejeans.


Changes Sought in Laws on Drunken Driving
TOUGH laws are widely credited with cutting New Jersey's drunken driving fatalities from 263 in 1988 to 114 in 1993.
But as the new year begins, many state law enforcement officials and safe-driving advocates are seeking major changes in the laws and procedures that make up the state's program against drunken driving.
If they are put into effect, said Colonel Peter J. O'Hagan, director of the state's division of traffic highway safety, "arrests and convictions for driving while intoxicated would increase by the thousands." Proposed changes in the state's evaluation program for accused drivers are intended to take greater numbers of repeat offenders with serious drinking problems off the roads.


Economic Memo; The World Shifted, but Not Mexico
Mexico has this in common with Orange County, Calif., and with derivatives plungers and other big losers in 1994: It failed to respond quickly when the economic world around it began to change, or to realize how risky its economic strategy was until it was too late.
Mexico's risks were built into a strategy of luring investors with high interest rates and a narrow currency-trading range, international economists here have concluded.


Bipartisan Foreign Policy
In the new year, President Clinton confronts a new foreign policy reality -- a Republican Congress.
Republicans are less united on international issues than on their domestic agenda.
But critics of specific Administration policies now lead both houses and chair key committees.
They have ample constitutional power to obstruct the President's agenda and advance their own.
The Senate has the authority to confirm nominees and ratify treaties, and both houses can vote down or condition appropriations for everything from foreign aid and intelligence to troop deployments.
Sharper foreign policy debate can be healthy.
The Administration has not performed so brilliantly that it can afford to brush off useful criticism.
No great philosophical differences divide Mr.
Clinton from mainstream Republicans on many issues, and both parties need to consider how to reshape U.S. policies to a changed world.
What are America's interests today?
What are appropriate uses of U.S. military force?
What is the right relationship between trade expansion and other objectives?


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about the shootings at two Brookline, Mass., abortion clinics incorrectly described in some copies a bag the police said the gunman left behind.
The bag, which the police said contained a pistol, was a duffel bag, not a paper bag.
In addition, the United States Attorney in Boston was misidentified in some copies.
He is Donald K. Stern, not Donald Hunt.


INSIDE
AIDS's Other Victims
There are many nights that Deborah Sollod, a nurse, goes home from work and cries.
That's one of the burdens of working with patients with AIDS.
She's not alone.
Page 25.
Tightrope Act in Mexico
President Zedillo will lay out his plans for economic recovery tonight, seeking to contain the impact of a weaker peso on the nation's simmering social problems.
Page 39.
Cease-Fire Begins in Bosnia
As a four-month cessation of hostilities took effect, Bosnian and Serbian commanders met to hold the first of a series of talks to work out the details of the truce.
Page 3.


Paris Journal; Brother Roger Calls, and 110,000 Youths Respond
Before Brother Roger spoke, young people from all over Europe were already kneeling in prayer, leaning on backpacks, singing hymns or just sleeping by the glow of a sea of candles.
More than 100,000 strong, they had come from more than 30 nations -- Orthodox Christians from Russia and the Balkans, Protestants and Catholics from north and south.
They had filled five cavernous exhibition halls and transformed the chilly sites into spaces of meditation, warmed by red banners, religious icons and a pervasive sense of calm.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Construction Spending . . .
Nov.
Thursday  Factory Orders . . .
Nov.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Employment . . .
Dec.


China's Central Bank Raises A Rate Linked to Investing
Confronting continued strong economic growth and rising inflation, China's central bank today raised interest rates on loans to financial institutions by an average 24-hundredths of 1 percent.
The move was aimed at controlling excess investment in fixed assets, the official Xinhua News Agency reported.
China had an inflation rate of 24.4 percent last year, more than double the Government's target.


Friendly Advice Helps Osborne Turn It Around
Under Coach Tom Osborne, Nebraska began impressively enough as a bowl team.
The Cornhuskers won their first two bowl games and four of their first five.
But starting in 1982, they hit a major snag.
With tonight's come-from-behind, 24-17 victory over Miami in the Orange Bowl, Nebraska won just its third of its last 13 post-season efforts.
It was after the 1993 season, with six bowl losses in a row, that Osborne stopped to consider the carnage.
He called coaching friends at Florida State, which can boast of an 11-0-1 record in its last 12 bowl games.


Ads on Radio Posted Strong Gains in 1994
For the oldest broadcasting medium, 1994 was a very good year.
Advertising revived with a vengeance, posting double-digit increases in 7 of the first 10 months of the year and ending the first 10 months up 12 percent over all.
In the face of this growing demand, the industry was able to raise its rates after several years of marking them down to gain business.
Radio executives are optimistic that strong increases will be posted in 1995 as well.


Who Makes Music With Whom Is the Work of Hidden Hands
When an orchestra performs, listeners reflexively allocate credit and blame to the conductor and the players.
But in the freelance ensembles that account for most of New York City's musical life there is another significant but generally unnoticed force at work.
Although the players produce the sounds and the conductors shape them, it is the orchestral contractor who decides which musicians the conductor will face.
Unlike the New York Philharmonic and the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra, which have permanent rosters and year-round contracts, ensembles like the New York Chamber Symphony, the Brooklyn Philharmonic, the American Symphony Orchestra and the Mostly Mozart Orchestra are assembled from a pool of more than 1,000 freelance musicians who work in the New York area.


CHRONICLE
Brandeis University in Waltham, Mass., has announced the largest gift from an alumnus in its 46-year history.
HERBERT BEIGEL , Class of '66, has donated $3 million to the school's theater program.
In return, the university's 750-seat theater will be renamed the Herbert and Nancy Beigel Main Stage Theater.


Winds of Change Hit Music's Top Tier
The record industry closed its books last week on a year of considerable prosperity, but also one of significant turmoil.
It was a year of upheaval in the executive ranks, and the impact of these changes is expected to ripple through the industry this year.
Sales of recorded music in the United States were expected to reach a new high of $11 billion in 1994, up 10 percent from 1993.
And optimism remains high for this year, when many big-name releases are planned.
But who will be where, taking credit for what, remains to be seen.


We Can Throw Teacher Expectations on the I.Q. Scrapheap; Why Freeze the Rats?
To the Editor:
In "Behind the Curve" (Op-Ed, Dec. 26), Myron A. Hofer mentions experiments on rats to buttress his argument that "The Bell Curve" by Charles Murray and the late Richard J. Herrnstein is faulty science.
That book has been widely criticized, and rightly so.


U.S.-India Textile Accord
The Clinton Administration said today that the United States and India had agreed on a deal to open the huge Indian market to American exports of textiles and clothing for the first time.
Under the pact, which is effective immediately, India has agreed to remove fibers, yarns and industrial fabrics from its restricted list and to provide immediate access for all other textile and apparel products.


Patents
ONE of the first things independent inventors learn is that the phrase "if you build it, they will come" does not usually apply to manufacturing.
Many inventors are stunned to discover that their low-tech, common-sense inventions do not inspire companies to retool factories to change a product's longstanding design.
Michael and Dorothy Kucik have hit that section of the inventors' learning curve.
The Kuciks run a heavy-machinery rigging company in Baltimore and are avid boaters in their spare time.
For years they struggled with the mess and water pollution caused by the changing of their boat's oil filter.


On the Road to Some Intriguing Places
If the romance has gone out of travel, blame television and all those old movie travelogues.
The urge to go trekking to far-off places can be considerably diminished by films that, even if sketchy, give the armchair tourist a fairly good idea of what it's like being there, but without the burdens of luggage and surly waiters.
The better the television documentary, it seems to me, the worse for travel agencies.
Among the best of those television excursions is the current PBS series "Legendary Trails" (an inadequate title that suggests dull hikes through dreary woods).
The four programs, produced by the BBC and each narrated by an expert author or journalist, travel to places considered sacred by pilgrims of various religious stripes.
As George Page, executive producer for Channel 13, observes, "You don't have to believe in anything particularly religious or spiritual to be awed by the variety and difficulty of the journey people have made for the sake of their souls."


THE NEW GOVERNOR: Man in the News; A Pragmatic Conservative: George Elmer Pataki
To the friends he met at Yale College 31 years ago, George E. Pataki was a garrulous, beer-loving freshman who knew precisely where he stood on the political spectrum (to the right), the name of the next President (Barry Goldwater) and what he would become when he grew up (governor of New York State).
To the politicians he passed along the way to becoming the 53d governor of New York, Mr.
Pataki was also a conservative, but often a pragmatic one.
His central beliefs did not stop him from working with more moderate politicians or from moderating his own views on difficult issues to achieve his goals.


PRO FOOTBALL: It's a B+ Day in the N.F.L. as Browns and Bears Win; Little Men: Vikings Caught Short Again
The first striking thing about Warren Moon, besides the worn look on his face, was the hitch in his stride.
"I'm going to put some ice on my knee," the Minnesota quarterback said as he walked toward the training room, slowly, carefully, his every step taking concentrated effort.
The season wasn't supposed to end this way for the brilliant Viking quarterback, or his team, but it did today in disastrous fashion.


Integration Steps Into the Pulpit
You can see it as a tale of two Southern churches, both grappling with a question that not too long ago would have been unthinkable: What happens to a white church when it gets a black pastor?
The very different way the story has unfolded in the last six months at Christ United Methodist Church outside Birmingham, Ala., and at Plaza United Methodist Church here goes to show that integration can be sweet and smooth -- when it means blacks' being accepted into white institutions.
When the goal is a genuine melding of blacks and whites on equal terms into institutions shaped by both, it is another matter entirely.


'The People Seek Change': Transcript of Pataki's Inaugural
Following is a transcript of Gov.
George E. Pataki's inaugural address in Albany yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times:
The change of administrations that we have just witnessed marks not just a transfer of political authority but a renewal of the democratic sanction under which it occurs, a reaffirmation of our common belief in a system of government that is ultimately answerable solely to the people.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the surge in radical talk by some abortion opponents misstated the stance of the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Boston on anti-abortion protests.
Bernard Cardinal Law has called for a moratorium on vigils on the sidewalks outside abortion clinics.
But he continues to defend the right of protesters to hold those vigils.


Church of Scientology Uses Ads to Fight Bias
To the Editor:
It is plain that Eliot Neaman, the history professor who wrote "Why Germany Warns About Scientology" (letter, Dec. 26), has never read Scientology's tenets.
His reference to "the so-called Church of Scientology" betrays his ignorance of the church's recognized religious status in the United States and many other free countries.


METRO DIGEST
REGION  GEORGE PATAKI BEGINS NEW ERA Calling for a new revolution to make government both smaller and more effective, George Elmer Pataki became the 53d Governor of New York with an inaugural address that promised "sweeping and fundamental change -- change that is certain and immediate." In the 38-minute address, long enough to lull 7-year-old Owen Pataki to sleep on his mother's lap, Mr.
Pataki repeatedly summoned the imagery of the American Revolution and suggested that his election was born of the same discontent with taxation and bureaucracy that incited the colonials.


Tough Town, Tougher Browns
Cleveland is a tough town.
People here have given Bill Belichick a hard time because he is not outgoing or witty or, even worse, the football team he coaches has often been a disappointment.
They have given Vinny Testaverde a hard time because he has not always been the most composed or effective quarterback, and when things have gone bad with him they have sometimes grown worse and worse.
If Belichick and Testaverde had been vengeful, they would have gained vindication today.
But after their Browns played so well in a 20-13 playoff victory over the New England Patriots, they spoke not of retribution but of a sense of accomplishment.


Why Israel Argues About King David
To the Editor:
The political fighting in Israel's Parliament over the moral fiber of King David, which you report Dec. 16 and 26, is not new in Israeli society.


Unhappy Anderson Shoulders Burden
Though it still hurts, the right shoulder is getting better.
But apparently something more is bothering Kenny Anderson.
"I'm not happy right now," the Nets' point guard, who has had somewhat of a rough week, told a television crew after practice today.
"Last year, I was a happy camper. But you have your ups and downs in life."


Bridge
For New York players, the tournament year ended Saturday afternoon at the New York Vista Hotel just in time for New Year celebrations.
Among those with most to celebrate were Carleton Lett, David Gurvich, Joseph Pasternack, Michael J. Rosen, all of Manhattan, and Gary Helman of the Bronx, who took top honors in the Flight A Swiss Teams in a field that included many players with major national reputations.
Other winners Friday and Saturday at the conclusion of the Greater New York Bridge Association's Winter Regional Championships were:


China's Central Bank Raises A Rate Linked to Investing
Confronting continued strong economic growth and rising inflation, China's central bank today raised interest rates on loans to financial institutions by an average 24-hundredths of 1 percent.
The move was aimed at controlling excess investment in fixed assets, the official Xinhua News Agency reported.
China had an inflation rate of 24.4 percent last year, more than double the Government's target.


Nebraska Stakes Its No. 1 Claim


'Fledermaus' With a Mayoral Debut
In its radio advertisements for the New Year's Eve performance of "Die Fledermaus," the Metropolitan Opera promised potential ticket buyers that if they sat through four hours of cloyingly overacted Straussian kitsch -- O.K., it wasn't put quite that way -- they could be out of the theater in time to ring in the New Year.
It was clearly a claim worth testing, and even at premium prices the house was sold out.
Nobody was disappointed: the Met kept its word with 32 minutes to spare.
As an act of mercy, in fact, the company added a slate of celebrity guests -- singers, actors and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani -- as a welcome respite from the work's bubbly waltzes and polkas and the production's pallid topical humor.
Near the end of the second act, Wolfgang Brendel, as Dr.
Falke, announced, "Some guests from New York have a surprise for you," and thereafter took on the duties of master of ceremonies.
In the pit, James Levine took over from Hermann Michael, and Samuel Ramey, David Malis and Neil Rosenshein bounded onto the stage to give a lively account of "There Is Nothing Like a Dame" from "South Pacific."


Markets Closed
All banks and financial markets in the United States are closed today for the New Year holiday.
Most markets abroad are also closed.


Treasury Sets Sales
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to bills, beginning with the weekly auction of three- and six-month bills on Tuesday.
The auction, usually held on Mondays, will be on Tuesday this week because of the New Year's holiday.
On Thursday, the Treasury will auction one-year bills.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.54 percent, the six-month issue was at 6.19 percent and the one-year was at 6.81 percent.


PATAKI PLEDGES A RENEWAL OF A 'REVOLUTIONARY SPIRIT OF SARATOGA' AS GOVERNOR
Calling for a new revolution to make government both smaller and more effective, George Elmer Pataki became the 53d Governor of New York today with an inaugural address that promised "sweeping and fundamental change that is certain and immediate."
In a 38-minute address, long enough to lull 7-year-old Owen Pataki into dozing on his mother's lap, Mr.
Pataki repeatedly summoned the imagery of the American Revolution and suggested that his election was born of the same discontent with taxation and bureaucracy that incited the colonials.


A New President, and Brasilia Is Again a Capital of Hope
Fernando Henrique Cardoso, a 63-year-old sociologist, was inaugurated as Brazil's President today, promising to give all his energy to banishing inflation from Latin America's largest nation.
"The majority of Brazilians made a clear choice" for low inflation and high growth, Mr.
Cardoso said, referring to his landslide electoral victory in October.


Democrats Talk of Power on the Last Days With It
Like the dispirited troops of a defeated army, Democrats and Congressional staff members prepared to relinquish cherished posts and cluttered, file-filled cabinets on the eve of the Republican takeover of the House of Representatives.
Lunch gatherings were grim, partings tearful and wishes for the new year filled with gallows humor.
At the Ford Annex building, Judi Greenwald introduced several colleagues as they were packing: "We're with the subcommittee on energy and power. At least we are until the end of the day."


George Pataki's Vision
Early in yesterday's inaugural address, New York's new Governor, George Pataki, paid gracious tribute to Mario Cuomo.
He then took the next 35 minutes to make it unmistakably clear that the government to expect under his leadership will be radically different in attitude and agenda from anything New Yorkers have known during Mr.
Cuomo's 12 years in Albany.
"The people seek change," he said.
"Let us give them sweeping and fundamental change that is certain and immediate." The centerpiece of Mr.
Pataki's philosophy of change, a theme to which he returned again and again, is to restore a sense of individual responsibility, and release individual energies, by lightening the "oppressive" hand of government.
There is, he asserted, a sense of crisis among many people, but it is "a crisis not of the people's making but of the government's." And "what those in government have done, those in government can undo."


Economic Memo; The World Shifted, but Not Mexico
Mexico has this in common with Orange County, Calif., and with derivatives plungers and other big losers in 1994: It failed to respond quickly when the economic world around it began to change, or to realize how risky its economic strategy was until it was too late.
Mexico's risks were built into a strategy of luring investors with high interest rates and a narrow currency-trading range, international economists here have concluded.


The Schools Are Getting Better
It is widely accepted that the public schools are in decline and that one major reason for poor student performance is the disintegration of families.
But a recent study by the Rand Corporation suggests just the opposite.
Student performance has actually improved over the last two decades, especially among minorities, thanks largely to changes within families.
This startling evaluation deserves careful examination by politicians and Washington officials before they indiscriminately dismantle social programs that may actually have worked.
As households with working dads and stay-at-home moms became an increasingly smaller proportion of American families, social policy makers worried about the effects of divorce, illegitimacy and working mothers on student achievement.
But the Rand study found that factors like parental education, household income, family size and the age of the mother when the child was born are more important than family structure.


Miriam Camps, 78, A Writer on Europe
Miriam Camps, who wrote about European unification and other topics and who had been a State Department official, died on Friday in a hospital near her home in Little Abingdon outside Cambridge, England.
She was 78.
The cause was lung cancer, said her sister, Margaret Schwartz.


Ex-Giants Reunion: 2 Coaches, 2 Players
WHEN the New England Patriots played the Browns here late in the 1993 season, Pepper Johnson approached Bill Parcells during the warmups.
"Why," the Browns linebacker asked, "did you leave me?"


Both Sides Huddling; Big Guns Are Not
Brian Burke, a senior vice president of the National Hockey League, was part of the small group that resumed bargaining yesterday in an effort to end the lockout that has postponed the start of the season for more than three months.
There were no details available from the subcommittee meeting, which was held at an undisclosed site under a news media blackout.
It was expected that Burke and a fellow N.H.L. executive, Jeff Pash, would represent the league.
Two attorneys, Bob Riley and John McCambridge, were to represent the Players Association.


Suspect's Weapon Isn't Often Used in Crimes, Police Say
To the many puzzles in the case of John C. Salvi 3d, the suspect in two killings at abortion clinics, add the question of why he was arrested carrying a weapon used more often for squirrel hunting than for shootouts.
When police officers surrounded his pickup truck on Saturday after a clinic here was sprayed with gunfire, Mr.
Salvi tossed a .22-caliber rifle out the window.


Eastern Germany's Road to Modernity Leads to the Shopping Mall
Watching change come to eastern Germany since the collapse of Communism five years ago is like watching newsreels of life from the 1950's to the 1990's speed past in fast-forward.
Office buildings and construction cranes have sprung up in every major city.
Streets have been torn up for new telephone lines, new sewers and new power cables, and then torn up again for new cable television wires.


Fanny Cradock, 85; A British TV Cook In an Evening Gown
Fanny Cradock, who won a niche in British social history by teaching luxury-starved Britons to cook better after the austere years of World War II, died on Dec. 27 in a nursing home in East Sussex, England.
She was 85.
Mrs.
Cradock, garbed in gems and evening gowns, enlightened television viewers with hundreds of how-to-cook programs, which began in the early 1950's and were influential in Britain for years.
Her television career lasted until the late 1980's.


Patents
ONE of the first things independent inventors learn is that the phrase "if you build it, they will come" does not usually apply to manufacturing.
Many inventors are stunned to discover that their low-tech, common-sense inventions do not inspire companies to retool factories to change a product's longstanding design.
Michael and Dorothy Kucik have hit that section of the inventors' learning curve.
The Kuciks run a heavy-machinery rigging company in Baltimore and are avid boaters in their spare time.
For years they struggled with the mess and water pollution caused by the changing of their boat's oil filter.


Dolphins' Defense Could Use a Little Fan Appreciation
The banner hung ominously Saturday in the northwest corner of Joe Robbie Stadium.
"Bring back Arnsparger," it said.
Tom Olivadotti didn't think too much of the suggestion.
Olivadotti is the Miami Dolphins' defensive coordinator.
Bill Arnsparger, once Miami's defensive coordinator, holds the same job now with the San Diego Chargers, who will be the Dolphins' opponent next Sunday in the American Football Conference semifinals.


Bird Island Journal; A Million-Dollar Fight Over 100 Acres of Scrub Oak and Marsh
One bright autumn day a few dozen people waded across a shallow inlet to Bird Island, one of the last privately owned, undeveloped islands on the East Coast.
Surf broke gently at their feet.
Small dunes rose behind them, backed by the twisted pines and scrub oak of the island's tiny maritime forest.
On the far side of the narrow island, yellow-green marsh grass shimmered in the sunlight.


New Stock and Bond Issues Fell by Almost 33% in 1994
After a strong start, 1994 limped to a disappointing close for Wall Street's underwriters.
New issues of stocks and bonds totaled $709 billion for the year, down nearly 33 percent from 1993's record of more than $1 trillion and the lowest total since 1991, according to the Securities Data Company, a Manhattan research firm.


New York Galleries Teaming Up To Show Art by 16 Brazilians
In a neighborhood that still runs a cable car, two Brazilian artists, Waltercio Caldas and Daniel Senise, conceive and create contemporary sculptures and paintings using two totally individual languages.
For Mr.
Caldas, the appeal of hilltop Santa Teresa is that "it doesn't have time, just space." Space has been a central concern of Mr.
Caldas for over 20 years, but his intriguing experiments with visual perception have had relatively little exposure in the United States.
He attributes the absence of a strong Brazilian presence in the international art world to a "lack of consciousness of Brazil's cultural complexity."


Authorities Seeking Motive For Attacks At Abortion Clinics
Investigators said today that they were trying to figure out why John C. Salvi 3d, a New Hampshire man accused of killing two women at abortion clinics in Massachussetts on Friday, came to this Tidewater city, a hotbed of anti-abortion activity.
Mr.
Salvi, 22, has been charged with murder and with assault with attempt to murder in the attacks in Brookline, Mass., in which two receptionists were shot to death and five other people were wounded.
Mr.
Salvi was arrested here on Saturday, after shots were fired at a Norfolk abortion clinic; no one was injured.


We Can Throw Teacher Expectations on the I.Q. Scrapheap; Intervention Fables
To the Editor:
In "Behind the Curve" (Op-Ed, Dec. 26), Myron A. Hofer relies on Robert Rosenthal's flawed studies of social expectation effects to suggest that I.Q. is highly malleable.
Mr.
Rosenthal reported that when teachers were falsely told that children were high in I.Q., their I.Q. scores rose an average of 15 points.


'95 BOWL GAMES: Rose Bowl; Well, Roses Are Kind Of Nice
They are a day late and perhaps a ranking short.
They sent every negative vibe possible to the Orange Bowl -- via satellite -- but the Penn State Nittany Lions flicked off their televisions tonight likely stuck at No. 2.
Due to Nebraska's victory over Miami on an opposite coast, Penn State needs to run up the score against Oregon in Monday's Rose Bowl and then wait for the polls to close.


WELFARE DEBATE WILL RE-EXAMINE OLD ASSUMPTIONS
A great debate is about to begin over one of the major premises of America's social welfare policy: that low-income people are legally entitled to Government aid guaranteeing a minimum standard of living.
Many of the Republicans who will take control of Congress on Wednesday contend that welfare, Medicaid and food stamps should be stripped of their status as open-ended "entitlements." Instead, they say, Congress should appropriate fixed amounts of money each year for those programs, whose size would no longer increase automatically when, for example, a recession put more people out of work.


Before the Real Pigskin Is Served, Have Some Snacks
There are no national titles at stake, no Heisman Trophy winners in uniform, not even any intrastate bragging rights to play for.
The Hall of Fame, Citrus, Cotton and Carquest Bowls are more like appetizers for the bigger and more prestigious games that will be played later today.


RESULTS PLUS
MEN'S BASKETBALL  No. 5 Kentucky Blocked  Samaki Walker, a freshman center, tied a school record with 10 blocked shots, scored 14 points and grabbed 10 rebounds as Louisville upended No. 5-ranked Kentucky, 88-86, yesterday.
With the 6-foot-9-inch Walker dominating inside, host Louisville (7-3) set a school record with 16 blocks.
Coach Rick Pitino's Kentucky team shot a season-low 34.1 percent and fell to 6-2. (AP)


Why Europe Is Careful Not to Scold the Bear
Two years ago, the Russian Foreign Minister horrified a gathering of 53 European countries in Stockholm by announcing what he called "a correction in the course of Russian foreign policy."
Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev warned that Russia saw a threat in overtures by NATO to formerly Communist countries in Eastern Europe, and in Western hostility to the Serbs in the war in Bosnia.
Moscow, he said, had a right to intervene militarily in what he called the "post-imperial space" around it, and would not hesitate to exercise it.


French Sailor Tells of Ordeal
Isabelle Autissier, the French solo sailor who was airlifted from her stricken yacht Saturday in the Indian Ocean, said yesterday that a huge wave had crippled her boat by rolling it over 360 degrees.
Autissier was expected to arrive last night in Adelaide, Australia, aboard an Australian Navy frigate, H.M.A.S.
Darwin.
The 38-year-old competitor in the BOC round-the-world race told competition officials by radio that she was fortunate to have been below deck when the wave hit on Wednesday.


A 'New Dawn' in Albany, but on the Dais, Remnants of an Old Feud
A 19-gun salute thundered outside Knickerbocker Arena and, later, lasers flickered from the podium as a disembodied voice sputtered, "Pataki! Pataki! Pataki! Pataki!" Birds and crickets chirped from somewhere, as if to greet what the printed programs called "a new dawn."
But for all the pageantry of the first Republican inauguration here in 24 years, it was the seating arrangement on the dais, more than anything, that hammered home how much things have changed under George E. Pataki.
Mario M. Cuomo, who has dominated every stage he sat on since 1982, was seated quietly to the podium's right, applauding selectively and fidgeting with his glasses.


A Good Description and Good Police Work Lead to the Capture of a Rape Suspect
Out to visit a friend on a quiet New Year's morning, the 33-year-old woman grew uneasy as a scruffy black van drew up beside her on a deserted South Bronx street yesterday.
Suddenly, she later told the police, the driver -- a 300-pound, 6-foot menacing presence with a face pockmarked by acne scars -- stepped out, drew a gun and ordered her to get in.
She refused. He bashed her in the face, she said, and dragged her in.


We Can Throw Teacher Expectations on the I.Q. Scrapheap
To the Editor:
Apropos the effects of teacher expectations on student I.Q., as discussed by Myron A. Hofer in "Behind the Curve" (Op-Ed, Dec. 26):


Essay; Royalties in Office
As a Nixon speechwriter a generation ago, I was delighted to get a check for $150 from The New York Times for a piece about language.
I told the White House counsel I would keep it because the article had nothing to do with my official duties and was written on my own time.
Counsel said to send the check back.
Why?
Because I was working full time for the U.S.
Government and it would be unethical to earn money on the side.


Drug Turf Is Safer as Dealers Avoid Streets
When Danny Cabero returned recently from two years in prison for drug possession he hardly recognized his old turf in Washington Heights, where streets were once congested with young men hawking drugs to drive-by addicts, and guns and knives were preferred means of communication.
"It's quiet," said Mr.
Cabero, 20, who went back this spring to the northern Manhattan neighborhood that became a landmark in the nation's cocaine crisis.
"They have less people selling drugs in the street. Less people robbing. One thing you can say about Washington Heights: you can walk down the street here and be safe."


A Guitarist Runs the Gamut of Riff, Melody and Solo
Vernon Reid's Masque, which performed on Friday night at the Cooler (416 West 14th Street), in the meatpacking district, was an oddly arranged band.
In addition to drums, bass, guitar and clarinet, the sextet, which played a mixture of jazz, funk and hard rock, used turntables and a unique homemade electronic instrument called the Samchillian Tip Tip Tip Cheeepeeeee (with a name like that, it has to be unique).
The result was a well-balanced ensemble equipped to explore the entire continuum of jazz and rock with the control of such other hard-hitting avant-garde ensembles as John Zorn's Naked City and Ronald Shannon Jackson's groups.
Most of Masque's instrumentals began with the turntable antics of D.J.
Logic, who scratched back and forth on a record before letting its drumbeat play.
Curtis Watts followed the beat on a live drum set, adding a few embellishments of his own.
With the addition of the muscular lines of Hank Schroy on bass, the rhythm section provided a strong foundation for experiments by the other three members of the sextet.


New Stock and Bond Issues Fell by Almost 33% in 1994
After a strong start, 1994 limped to a disappointing close for Wall Street's underwriters.
New issues of stocks and bonds totaled $709 billion for the year, down nearly 33 percent from 1993's record of more than $1 trillion and the lowest total since 1991, according to the Securities Data Company, a Manhattan research firm.


Russian Troops and Secessionists Battle Fiercely in Grozny Streets
The war for Chechnya has turned into a vicious block-by-block street brawl.
After the capital had been pounded from the skies for days, teams of Russian snipers entered central buildings in Grozny today and fired on Chechen soldiers throughout the day.
Casualties were said to be heavy on both sides as the badly outnumbered Chechen soldiers fought back ferociously, but there was no reliable accounting of casualties on either side.
The hulks of several Russian tanks -- some with troops still in them -- smoldered near the central train station, where much of the heaviest fighting has taken place.


Eakins as a Photographer of Enigmatic Nudes
EAKINS AND THE PHOTOGRAPH Works by Thomas Eakins and His Circle in the Collection of the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts  By Susan Danly and Cheryl Leibold, with essays by Elizabeth Johns, Anne McCauley and Mary Panzer  Illustrated. 235 pages.
Smithsonian Institution Press for the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts.
Cloth $85; paper $34.95.
Hailed by many critics as the greatest American artist of the 19th century, Thomas Eakins has long been an almost mythical character.
His blend of meticulously detailed realism and psychological insight has been proclaimed a particularly American style of painting; the story of his dismissal from his teaching position in 1886 for removing the loincloth from a male model before a female drawing class has been endlessly recounted as an example of the modern artist's commitment to visual truth in the face of provincial prudery.


Economy And Politics Still Govern
NEW YORK'S new Governor took office yesterday the way he ran for it.
In language as focused as the voice-overs in his campaign commercials, George E. Pataki declared war on the government he was elected to run.
"What those in government have done, those in government can undo," Mr.
Pataki told an appreciative crowd of 13,000.


Warren Caro, 87, Theater Executive
Warren Caro, a retired executive of the Shubert Organization and a former executive director of the Theater Guild, died yesterday at Englewood Hospital in New Jersey.
He was 87 and had lived in Norwalk, Conn., before moving to the Actors Fund Nursing Home in Englewood two years ago.
Mr.
Caro was the director of theater operations and then projects development director for the Shubert Organization, which is based in Manhattan, from 1967 until he retired in 1980.
From 1946 to 1967, he was the executive director of the Theater Guild-American Theater Society.


Holiday Today
New Year's Day is legally observed today.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office, 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, open.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION: No pickups, street cleaning or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Subways and buses on holiday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on regular weekday schedule.
Metro-North Railroad on combined Saturday and Sunday schedule.
NEW JERSEY GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Rail service on holiday schedule.
Buses on Saturday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on combined Saturday and Sunday schedule.


Sports of The Times; Shrimpland Inheriting Big Legacy
THEY'RE shifting the game called the Orange Bowl to the land of the shrimp eaters.
In 1997, the Orange Bowl game will be played in the swanky confines of Joe Robbie Stadium, where the wealthiest fans can ingest crustaceans behind air-conditioned glass and use private plumbing without having to mix with those sweaty people out there in the stands.
The officials should have moved the game next year rather than wait until 1997.
It's not going to be the same without the old joint being the center of the football-playing universe, the way it was last night, as Nebraska overcame Miami's home-field advantage, 24-17, to probably guarantee good old Tom Osborne's first national championship after 22 years.


Making Days Live in Face of Death; At AIDS Residence, a Nurse Helps Poor, Drug-Addicted Patients
Tim G. came back one Wednesday, but he was changed -- thinner, quieter, diffident.
He had been shooting up a combination of heroin and cocaine that had damaged one of his kidneys and impaired his memory.
Deborah Sollod, the clinical nurse manager at the Robert Mapplethorpe Residential AIDS Treatment Facility, stood behind Tim G.'s wheelchair in the narrow hallway of the brownstone and tried to reassure him.


Winds of Change Hit Music's Top Tier
The record industry closed its books last week on a year of considerable prosperity, but also one of significant turmoil.
It was a year of upheaval in the executive ranks, and the impact of these changes is expected to ripple through the industry this year.
Sales of recorded music in the United States were expected to reach a new high of $11 billion in 1994, up 10 percent from 1993.
And optimism remains high for this year, when many big-name releases are planned.
But who will be where, taking credit for what, remains to be seen.


Rebels in Mexico Hold A Subdued Celebration
In the great amphitheater carved from the rain forest to receive partisans of the peasant guerrillas with headquarters here, the rough-hewn benches where thousands once sat were nearly empty as the New Year began today.
Amado Avendano, the genial small-town newspaper publisher whom the insurgents call the true Governor of the "rebel state of Chiapas," had brought some friends to celebrate the first anniversary of their uprising, but most of them fit into a single pickup truck.


Though Hunt for Suspect Was Vast, Chance Proved Crucial for Capture
In the frantic first minutes after a man shot his way through two abortion clinics here, instantly killing one woman, fatally injuring another and leaving five people wounded and bleeding, the Brookline police took the first steps in an intensive manhunt that would stretch from United States Customs offices on the Canadian border to a lonely stretch of highway in Rhode Island.
Yet thorough as it was, the net stopped hundreds of miles short of where the suspect, John C. Salvi 3d, would later be captured.
While officers from more than a dozen Federal, state and local law-enforcement agencies followed a trail that began with what one official described as a "wonderful treasure trove" of evidence, the suspect -- identified within hours of the attacks -- eluded every net and was caught only by chance.


Trade Accords Have Sown Violent Seeds
To the Editor:
Having declared the North American Free Trade Agreement "a death sentence" for Mexico's Indians, the rebel leader Subcomandante Marcos has written to the new President, "Welcome to the nightmare" (news article, Dec. 29).


For NATO, Expansion Could Prove Fatal
To the Editor:
Zbigniew Brzezinski acknowledges in "NATO -- Expand or Die?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 28) that neither the North Atlantic Treaty Organization nor its prospective new members from the former Soviet bloc are facing any imminent Russian threat.
Yet he demands an immediate expansion of NATO.
Why?


Fistfight Costly for 2 Gators
Thanks to a team curfew, the Florida players stayed off the crowded, raucous streets of the French Quarter on New Year's Eve.
They did not, however, stay out of trouble.
At the team's group meal Saturday night at the Superdome, two Florida players engaged in a fistfight that ended with one player in a local hospital and the other on his way home to Gainesville.


Burden of Proof on Mexico's President Tonight
When President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon goes on national television Monday night to outline his plan for rebuilding the crippled Mexican economy, he will also be doing his best to convince investors that the Mexican market they once thought the world of was not a mirage.
Mr.
Zedillo worked through the New Year's weekend to put the finishing touches on an economic-stabilization plan that will limit wages, prices and Government spending while lining up the financial backing of the United States and Canada, major European nations, American commercial banks and the International Monetary Fund.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-7  RUSSIANS AND REBELS BATTLE ON  The war between Russia and the separatist region of Chechnya turned into a vicious street brawl as Russian snipers entered the rebel capital of Grozny and battled Chechen soldiers.
Casualties were said to be heavy.  1


PRO FOOTBALL: It's a B+ Day in the N.F.L. as Browns and Bears Win; Strong Arm: Patriots Tossed By Testaverde
Al Testaverde of Elmont, L. I., was in Cleveland to lend his son Vinny some moral support in his first playoff game.
But he didn't attend the game against the Patriots at Cleveland Stadium this afternoon.
Vinny Testaverde doesn't know where his father spent the time during the game.
He speculates that his father spent part of the day at church, no doubt offering up a prayer on behalf of his son and the Cleveland Browns.
Testaverde thinks his father might have gone to a Cleveland mall to do some shopping.


A Ferry Gives Wall Streeters Speed Plus Socializing
Drinkers stood two deep at a horseshoe-shaped bar festooned with red and green holiday decorations.
Laughter spilled from brokers swapping graveyard jokes about the subway bomber.
A couple of financial analysts, the kind who probably would talk shop on their death beds, were huddled in a review of the day's trading on Wall Street.
The only unusual element was the setting.
The bar was on an 82-foot boat zipping across the open sea, heading through the darkness for the New Jersey coast.
The boat was half of the two-vessel, high-speed ferry fleet that runs daily between Monmouth County and Manhattan.


Burden of Proof on Mexico's President Tonight
When President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon goes on national television Monday night to outline his plan for rebuilding the crippled Mexican economy, he will also be doing his best to convince investors that the Mexican market they once thought the world of was not a mirage.
Mr.
Zedillo worked through the New Year's weekend to put the finishing touches on an economic-stabilization plan that will limit wages, prices and Government spending while lining up the financial backing of the United States and Canada, major European nations, American commercial banks and the International Monetary Fund.


No Headline
"What those in government have done, those in government can undo." -- GOV.
GEORGE ELMER PATAKI, of New York, in his inaugural address.  [ 1:6. ]


U.S.-India Textile Accord
The Clinton Administration said today that the United States and India had agreed on a deal to open the huge Indian market to American exports of textiles and clothing for the first time.
Under the pact, which is effective immediately, India has agreed to remove fibers, yarns and industrial fabrics from its restricted list and to provide immediate access for all other textile and apparel products.


Smoking Ban Is Tightened In Suffolk
It was a New Year's Day of football, beer and munchies at Jerry Cusack's bar and restaurant here on Route 111, and even though a tough new smoking ban had gone into effect in the county, many patrons were smoking as usual.
Under the new law, Mr.
Cusack and other restaurateurs do not face the threat of fines because of smokers until June 1, when the last of a series of new restrictions are to be phased in by Suffolk County.
For now, restaurant employees are supposed to tell patrons that the new regulations have taken effect and that they should not smoke.


1995's First Day, Before and After


Bombing Plot Seen in Notes, Official Says
Notes and drawings found in the home of Edward J. Leary, who is accused of being the subway firebomber, show that he planned to detonate bombs with motion-sensing devices and remote controls and to gun people down with a high-powered rifle as part of a terror campaign in the subways, a law-enforcement official said yesterday.
The two gasoline bombs that have been attributed to Mr.
Leary were both meant to explode aboard trains while they were in tunnels, possibly under the East River, to achieve the maximum carnage and panic, said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Both devices instead exploded in subway stations, and the official said that one went off sooner than intended and the other exploded much later than intended.


Cease-Fire in Bosnia Starts, and Sides Meet on Details
The agreement for a four-month cessation of hostilities in Bosnia and Herzegovina took effect at noon today, and shortly afterward Bosnian Government commanders met with officers from the Bosnian Serb army they have been fighting for 33 months.
The meeting, held at the Sarajevo airport, was the first of what will probably be a long series of sessions at which the two sides will negotiate details of the cease-fire.


'95 BOWL GAMES: Fiesta Bowl; Notre Dame Unranked, But Not Unmotivated
It was about the umpteenth time that Notre Dame Coach Lou Holtz had been asked whether the Irish, with their 6-4-1 record, deserved to be playing in a major bowl.
The line of questioning was starting to become annoying.
"Let me get this straight," Holtz said.
"We are playing a team that is one of the four best teams in the country, right? They've got the Heisman winner, and they got Bill McCartney retiring. And we're playing them in their section of the country. Then I assume we're, what, a 30-to-35-point underdog? But with all those things going, we're only a 7-point underdog. I guess somebody thinks we belong here."


37 Years Later, Father of Winter Tennis Is Recognized
His wait was 37 years. His story is unchronicled.
For almost four decades, Desmond Margetson received no credit for introducing the tennis bubble, which helped fuel the game's boom in the late 1960's by making the sport year-round for the general public.


Sports of The Times; It's a Long Journey For the Three M's
Marino, Montana and Moon.
The names lack the hallowed ring of Tinker to Evers to Chance, but the trilogy signifies a sense of generation as three quarterbacks approach the final defining points of their careers.


'95 BOWL GAMES: Sugar Bowl; A Chance For Pride Is Florida's Battle Cry
David Swain watches the sports reports on television, and they tug at his gut, a small ache that reminds him, constantly, of what he has missed.
Nebraska played Miami in the Orange Bowl tonight for the national championship.
Penn State plays Oregon on Monday in the Rose Bowl for a shot at that same title.
And Swain and his Florida teammates are here at the Sugar Bowl, waiting for a rematch against rival Florida State on Monday night that means everything to the Gators, but little to the championship picture of which they thought they'd be a part.


Don't Put Pentagon In a Budget Fortress
To the Editor:
In the minds of many in Washington, as the 104th Congress prepares to go into session, must be the major budget cuts President Clinton has announced for five Federal agencies in an effort to pare $24 billion from the budget over the next five years, and the $25 billion more for military readiness that the President approved in December.


China Revamps Forces With Eye to Sea Claims
As Chinese diplomats talk of peaceful coexistence with their Southeast Asian neighbors, China's military leaders are refurbishing a portion of their large and antiquated military to enforce claims of sovereignty over the South China Sea and its resources, Chinese and Western experts say.
In this effort, Chinese military leaders have nurtured specific industries to develop advanced weapons technology and are tailoring their naval and air forces for the region, the experts say, even as the country's overall level of military production is declining.


CHRONICLE
LYLE LOVETT figures his 15 minutes of fame arrived when he married JULIA ROBERTS 18 months ago.
The press scrutiny and public curiosity that followed their wedding has subsided, Mr.
Lovett said in an interview in yesterday's Los Angeles Times.


The President Welcomes '95 With Old Songs and Friends
"Life," the Southern boy's mother warned him, "is like a box of chocolates: You never know what you're gonna get."
With those thoughts, delivered in a wry, drawling homage to the fictional Forrest Gump, another Southern boy, Bill Clinton, welcomed 1995 this weekend, adding in his best self-mocking manner: "Maybe that's why I never liked chocolate."


The Neediest Cases; Helping Troubled Artist Regain His Self-Respect
Max Epstein once made a living as a print maker and painter, creating works suffused with color.
In one print, he studied the reflection of water in a lake, forming an imprecise, impressionistic image with a violent mix of primary hues.
In one of his landscapes, ducks swim in a lake under a vibrant blue sky punctuated with luminous red spheres of clouds.
Some of his works use photographic elements, like "The Whitney," a silk-screen print in that museum's collection.
It superimposes front and rear views of the museum, intensely contrasted in glowing oranges, greens and purples.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International  When Mexico's new President goes on television tonight, the challenge he faces will be to lay out specific plans for a financial recovery that will not worsen the country's simmering social problems.
President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon will also work to convince investors that the Mexican market they once adored was not imagined.
Mr.
Zedillo's stabilization plan will set much of Mexico's economic course for the year.  [ Page 39. ]


Pulp Fiction: Tough-Guy Huskers Stage Comeback
The coach has insisted, over and over for years and years, that the hardware was never worth as much as the process.
Tom Osborne has always been polite but firm when he said that.
He never denied wanting to have his Nebraska Cornhuskers win a national championship.
He just felt the hardware would only be worthwhile if the journey was, too.
Tonight, in the Orange Bowl, where so many of Nebraska's seasons had reached climaxes that ranged from mere disappointment to unforgettable heartbreak, Osborne's Huskers culminated a process that could proudly be placed on any trophy case.
With quarterback Tommie Frazier, in his first game since surgery to solve recurring blood clots, leading a fourth-quarter comeback, the Huskers defeated Miami, 24-17, in the 61st Orange Bowl.


'Sunset' Matinee Canceled
Yesterday's matinee of "Sunset Boulevard" was canceled because the musical's elaborate mechanized sets malfunctioned.
A box-office employee at the Minskoff Theater, who would not give her name, said only that some sets, which include a mansion that rises off the stage, did not work properly and that the patrons' money had been refunded.
No performance is scheduled today, and the box-office employee said it was hoped that the problem could be fixed by tomorrow.


Angelo Del Toro, Legislator From East Harlem, Dies at 47
Assemblyman Angelo Del Toro, an influential East Harlem Democrat who has represented his community in the State Legislature since 1975, died on Friday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan while undergoing a routine kidney dialysis procedure.
He was 47.
Mr.
Del Toro died of a heart attack, said Vincent Marchiselli, a friend and former colleague in the Assembly.
He said that Mr.
Del Toro, who had been under treatment for kidney disease since the late 1970's and underwent dialysis every week, had survived two heart attacks earlier this month.


A Quieter Hum In the Southwest
Across America, the economy of the 1990's is shaping up as the mirror image of the 1980's.
A decade ago, California and the East Coast were booming; today, they lag behind the rest of the country.
The Midwest, then known as the Rust Belt, buckled.
Now an industrial revival is restoring much of the original finish to the region.


Lurking On-Line: The Electronic Eavesdroppers
Each day, millions of people log on to computer networks to discuss their lives with complete strangers, whether on safe subjects like pet grooming, lurid topics like foot fetishes or emotionally wrenching issues like alcoholism or child abuse.
But for every person chatting in one of these conversations, many more are eavesdropping -- a practice known in the electronic community as lurking.
Lurking used to be one of the on-line world's most disdained practices.
But just as the Internet community has been forced grudgingly to accept millions of new arrivals to the neighborhood, so has it been forced to accept lurking as an inevitable consequence of all those curious, shy or nosy newcomers.


Forward, but How Fast, in Interactive TV?
Is this the year that video viewers will finally begin demanding "video on demand"?
Depends on whom you listen to.


Microsoft's Rivals Are Hearing Louder Footsteps
This may not be the year that the Microsoft Corporation finally takes over the world, but the world's biggest independent software company is hoping to consolidate its hold over large chunks of the personal computer software industry.
Already, the company has made a trademark of the new year by naming the latest version of its industry-dominant operating system Windows 95.
And even though Microsoft recently announced that shipments of the new Windows may be delayed until August, in the battle for what marketers call mind share, the product has already won.


Site-Seeing on the World Wide Web
For anyone with a computer, modem and so-called browser software, the place to be in 1995 is the World Wide Web, a section of the Internet overflowing with sights and sounds.
Each of the thousands of World Wide Web sites opens with a "home page" --which serves as both a table of contents and Alice's rabbit hole into a world that may be beautiful, bizarre or banal.


Highlights
Nasdaq Is on the Ropes
Nasdaq suffered a one-two-three punch.
First, a left jab from two professors who released a study in May showing that 25-cent spreads were the norm on the Nasdaq stock trading system, while 12.5-cent spreads were the norm for the big exchanges. (Brokers make their money using spreads, which let them buy and sell at different prices. The larger the spread, the larger the fee.) Then, a right hook from plaintiffs in a wave of class-action lawsuits against the main market makers -- touched off by the professors' study, which Nasdaq said was flawed.
And finally, an uppercut from the Justice Department, which said in October that it was investigating the dealers who make Nasdaq markets, the apparent focus being on a suspicion of price fixing.
Joseph Jett's Fame as a Phantom
One way or another, it seems, Orlando Joseph Jett was bound to gain fame in 1994.
Early in the year, the 36-year-old chief government bond trader at Kidder, Peabody (who goes by his middle name) was declared Employee of the Year -- and was rewarded with a $9 million bonus.
But before summer, he was held out as a villain who is said to have exploited glitches in the brokerage firm's accounting systems to take credit for $350 million in phantom profits, or profits that existed only on paper.
Kidder's parent, General Electric, quickly reduced previously reported profits by $210 million and then sold off the brokerage firm, all the while pointing to Mr.
Jett.
Later the New York Stock Exchange said it was punishing Mr.
Jett -- he refused to testify before the exchange's enforcement division -- by banishing him from trading securities or working for any employer affiliated with the exchange.
This has essentially barred him from Wall Street, which suffers from herd mentality, at least in this regard. (So far Mr. Jett, who has strongly denied any wrongdoing, is a phantom defendant: No charges have been filed in the complex case, which is being investigated by the S.E.C. and the United States Attorney's office in Manhattan and promises more drama this year.) Read at Your Own Risk
It only began creeping into the vernacular in the spring of 1994; by year-end, mention of the word could jangle the nerves of a wide set of investors. (WARNING: The following material is not recommended for readers with high blood pressure.) Derivatives.
Derivatives -- financial instruments with values linked to some underlying asset like a bond, stock or index -- stung corporations like Gibson Greetings and Procter &amp; Gamble, mutual funds run by Piper Jaffray and Paine Webber, and municipalities across the country.
But nowhere was the failure of investment plans using some derivatives more dramatic than in Orange County, Calif.
The county's risky plan, which also included heavy borrowing, led to the biggest municipal bankruptcy ever.
Schoolchildren may get a chilling lesson in financial tomfoolery: the county's schools, which were required by state law to put their funds through the county's investment pool, may run out of money to pay salaries.
A Lighter Load to the Bank
No need to enlist Brinks trucks to pick up bonuses this year, folks.
Your Range Rovers will do.
Goldman, Sachs, one of Wall Street's richest investment firms, prided itself on outdoing its rivals in past industry downturns.
But not this time: Goldman is struggling to make money as are other firms that rely heavily on bond trading, including Lehman Brothers, Salomon Brothers and Bear, Stearns.
They were all blind-sided by rising interest rates last year.
Goldman's elite securities traders and investment bankers are seeing their discretionary bonuses chopped by as much as 75 percent. (In good years the bonuses can be several times their annual salaries, which are often in the high six figures, at least.) The firm had its first round of layoffs in years in 1994, and more are expected this year.
Goldman's support staff is also seeing smaller bonuses; they are down to 8 percent from 30 percent a year ago.
Prudential's Burgeoning Tab
What Prudential executives thought would be put behind them last year for a relatively small price of $330 million is still an albatross -- one that's costing the insurance giant at least twice as much.
In the 1980's the company's Prudential Securities unit defrauded hundreds of thousands of investors who joined the limited partnerships it had set up and billed as safe.
Small investors lost billions.
Claims against the company's $660 million restitution fund are still flowing in: at the middle of last month, the number of filings was higher than ever.
More than 56,000 claimants have already received $397 million, while more than 152,000 have filed claims.
Filings can be made as late as a year from the postmark date on the forms Prudential began mailing a year ago this month.
If the $660 million doesn't cut it, Prudential will have to pony up even more.


Fast-Starting Colorado Outclasses Notre Dame
Notre Dame had hoped to prove those people wrong, who said it didn't deserve to be in a major bowl after a 6-4-1 regular season.
While that remains subject for debate, one thing was clearly proven at the Fiesta Bowl this afternoon: the unranked Irish didn't belong on the same field with the Colorado Buffaloes.
In a game that was essentially over after two quarters, the Buffaloes breezed to a 41-24 triumph before 73,968 at Sun Devil Stadium.
Quarterback Kordell Stewart outdid his Heisman Trophy-winning tailback Rashaan Salaam by registering a Colorado bowl-game record 368 yards of total offense.
Stewart, who passed for one score and ran for another, threw for 226 yards and rushed for 143.


Derivatives Draw More Scrutiny
Well, at least the financial system didn't collapse last year and cause worldwide chaos.
For the beleaguered Wall Street rocket scientists who create and sell the newfangled deals broadly known as derivatives, that is as good as news got in 1994.


OUTLOOK 1995: Global Economic Prospects Are Brighter for Most; Continued Vitality For Southeast Asia
Economic prospects around the world look better this year than last.
The decision by several large countries to sell off Government-controlled industries is one big engine of growth.
Yet deficits, inflation and joblessness keep hampering the pace of recovery in many countries.
For many nations, 1994 was a turnaround year as they began pulling out of recession.
Some of the hottest economies, and targets of foreign investment, emerged in once-overlooked markets of Southeast Asia and Latin America.


Salaam Decides to Go Pro
Realizing his incredible 1994 season would be a difficult act to follow, Heisman Trophy winner Rashaan Salaam will skip his senior season and declare himself eligible for the National Football League draft.
"I broke a lot of records and there's nothing left for me to do on the college level," Salaam said today, moments after scoring three touchdowns to help lead Colorado to a 41-24 victory over Notre Dame in the Fiesta Bowl.
"Hopefully, I can take all this talent I've got and have the same success on the N.F.L. level."


Southeast's Lure: Jobs, Jobs, Jobs
Across America, the economy of the 1990's is shaping up as the mirror image of the 1980's.
A decade ago, California and the East Coast were booming; today, they lag behind the rest of the country.
The Midwest, then known as the Rust Belt, buckled.
Now an industrial revival is restoring much of the original finish to the region.


MARKETS &amp; INVESTING: A Wild Ride for Emerging Markets; A Choppy Ride for Europe?
The major markets in Europe generally did not do much last year, but there was plenty of action out on the volatile new frontiers of emerging markets, enriching some investors and impoverishing others.
In Brazil, the Bovespa equity index finished the year up by well over half in dollar terms, and other markets in Peru and Chile were not far behind.
But the losers were almost as conspicuous as the winners.
The new stock markets in China's burgeoning cities of Shanghai and Shenzhen ended 1994 down by more than a third.
The most embarrassing performance was turned in by Turkey's stock market, whose value was cut 49 percent over the year.
The Turkish market was a big winner in 1993.


A Trim Heartland Flexes Its Muscles
Across America, the economy of the 1990's is shaping up as the mirror image of the 1980's.
A decade ago, California and the East Coast were booming; today, they lag behind the rest of the country.
The Midwest, then known as the Rust Belt, buckled.
Now an industrial revival is restoring much of the original finish to the region.


OUTLOOK 1995: THE ECONOMY Industry Groups Cope With Cost-Cutting and Consolidation; Retailers Battle Mostly Over Prices
Retailing has become a commodity business in many ways.
These days stores are distinguished less by their merchandising flair than by their pricing strategies, which give consumers a powerful weapon.


METRO DIGEST
CRIME RATE FALLS, BUT WORRIES PERSIST
The official police statistics show there has been a double-digit decrease in crime in the last year in the Sunset Park section of Brooklyn, with fewer rapes, robberies and car thefts.
But the standard scene outside Nereida Rodriguez's apartment window has not changed much.
Men deal drugs.
Groups of youths, exchanging the handshakes that identify them as gang members, hang out on the street corner.
The sirens of police cars and ambulances scream regularly.
Community leaders and residents of Sunset Park say the distance between the reality of their lives and the numbers put out by the Police Department offer a telling example of the sometimes limited meaning and impact of crime statistics.
A1.


Russian Military Journalist Is Killed
Vladimir Zhitarenko, 54, a correspondent for the military daily Krasnaya Zvezda, died Saturday night after being shot in the head as he covered the fighting in Chechnya, the Russian Defense Ministry announced today.
He was the second journalist to die covering the Chechnya war.
Cynthia Elbaum, 28, an American photographer, was killed during a bombing attack in Grozny on Dec. 22.


Talks Held on Prosecuting Suspect in Clinic Shootings
State prosecutors from Massachusetts and Virginia negotiated today with Federal officials to decide who should go first in prosecuting John C. Salvi 3d, the New Hampshire man accused of attacking abortion clinics outside Boston and here in Norfolk.
Mr.
Salvi, described by friends as a melancholy 22-year-old loner, is to be arraigned here on Tuesday before a state judge on charges of shooting into an occupied building.


A Trim Heartland Flexes Its Muscles
Across America, the economy of the 1990's is shaping up as the mirror image of the 1980's.
A decade ago, California and the East Coast were booming; today, they lag behind the rest of the country.
The Midwest, then known as the Rust Belt, buckled.
Now an industrial revival is restoring much of the original finish to the region.


If at First You Don't Succeed, Try the Playoffs
The Cleveland Browns' coaches and players might want to get on the telephone to Chicago this week and get a few pointers on how to beat a division opponent in the playoffs that they didn't have any success against during the regular season.
The Bears dismantled the Vikings, 35-18, in a National Football Conference wild-card game on Sunday and will play at San Francisco on Saturday.
The Vikings had beaten Chicago twice during the season in N.F.C.
Central Division games, but it didn't matter on Sunday as the Bears completely outplayed their opponent.


U.N. Leader to Call for Changes in Peacekeeping
As the United Nations prepares to celebrate its 50th birthday in 1995, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali will start the year by recommending to the Security Council ways to avoid problems that have threatened peacekeeping operations since the cold war ended.
There is an urgency, he says.
Peacekeeping must be streamlined if it is not to overwhelm and paralyze an organization that has so many other jobs to do.


Police Reclaim East Village With the Help of Residents
On a recent Friday night, Police Officer Al Kohler crawled flat across the roof of a seven-story housing project on the Lower East Side of Manhattan and watched through a pair of binoculars as a group of young men brokered a drug deal on the sidewalk below.
"He made the sale," whispered Officer Kohler while one youth counted the money and another hid the cocaine under a garbage bag.
"The one in the tan jacket."


Micro-Machines Help Solve Intractable Problem Of Turbulence
LIKE crowds of tiny judo wrestlers trained to exploit the power of vastly stronger adversaries, arrays of machines the size of pinpoints are being developed to substitute "smart" control of airplanes and ships for conventional, energy-sapping mechanisms like rudders.
Microelectromechanical systems, or MEMS, as they have been named, also show promise as a means of reducing the turbulent drag that slows aircraft and ships, impedes flow in blood vessels, complicates the automatic administration of drugs in a patient's body and causes many other problems.


OUTLOOK 1995: TECHNOLOGY &amp; MEDIA New Rockets, and Destinations, in Cyberspace; Vroom! Digital Engines Put a Pedal to the Metal
In the muscle-car 1960's, a generation of teen-agers grew up on songs like "Hey Little Cobra," "Dead Man's Curve" and "Little G.T.O." Even now, many 40-something Americans still feel a carbureted chill whenever they hear snatches of lyrics like "three deuces and a four speed, and a 389."
These days, though, Holley carbs, horsepower and cubic inches are passe.
The real speed thrills are to be found roaring down the info highway, where the measure of muscle is MIPS (millions of instructions per second) and bandwidth (how much data can be sucked through a network hose in a single gulp).


Officially, Crime Is Dropping, But Brooklyn Is Still Worried
The official police statistics show there has been a double-digit decrease in crime in the last year in the Sunset Park section of Brooklyn, with fewer rapes, robberies and car thefts.
But the standard scene outside Nereida Rodriguez's apartment window has not changed much.
Men deal drugs.
Groups of youths, exchanging the handshakes that identify them as gang members, hang out on the street corner.
The sirens of police cars and ambulances scream regularly.
"My 5-year-old son sits in that window, in the morning and at night, and he asks me what those people are doing -- if they are bad, if they are going to hurt us," said Ms.
Rodriguez, whose apartment looks out on Fifth Avenue.
"I try to answer him as best I can. But I don't know."


Patchy Fog Hovers Over the Northeast
Across America, the economy of the 1990's is shaping up as the mirror image of the 1980's.
A decade ago, California and the East Coast were booming; today, they lag behind the rest of the country.
The Midwest, then known as the Rust Belt, buckled.
Now an industrial revival is restoring much of the original finish to the region.


Studio Budgets: A River Wild
At Sony Pictures Entertainment the mood is so bleak these days that executives, over the holiday season, were exchanging graveyard jokes.
The latest one: What's the difference between Sony and the Titanic?
The Titanic had entertainment.
It was not quite that grim elsewhere in Hollywood, but neither was there much holiday cheer.
The Sony Corporation's staggering $2.7 billion write-off on Sony Pictures Entertainment -- which includes Columbia and Tristar -- shocked Hollywood for two reasons when Sony announced the news late last year.


No Headline
"The way the media portray him, you'd think he didn't want to just start up orphanages, but burn them down, too." -- JANET SHERMAN, a Denver homemaker, on Newt Gingrich.  [ A16:2. ]


OUTLOOK 1995: THE ECONOMY Industry Groups Cope With Cost-Cutting and Consolidation; Synergen Reflects Biotech's Woes
Sometimes the fortunes of a single company can speak to the state of an entire industry.
Sadly, for the biotechnology industry in 1994, that company was Synergen Inc., which entered the year weakened and exited acquired.
Synergen stock once traded as high as $67 a share, for a market value of about $1.7 billion, but plummeted after the company's lead drug repeatedly failed in clinical trials.
That, along with several other failures of high-profile biotech drugs this year, contributed to a protracted decline in all biotech stocks.
In November, the Amgen Corporation, one of the handful of profitable biotech companies, agreed to acquire Synergen for just $240 million in cash, or $9.25 a share.


Hiring Freeze Is First Order From Pataki
On his first day at work as Governor, George E. Pataki today ordered a freeze on the hiring of some state workers as he had promised, a move he acknowledged was but a small step toward grappling with the state's worsening finances.
Seated at the head of a long table in his new office, Mr.
Pataki scratched his signature onto paper with a red pen, lifted the document above his shoulder and announced: "Here we go. Executive Order No. 1."
It was his only official act in public on a day when the new administration began to turn from a weekend of festivities to the reality of fulfilling the ambitious changes Mr.
Pataki has pledged.
In the early afternoon, he and his wife, Libby, completed the inaugural celebrations by greeting several hundred guests -- including some picked in a lottery at the swearing-in ceremony -- on the first floor of the Executive Mansion.


Barry Pledges Integrity for Government in Washington
Vowing to "bring integrity back into government" and to rebuild his deteriorating city "from the ground up," Marion S. Barry Jr. was sworn in today for a fourth term as Mayor of the District of Columbia.
Mr.
Barry, who overcame a personal and political disaster -- a misdemeanor drug conviction and six months in prison after the Federal Bureau of Investigation videotaped him smoking crack cocaine in 1990 -- had campaigned as "the candidate of the last, the lost, and the least," and as a bridge between the city's poor blacks and affluent whites.


Searching Your Attics For Hidden Storage
DOS is dead, but not everybody knows it.
Quarterdeck Office Systems of Santa Monica, Calif., continues to improve its memory manager, and QEMM 7.5 is faster and smoother than previous versions.
Since MS-DOS 6.x has its own memory manager, Memmaker, I tried that first on a 486/DX2/66.
The machine contains 16 megabytes of random access memory, to keep several Microsoft Windows programs open at the same time.
But DOS neither knows nor cares about 15 of those megabytes.
It deals with the first megabyte only.
In fact, it really deals with only the first 640 kilobytes, conventional memory; the rest of the first megabyte, upper memory, running from 640K to 1,024K, is reserved for special purposes.
But not all that upper memory is occupied, and that is where memory managers find spaces to shift things from conventional memory.


Basic Nursing Care
To the Editor:
I was startled to read (news article, Dec. 25) that the Federal Agency for Health Care Policy and Research was calling routine care for the treatment of bed sores (decubitus ulcers) "improved care," and thus a vehicle for saving money.


California Starts To Chase the Blues
Across America, the economy of the 1990's is shaping up as the mirror image of the 1980's.
A decade ago, California and the East Coast were booming; today, they lag behind the rest of the country.
The Midwest, then known as the Rust Belt, buckled.
Now an industrial revival is restoring much of the original finish to the region.


U.A.B. Hires Coach
The former Vanderbilt coach, WATSON BROWN, was picked yesterday to guide Alabama-Birmingham into big-time football and out of the shadow of Alabama and Auburn.
Brown, offensive coordinator at Oklahoma the past two seasons, was one of seven people who interviewed for the job of taking U.A.B. from National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I-AA play to Division I-A, beginning in 1996.
Meanwhile, the man who takes over Brown's former school, the Cleveland quarterbacks coach ROD DOWHOWER, took a break from playoff preparations to fly to Nashville and be introduced as Vanderbilt's 23d head coach. (AP)


For Funds in '94, There Was No Place to Hide
FOR the millions of Americans who invest in mutual funds, 1994 feels like the punchline of a not-very-funny joke.
How bad was it?


G.O.P. Starts Expanding TV Coverage
Whatever happens in the new Congressional era of Republican control, citizens will be able to witness more of it.
Striving for a new aura of openness, the Republicans have agreed to allow television cameras into most committee meetings and daily press briefings with the House Speaker and the Senate majority leader.
Both houses are still weighing whether to allow C-Span to operate its own cameras in the chambers and to allow those cameras free rein.
Currently, cameras are operated by Government employees, who focus only on the person speaking and feed those shots to C-Span.


Congress and White House Split on High Tech
Newt Gingrich versus Al Gore: warriors in cyberspace?
Look for some big new battles on the electronic frontier this year as Newt Gingrich and his Republican followers in Congress face off against the Clinton Administration over Government policies to promote new technology.


Florida State Takes Rematch and Bowl Record
When the sellout crowd settled into their seats for tonight's Sugar Bowl, there was a message, of sorts, on the Superdome scoreboard.
The score, prior to kickoff, was listed as Florida State 31, Florida 31.
The quarter was listed as the fifth.
This game was billed as a rematch -- one that offered Florida a shot at redemption and Florida State a chance to further humiliate its intrastate rival.
On Nov. 26, the Seminoles had rallied from a 31-3 fourth-quarter deficit to tie the Gators, 31-31, in the waning seconds of a regular-season game.


Unwary Drivers Take A Nasty Detour on I-95
To the Editor:
The Associated Press article on the "missing link" of I-295 in southern New Jersey (Dec. 23) mentions "the last break in the interstate highway system designated by the number 95 that links Portland, Me., with Miami, Fla."


OUTLOOK 1995: Global Economic Prospects Are Brighter for Most; Daunting Challenges For China's Leaders
Economic prospects around the world look better this year than last.
The decision by several large countries to sell off Government-controlled industries is one big engine of growth.
Yet deficits, inflation and joblessness keep hampering the pace of recovery in many countries.
For many nations, 1994 was a turnaround year as they began pulling out of recession.
Some of the hottest economies, and targets of foreign investment, emerged in once-overlooked markets of Southeast Asia and Latin America.


Saatchi Co-Founder Is Said To Cut Ties to Ad Company
Maurice Saatchi, the deposed chairman of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company, will turn down the job of chairman of its flagship advertising agency, completing his break with the giant ad company that he founded with his brother Charles, The Times of London reported today.
"I have decided to say 'no,' " The Times quoted Mr. Saatchi as saying.


Penn State Wins Rose Bowl


OUTLOOK 1995: THE ECONOMY Industry Groups Cope With Cost-Cutting and Consolidation; Consumer Stocks Could Gain Luster
Although they have had their moments in 1994, consumer-products companies have not exactly set the world on fire, or more specifically, inflamed investors with passion for consumer stocks.
But if the economy slows in 1995, an increasing number of investors may be looking to consumer-products companies with strong growth prospects.
The reason?
They are a useful alternative to the companies whose products are linked to the ups and downs of the economy.


THE ECONOMY
The Current Recovery Deserves More Respect. PAGE C3.
For Fed Watchers, It's a Time of Wait and Guess. PAGE C4.


The Patakis' Open House


Ruling Revises Polar Bear Ad
The Coca-Cola Company has won an injunction requiring the Polar Corporation, a 112-year-old family-run soft-drink business, to revise an ad that shows a polar bear tossing a Coke can into a trash bin.
"We will comply with the judge's ruling, which affirms our right to use a polar bear in the ad, but limits us from discarding the can," said Christopher Crowley, vice president of manufacturing at Polar.


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


Knoxville Journal; Company's Fall Is Dash of Cold Water but Not a Dashing of Hope
Across the street from two glass towers built by two banking brothers who went broke in the mid-80's, Jake and C. H. Butcher Jr., sits the emptying shell of the empire that Christopher Whittle built.
Some Knoxvillians call the spot, the corner of Maine and Gay Streets, Ego Intersection.


Talk of Middle-Class Tax Cut Makes Wall St. Uneasy
Wall Street is watching warily as leaders of the new Republican majority in Congress and the Clinton Administration vie for the hearts and minds of the middle class with promises of tax relief.
Topping the Republican proposals is a bonus for investors -- an exclusion of 50 percent of long-term capital gains from taxable income.
The measure would lower capital gains taxes to a range of 7.5 percent to 19.6 percent.
President Clinton has countered with a 30 percent exclusion, resulting in taxes of 10.5 to 28 percent, the top rate now.


Execution Stay Denied Man Who Texas Concedes Did Not Kill
By a vote of 6 to 3, the Supreme Court today denied a stay of execution for a Texas man who, the state has conceded, did not kill the victim of a kidnapping and murder for which he was convicted in 1987.
While the Court reviews and denies numerous requests for stays of execution, the appeal brought on behalf of Jesse Dewayne Jacobs was unusual.
Mr.
Jacobs, who is scheduled to be executed on Wednesday, originally confessed to the crime but later recanted and said his sister had committed the murder.


Man Charged With Slaying Wife at Work
When Charles Smith called the Transit Authority on Sunday night, expressing concern that his wife had not returned home from her shift as an elevator operator at a Manhattan subway station, he was treated gently.
An authority worker, not wanting to break the news to him over the telephone that his wife had been found shot to death at work, suggested that he go to the station at 184th Street and Fort Washington Avenue.


Recovery Is Entitled to Respect
AT first, it was tagged the "jobless recovery." Then, the complaint was that average workers were still suffering from shrinking paychecks.
Now, the fear is that the Federal Reserve is about to squash any further growth.
The 1990's expansion, almost four years old, just can't get any respect these days.
But for all the naysaying, what is forgotten is that it's not just how fast you've been going, but how far you've come.
Comparing the 1990's economy at this point in its expansion with a similar point in the 1980's, this recovery looks similarly solid and durable.


Far From Home, a Couple Seek Medical Care for Their Ailing Son
In her pocket, Nadezhda Sivets carries a photo of her apartment building in Tajikistan, its walls battered by mortar shells.
But the civil war in her homeland is far from her thoughts now, and a more personal struggle dominates her life.
Mrs.
Sivets' son, Denis, has a rare disease, and she has spent years searching for an accurate diagnosis.
At 10, Denis is retarded, cannot speak and walks with a severe limp.
He was born healthy, but eight months later he developed a bacterial infection.
Doctors in Tajikistan, a former Soviet republic, mistakenly prescribed an overdose of antibiotics that damaged his brain and nervous system.


On My Mind; The Cruelest Hoax
The campaign for drug legalization grows in wallet and prestige.
But, as it picks up journalistic and academic endorsement and foundation money, one thing stays constant.
It remains now, as it always has been, one of the most cruel and selfish movements in America.
The great majority of Americans are against legalization.
So are the politicians they elect to office.


Heredity's More Than Genes, New Theory Proposes
MEN may deny it, yet there it is, immortalized in a popular song: "I want a girl just like the girl that married dear old dad." For their part, many women remain so romantically fixated on that first big guy in their lives that traits reminding them of their father -- an emotional coolness, say, or an irritable authoritarian streak -- seem irresistible, the embodiment of ideal masculinity.
And when the bombast and insecurities of youth have sloughed away, most of us realize that we often think, act, gesture, opine, vote, belch, fret and procrastinate just like our parents.
Such convergences of style and behavior may be the result of genetic predispositions; or they could stem from children and parents coexisting in a similar environment that prompts the expression of like-minded characteristics.


OUTLOOK 1995: Global Economic Prospects Are Brighter for Most; Europe's Economies Are in an Upswing
Economic prospects around the world look better this year than last.
The decision by several large countries to sell off Government-controlled industries is one big engine of growth.
Yet deficits, inflation and joblessness keep hampering the pace of recovery in many countries.
For many nations, 1994 was a turnaround year as they began pulling out of recession.
Some of the hottest economies, and targets of foreign investment, emerged in once-overlooked markets of Southeast Asia and Latin America.


That Big Payroll Tax Still Blocking the Ice
During the 10-day strike of 1992, the National Hockey League rented a political spin doctor from Canada.
"The season is over right now!" this man declared one day.
Of course, the season wasn't over.
Negotiations resumed and so did the season.
The current lockout, now in its 95th day, is being inflicted on players and fans by a new regime in league headquarters, a more effective bunch, too, which nevertheless retains some of the old flair.


Gingrich Says Social Security May Need New Look, but Not Now
The financing of Social Security may need a re-examination, but not right away, Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the incoming Speaker of the House, said in an interview broadcast today.
There was some political nerve in his comments.
Even though Democrats have for decades accused Republicans of plotting to subvert Social Security, Mr.
Gingrich rejected an invitation from the interviewer to agree that "you'll never touch it."


The Realities of Lives Contradict the Dreams
FELICIA'S JOURNEY
By William Trevor
213 pages. Viking. $21.95.
The title of William Trevor's latest novel, "Felicia's Journey," refers -- ironically, it turns out -- to the picaresque journey undertaken by so many traditional literary heroes, the allegory-laden journey that takes them from innocence to wisdom, from childhood to maturity.
Though Felicia does in fact achieve a kind of enlightenment, her journey, as the reader grimly learns, is neither predictable nor particularly felicitous.


Southeast's Lure: Jobs, Jobs, Jobs
Across America, the economy of the 1990's is shaping up as the mirror image of the 1980's.
A decade ago, California and the East Coast were booming; today, they lag behind the rest of the country.
The Midwest, then known as the Rust Belt, buckled.
Now an industrial revival is restoring much of the original finish to the region.


Seton Hall Gets Started in Second Half
Chided by their coach at intermission, the Seton Hall Pirates awakened from a first-half lethargy by scoring 49 points in the second half today on the way to their first Big East victory of the season, 72-54, over Miami at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Pirates shot 10 for 31 and were held to only 23 points in the first 20 minutes in what Coach George Blaney sarcastically told them was "the most exciting half" he had ever been involved in.


Ruling Revises Polar Bear Ad
The Coca-Cola Company has won an injunction requiring the Polar Corporation, a 112-year-old family-run soft-drink business, to revise an ad that shows a polar bear tossing a Coke can into a trash bin.
"We will comply with the judge's ruling, which affirms our right to use a polar bear in the ad, but limits us from discarding the can," said Christopher Crowley, vice president of manufacturing at Polar.


The Trials of the Other Tom, the New Kid on Mount Rushmore
NBC's investment in Sunday night's Orange Bowl (aside from the $7 million paid for the television rights) included an investment in the fortunes of Nebraska Coach Tom Osborne.
NBC made him a haunted plainsman, a living martyr bedeviled by past Orange Bowl losses and the inability to be labeled a national champion.
To judge by Bob Costas's pregame portrayal of Osborne, the preternaturally stoic coach could have doubled for Coach Allie Schweitzer: a son of Nebraska, an athletic "marvel" who starred for his small hometown college; possessed of "serene dignity," he has suffered "honor in defeat" but now sought an "end to his New Year's nightmare." Come let us adore him.


Derivatives Draw More Scrutiny
Well, at least the financial system didn't collapse last year and cause worldwide chaos.
For the beleaguered Wall Street rocket scientists who create and sell the newfangled deals broadly known as derivatives, that is as good as news got in 1994.


This Dr. Doom Wants Steelers in His Clutches
From the time Bill Belichick was in high school and helping his father break down Navy game films, from the time he was a 23-year-old unpaid assistant with the Baltimore Colts, from the time he was the defensive coordinator who helped the Giants win two Super Bowls, he projected a public image of seriousness to the point of gloom.
His Giants' players called him Dr.
Doom.
Now, at age 42 and in his fourth year as the head coach of the Cleveland Browns, he still projects that image.


Highlights
E-Cash Makes the Web Go Around
With people practically killing themselves to pile onto the Internet, which has been open to commercial traffic for three years now, it's surprising how long it took merchants and marketers to see the digital dollar signs.
But their awareness of the intense interest in this sprawling computer network was heightened in April when two Arizona lawyers received death threats after they posted an ad for their services -- in the wrong place: on thousands of cyberspace "bulletin boards" called news groups.
Now, on an "acceptable" advertising zone called the World Wide Web, everyone -- Adobe, Compuserve and MCI for starters -- is trying to get in on the act.
One company has even invented electronic cash.
It's meant to be transferable with clicks on a computer screen.
Its inventors also say it will protect spenders' privacy.
An Empire That's Likely to Strike It Rich
In Hollywood, where breathing is synonymous with hawking a movie deal of one sort or another, one threesome seems poised to succeed with a pop-culture empire like none before.
The Disney expatriate Jeffrey Katzenberg, the movie powerhouse Steven Spielberg and the record king David Geffen made plans for a new movie studio last year, in the biggest merger of Hollywood talent since Charlie Chaplin, Mary Pickford, Douglas Fairbanks and D. W. Griffith created the United Artists movie empire 75 years ago.
The three millionaires one-upped Mr.
Chaplin and his cohorts, though, by forming a precedent-setting TV production company with Capital Cities/ABC.
The venture will make TV industry history because it will be the first in which a broadcast network shares advertising income and other revenue with an outside producer.
Sony Turmoil Could Make a Camera Blink
Every time Sony turned around last year, it lost another big name.
Jon Peters, who along with Peter Guber once headed Sony's motion picture studio, ended his 4 1/2-year affiliation with Sony.
Mr.
Guber -- he became a multimillionaire when Sony bought his and Mr.
Is Fox in a Pickle or Not?
Can Rupert Murdoch get himself out of this one?
The close of a year in which Mr.
Murdoch's Fox network outbid CBS for N.F.L. football and lured away affiliated stations from ABC, CBS and NBC saw Fox get a paw of sorts caught in a Federal Communications Commission trap.
Fox has been challenged by NBC and the N.A.A.C.P., both of which say its structure violates an F.C.C. policy limiting foreign ownership of TV stations to 25 percent.
Fox is owned by the News Corporation, which is based in Australia.
Aha!
But control of Fox is held by Mr.
Murdoch, its chairman, who became an American citizen before his deal for Fox was completed.
Fox noted that the F.C.C. already approved the ownership structure -- in 1986.
The F.C.C. has been as tight-lipped as a recluse fur trapper about its investigation.
Mr.
Murdoch has vowed to challenge NBC's licenses.
Disney's Small and Eventful World
No one knows this tune better than Walt Disney: It's a world of laughter (all the way to the bank with wildly high proceeds from "The Lion King"), a world of tears (for its president, Frank Wells, who died in a helicopter crash last year).
It's a world of hopes (for buying a television network) and a world of fears (about failing with a historical theme park bordering Civil War battle sites like Bull Run). . . . .
Would Someone Put a Leash on Viacom?
In July, Viacom gobbled up Paramount.
Two months later, it absorbed Blockbuster Entertainment.
Viacom's chairman, Sumner M. Redstone, called his company a "global media colossus." No kidding.
The company's other properties include Simon &amp; Schuster books, the MTV: Music Television and Nickelodeon cable channels and 1.1 million cable TV subscribers.


Site-Seeing on the World Wide Web
For anyone with a computer, modem and so-called browser software, the place to be in 1995 is the World Wide Web, a section of the Internet overflowing with sights and sounds.
Each of the thousands of World Wide Web sites opens with a "home page" --which serves as both a table of contents and Alice's rabbit hole into a world that may be beautiful, bizarre or banal.


A Quieter Hum In the Southwest
Across America, the economy of the 1990's is shaping up as the mirror image of the 1980's.
A decade ago, California and the East Coast were booming; today, they lag behind the rest of the country.
The Midwest, then known as the Rust Belt, buckled.
Now an industrial revival is restoring much of the original finish to the region.


MARKETS &amp; INVESTING: Market Place; Risk Abroad May Keep U.S. Investors Close to Home
STOCK market investors didn't make much money last year though corporate profits were stunningly high.
The good news of profits being well above forecasts was offset by the fact that the Federal Reserve decided to push up interest rates -- and to keep doing so.
As 1995 begins, there is general confidence that the economy will remain strong at least for this year, although talk of a 1996 recession has emerged.
Corporate profits are generally viewed much more favorably than they were a year ago.
There is hope that the dollar has bottomed and that bonds will not fall much more.


Forward, but How Fast, in Interactive TV?
Is this the year that video viewers will finally begin demanding "video on demand"?
Depends on whom you listen to.


For Funds in '94, There Was No Place to Hide
FOR the millions of Americans who invest in mutual funds, 1994 feels like the punchline of a not-very-funny joke.
How bad was it?


A Woman With a Story to Tell Must Pay the Price
TRACY MEHM'S mistakes might not be the biggest in the world, but they could arm-wrestle Van Damme, no sweat.
Her first biggie was joining an "escort" service to work her way through Buffalo State College.
The second was telling her boss, once she had been arrested, that the police planned to visit.


OUTLOOK 1995: Global Economic Prospects Are Brighter for Most; Mexico Heads Back To the Drawing Board
Economic prospects around the world look better this year than last.
The decision by several large countries to sell off Government-controlled industries is one big engine of growth.
Yet deficits, inflation and joblessness keep hampering the pace of recovery in many countries.
For many nations, 1994 was a turnaround year as they began pulling out of recession.
Some of the hottest economies, and targets of foreign investment, emerged in once-overlooked markets of Southeast Asia and Latin America.


INSIDE
Preserving Peacekeeping
The United Nations Secretary General is recommending ways to avoid problems in peacekeeping since the cold war ended.
Page A3.
U.S.
Offers Hand to Mexico
The United States has agreed to pay for half of an $18 billion loan package to help Mexico stabilize the peso and ease its economic crisis.
Page A6.
Learning From Mom and Dad
A theory says that parental teaching by animals, including humans, can be handed down like a genetic inheritance.
Science Times, page B13.
Jewish Settlement Disputed
A dispute over a Jewish settlement took an uncertain turn when Israel halted construction at a site that Palestinians had protested.
Page A3.


OUTLOOK 1995: THE ECONOMY Industry Groups Cope With Cost-Cutting and Consolidation; Consumer Stocks Could Gain Luster
Although they have had their moments in 1994, consumer-products companies have not exactly set the world on fire, or more specifically, inflamed investors with passion for consumer stocks.
But if the economy slows in 1995, an increasing number of investors may be looking to consumer-products companies with strong growth prospects.
The reason?
They are a useful alternative to the companies whose products are linked to the ups and downs of the economy.


George Eells, 72, Writer and Editor
George Eells, a writer and editor and a biographer of such entertainment luminaries as Cole Porter, Mae West and Anita O'Day, died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 72 and lived in Greenwich Village.
The cause was pneumonia after complications from brain surgery in June, said Patrick Pacheco, a friend.


France Lifts Orly Limits
Dutch and Austrian airliners landed at Orly Airport today after France reluctantly opened the airport to further international and domestic competition.
The airport, 10 miles south of Paris, opened to KLM flights from Amsterdam and Lauda Air flights from Vienna.
Both airlines have been flying to Charles de Gaulle Airport, 16 miles north of the city.


Patterns
Tower Clothing
There is a certain fashion customer who responds only to sarcasm.
And that customer -- hip, disillusioned and teen-aged -- happens to be the target for Tower Clothing.


Saatchi Co-Founder Is Said To Cut Ties to Ad Company
Maurice Saatchi, the deposed chairman of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company, will turn down the job of chairman of its flagship advertising agency, completing his break with the giant ad company that he founded with his brother Charles, The Times of London reported today.
"I have decided to say 'no,' " The Times quoted Mr. Saatchi as saying.


Magazine Industry Is Declaring an End to Its Recession
As magazine executives tally final figures for what they say will probably turn out to be the industry's most successful year in terms of advertising pages and revenues, the magazine industry is cheerier than it has been in five years.
And with January and February issues already closed and March near complete, they say they have enough indication to believe that the industry-wide recession that refused to end is over.


CHRONICLE
Don't call HUGH GRANT an optimist.
He plays alongside Robin Williams in his first big Hollywood role, in the film "Nine Months," but he's not expecting fame to last, A.P. reported.


Congress and White House Split on High Tech
Newt Gingrich versus Al Gore: warriors in cyberspace?
Look for some big new battles on the electronic frontier this year as Newt Gingrich and his Republican followers in Congress face off against the Clinton Administration over Government policies to promote new technology.


California Starts To Chase the Blues
Across America, the economy of the 1990's is shaping up as the mirror image of the 1980's.
A decade ago, California and the East Coast were booming; today, they lag behind the rest of the country.
The Midwest, then known as the Rust Belt, buckled.
Now an industrial revival is restoring much of the original finish to the region.


Magic's Avent Knifed
ANTHONY AVENT, a reserve forward for the Orlando Magic, was knifed four times in his left arm during a weekend fight and needed 20 stitches and 20 staples to close the wounds.
"There was no damage that would inhibit him as a basketball player," the Magic said.


Brookline Shows Fervor In Keeping Clinics Open
The Brookline police used to call the job of guarding the abortion clinics in town "the baby killer detail." But when Operation Rescue made the clinics a target, back in 1988, everything changed.
"The town made a commitment: The clinics will be open," said Lieut.
Bill McDermott, a detective who made himself an expert on Operation Rescue, a radical group opposing abortion, and other anti-abortion groups.
"The police department backed it up. Even when they drove their cars up and cemented themselves in, we managed to keep the clinics open."


Tiny Clinic In Katmandu Solves Medical Mystery
THIS is a tale of the little clinic that could.
It involves Gurkhas, a tainted head of lettuce in the refrigerator of a British diplomat and a newly discovered disease that afflicts travelers around the world.
The disease begins with severe diarrhea, nausea and stomach cramps, then progresses to weeks of debilitating fatigue and loss of appetite.
Victims routinely lose as much as 15 to 20 pounds.
Travelers to warm climes seem particularly susceptible.


Major Religions Try to Live With Both Relevance and Tradition
To the Editor:
Re "Give Us This Day Our Daily Pablum" (Op-Ed, Dec. 27): It is a pity that David Klinghoffer is opposed to school prayer not because it is coercive and destructive of democratic principles but because any prayer that would pass constitutional muster would not be coercive enough to suit him.
Evidently, he would approve of a fire-and-brimstone prayer crafted by an Elmer Gantry if it slipped through the Supreme Court or was legalized by constitutional amendment.


Clinton on Home Soil for Rest and, Maybe, Some Excitement
President Clinton, the transplanted Arkansas traveler who has no real home but the White House these days, returned to his hometown today for a bit of post-New Year's relaxation, visits with old pals and the dedication on Wednesday of an elementary school named in honor of a former governor who worked to improve education in the state, William Jefferson Clinton.
"It's wonderful to be home," Mr.
Clinton told a crowd as Air Force One touched down at Adams Field shortly after noon.
"We're looking forward just to spending some personal time visiting with our friends, saying hello to people, driving around the state a little bit. And I'm even going to have a few hours tomorrow where I have nothing on the schedule for the first time in years and years."


Employee Killed in Lumber Store Robbery
An employee was shot to death yesterday when two hooded gunmen robbed a lumber warehouse store in Brooklyn, the police said.
Lieut.
William McKnee of the 67th Precinct detective squad said the two gunmen entered the store, the Lumber Headquarters, at 4212 Church Avenue in Flatbush, shortly before 11 A.M. and announced a holdup.
One of the robbers shot the victim once in the head before both fled on foot with an undetermined amount of cash from the register, detectives said.


Patchy Fog Hovers Over the Northeast
Across America, the economy of the 1990's is shaping up as the mirror image of the 1980's.
A decade ago, California and the East Coast were booming; today, they lag behind the rest of the country.
The Midwest, then known as the Rust Belt, buckled.
Now an industrial revival is restoring much of the original finish to the region.


A Lingering Unease Despite Strong Growth
RARELY since World War II have the world's most powerful economies surged forward so successfully at one time.
And rarely have their citizens been so worried that the good times are about to end before they get a share of the bounty.
In the United States, economic growth was the best in a decade, yet that did nothing to help Bill Clinton avoid the revenge of the middle class that led to the first Congress in 40 years controlled entirely by Republicans.
In Europe, even though prosperity is returning after a painful recession that sent the jobless rate back into double digits, Helmut Kohl held on to power in Germany only by his fingertips, John Major seems on his last legs in Britain, France is turning inward and Italy has returned to its perpetual state of political chaos.


Israeli Soldiers in Gaza Kill 4 Palestinian Police Officers
Israeli soldiers at the northern end of the Gaza Strip shot and killed four Palestinian police officers on Monday night in the deadliest encounter between the forces since Palestinian self-rule began in Gaza last May.
There were conflicting accounts of what happened in the shootings, which began in thick fog that enveloped the coastal strip.
Nor was it clear if the incident would have repercussions on Israeli-Palestinian peace talks that were already heavily burdened by disputes over Israeli settlements and other issues.


Back on the Job


By Design; Return of the Alligators
From time to time, a classic style becomes fashion.
It happened recently with the white cotton shirt and the sweater set.
Now it's the polo shirt.
Abbreviated polo shirts that bared the midriff appeared on the runways of Ralph Lauren's and Anne Klein's spring shows.
But the cognoscenti have been scooping up the original Chemise Lacoste polo shirts with the famous embroidered alligator logo.


Berlin's Lost Generation
We met at a restaurant in the chic Savignyplatz quarter in western Berlin.
It was shortly before Christmas, a festive season, yet the man was palpably ill at ease.
He said he felt like a victim of agoraphobia, becoming anxious away from his safe haven in eastern Berlin.
Indeed, he had visited western Berlin less than a dozen times since the wall was breached by the autumn revolution of 1989.
His wife said she overcame these terrors, out of need.
Three times a week she crosses the gone but hardly forgotten line, traveling 90 minutes each way from outlying Koepenick to Grunewald.
There she cleans house for an affluent westerner; along with her half pension, it is the couple's major source of income.
She has a university degree and is fluent in three languages.
Her husband, with a Ph.D. and an academic background, now helps a relative clean and maintain a vegetable farm.


Documenting What Motivated Those Who Helped Save Jews
Long before "Schindler's List" reached the screen, Marek Halter, a French writer descended from Jews in Poland, became obsessed with the idea of demonstrating that even at the darkest moments of the Holocaust, the Jews trapped in Nazi-run Europe were not without friends.
"I could never accept the notion that the whole world was against the Jews," he explained.
"I could not accept philosophically that there was no good, no generosity, left in the world. To do so would mean living inside a moral or existentialist bunker and that was too disagreeable."


Far From the Courtrooms, Tobacco's Rituals Endure
What is the 1995 outlook for tobacco?
Fraught and turbulent, but not inevitably disastrous.
If the industry was under a microscope in Washington last year, it is likely to be caught by television lights in 1995.
For the first time, a class-action suit of smokers who say they are addicted and diseased is going ahead, in a Florida state court.
So is a separate Florida class-action suit involving flight attendants who say they are ill from second-hand smoke.


Looking Ahead, Warily, to Brighter Days for Wall Street
Wall Street's prospects are looking brighter in 1995.
But after the pain of 1994, that may not be saying very much.
Most analysts predict that this year will be a more "normal" year for the industry, in part because they do not expect to be surprised by another sharp rise in interest rates.
A larger number of takeovers and mergers is expected to fuel the deal business for investment bankers, and the equity markets, which remained relatively strong in 1994, are expected to perform well, helping to lift profits above 1994 levels.


CHRONICLE
HOLLY HALSTED BALTHIS recalled that when she was named queen of the 1930 Tournament of Roses, she didn't have a crown and had to make her own dress -- although she was given $10 to buy the satin cloth.
Sixty-four years later, this year's queen, ALIYA HAQUE , was decked out in one of the official outfits: scarlet jacket, a black and white striped turtleneck and an oh-so short black miniskirt.


Magazine Industry Is Declaring an End to Its Recession
As magazine executives tally final figures for what they say will probably turn out to be the industry's most successful year in terms of advertising pages and revenues, the magazine industry is cheerier than it has been in five years.
And with January and February issues already closed and March near complete, they say they have enough indication to believe that the industry-wide recession that refused to end is over.


Alabama Unveils a Late Rally to Set Back Ohio State
CITRUS BOWL  Alabama 24 Ohio State 17
The tailback Sherman Williams raced 50 yards with a screen pass with 43 seconds to play to lift Alabama to a 24-17 comeback victory yesterday over Ohio State in Orlando, Fla.
Williams came out of the backfield to catch Jay Barker's pass and outraced defenders to the end zone, snapping a 17-17 tie.


Looking to G.O.P. For Political Change
Americans are waiting for Republicans to take over Congress to see if they can do what they promise and control the bureaucracy that many see as bloated even though they may not agree with Newt Gingrich.


OUTLOOK 1995: Global Economic Prospects Are Brighter for Most; Russia Faces Plenty Of Disappointment
Economic prospects around the world look better this year than last.
The decision by several large countries to sell off Government-controlled industries is one big engine of growth.
Yet deficits, inflation and joblessness keep hampering the pace of recovery in many countries.
For many nations, 1994 was a turnaround year as they began pulling out of recession.
Some of the hottest economies, and targets of foreign investment, emerged in once-overlooked markets of Southeast Asia and Latin America.


France Lifts Orly Limits
Dutch and Austrian airliners landed at Orly Airport today after France reluctantly opened the airport to further international and domestic competition.
The airport, 10 miles south of Paris, opened to KLM flights from Amsterdam and Lauda Air flights from Vienna.
Both airlines have been flying to Charles de Gaulle Airport, 16 miles north of the city.


A Moment in November Meant No. 2 for Penn State
The answer to the trivia question, now and forever, is Chris Dittoe.
The imperfect resolution of this college football season, with a bowl day made anticlimactic by an altered schedule and a politicized system that leaves its marks in history books, will include an unlikely central factor.
That is, Chris Dittoe, the substitute Indiana University quarterback.
His otherwise insignificant 5-yard touchdown pass, his looping, deflected, 40-yard score and 2-point conversion pass with time expired, all in the last 1 minute 49 seconds of a game that had already been determined, provided the bizarre finish to a 6-point Penn State victory that cost the Nittany Lions a share of a national championship.
On Nov. 5.
With starters watching from the sidelines.
A top spot in the coaches' poll was lost, and never regained.


OUTLOOK 1995: THE ECONOMY Industry Groups Cope With Cost-Cutting and Consolidation; Steel's Prospects Are Bright for '95
The domestic steel industry is looking forward to another good year, after a year when soaring demand from automobile and appliance makers had mills straining to fill orders.
With buyers so eager, the steel companies were able to push through several rounds of price increases, and prices are expected to continue rising.
Hot sales and higher prices brought profits to many companies that just a few year ago were struggling to stem losses and shrink capacity.
But few stood out as prominently as the AK Steel Corporation , formerly the foundering carbon steel division of Armco Inc.
Carbon steels are used in autos, appliances and structural applications.


Time on My Hands, Not to Mention My Schedule
AS the new year dawns, traditional paper calendars, planners and organizers promise to turn our messy lives into miracles of organization if only we adopt a few simple rules, write appropriate things in appropriate places and live our lives by the appointment book.
In demanding that we work the way they want us to, computers and organizers would seem to be made for each other.
Invariably, though, computerized personal information managers (PIM's to the cognoscenti) exhibit major flaws, particularly when formatting information for use on the go.
Now comes the Data Link watch, which sports the "Microsoft Windows Compatible" logo and, for about $100, promises to put your appointment book on your wrist.
The Timex Corporation makes this unusual timepiece and can be reached at (800) 367-8463.


Desert Preserve Favors Hunters Over Visitors
To the Editor:
"New Parks Mix Public and Private, Uneasily" (front page, Dec. 26) does an excellent job of describing the National Park Service's task in managing two new national parks, Death Valley and Joshua Tree, and the new Mojave National Preserve.


Chess
Strong players are emerging from the world's remotest areas despite cultural differences.
There is hardly a country in the world that is cut off from the chess scene.
In part this is because the diversity of languages is not an obstacle.
For example, one can communicate resignation of a game by the old-fashioned gesture of turning over the king, and one can offer a draw by crossing the index fingers to indicate a half-point.


A Rescued Autissier Expresses Gratitude
The French solo sailor ISABELLE AUTISSIER said yesterday that she was "very grateful" to the Australian Navy personnel who rescued her after she spent more than four days stranded in her stricken yacht in the southern Pacific.
Autissier, 38, who was competing in the BOC Round the World race, was rescued 750 nautical miles southwest of Adelaide on Sunday.
She was lifted off by winch from her stricken 18-meter yacht, the Ecureuil Poitou Charentes II, by the crew of a Seahawk helicopter and then transferred to the deck of the H.M.A.S.
Darwin.


OUTLOOK 1995: Forecasting 1994 Proved Hazardous; ...But He Was Way Too Low
None of the nation's most prominent forecasters was more pessimistic about what 1994 would bring for the American economy than Irwin L. Kellner, senior economic adviser at Chemical Bank.
"Everything pointed to weakness," he recalled recently.
Mr.
Kellner said he thought a year ago that the Clinton tax increase for the wealthy would inhibit spending among the rich, and that would have a ripple effect on the less affluent.
Neither happened.


2 Games for Fed Watchers: Waiting and Guessing
By the middle of 1995, either a lot of professional economists or a lot of bond traders and investors will be very, very embarrassed.
The consensus of traders and investors, as shown by prices in bond and futures markets, is that the Federal Reserve will push overnight interest rates up to 7 1/2 percent by June, from 5 1/2 percent now.
But economic forecasters are much less gloomy; one recent survey found that blue-chip forecasters' average estimate was for overnight rates of just 6.1 percent for the second quarter.


Mexico Delays Austerity Plan as Labor and Business Balk
President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon postponed a televised address to the nation tonight after Government officials were unable to reach an agreement with labor and business leaders on an austere package of wage and price controls.
Investors in both Mexico and the United States had been awaiting the message to see how Mr.
Zedillo was planning to rebuild Mexico's economy after a brutal devaluation two weeks ago that lowered the value of the Mexican peso by 30 percent.
The speech also was intended to rebuild investor confidence by showing that Mr.
Zedillo was firmly in control of the economy, an image undoubtedly obscured by the postponement.


Galloping Through the Mall
Away from the din of holiday sales, a girl took the reins of a noble steed and went for a spin yesterday at the Garden State Plaza mall in Paramus. (John Sotomayor/The New York Times)


Stock Market Analysts Expect Strong Finish to 1995
Somewhere, undoubtedly, there is handwringing over the prospect of a big, deep bear market this year.
Just as certainly, there are some market seers out there who expect very big things from the stock market in 1995.
But Wall Street analysts in the mainstream expect the stock market to be shaky in the first half and better later, with market average hitting highs for the year in the fourth quarter.
Most expect the blue-chip Dow Jones industrial average to trade within a narrow 400-point range this year.


History Shows Stocks Will Go Up (or Down)
Looking for a sure-fire way to use history to forecast the stock market?
Here are a few choices.
If they appear to be contradictory, don't let that bother you.
Some of them are sure to be right.
Fives are fine.
The stock market always goes up in years ending in the number 5, like 1995.
That record goes back to at least 1895, and over that stretch the average gain for the Dow Jones industrials in years ending in 5 has been an astounding 31.4 percent.
Much of that is because of an 81.7 percent rise in 1915, when World War I created tremendous demand for American products, but in four other 5's -- 1905, 1925, 1935 and 1975 -- the Dow gained at least 30 percent.


The Mall Hasn't Quite Yet Replaced Main St.
To the Editor:
"Free Speech in the Mall," your Dec. 26 editorial in support of the New Jersey Supreme Court's decision allowing leafletting in shopping malls fails to mention the premise on which the ruling is based: that malls have displaced downtown business districts as the center of commercial and social activity.
That premise is faulty for two reasons.


Many Doubt Truce Will Lead to Bosnian Peace
A missile slammed into the Holiday Inn in Sarajevo today, wounding no one but carrying an ominous warning to those who hope that the truce signed Saturday will prove a prelude to lasting peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It was perhaps the first but almost certainly not the last violation of the new truce, which is to last for four months while the Government and Bosnian Serbs seek to negotiate a peace treaty.


The Party's Over


Deal Makers' Phones Could Be Busy
Want to get into the media business?
Be sure to return all those calls from investment bankers like Allen &amp; Company, Lazard Freres, Salomon Brothers and Goldman, Sachs.
Indeed, 1995 should be a strong year for media deals, said Barry Diller, chairman of QVC Inc., the home shopping channel.
"There is an awful lot of ambition with new constituencies wanting to play," he said.
"Those are the conditions that can be counted on to produce action. You have Comcast, Cox and the new Continental Cablevision that will be public, and ITT."


Cathedrals Are Worth Price of Admission
To the Editor:
The admission charge at cathedrals in Britain (London Journal, Dec. 26) is not a new practice.
Considering the costs of a trip, it is a pittance.
Some cathedrals also charge for taking photographs.
One problem is that the place for payment is often far from the entrance.


Yearning To Breathe Free
Without being dour, Lorraine Canoe makes do with life in New York City, but it is not the same.
You can find all kinds of things, but the supermarkets do not stock deer meat or boiled corn bread.
In no borough are regular Mohawk ceremonies held for each of the year's 13 moons.
"And it's not easy trying to find someone I can talk Mohawk with," she said.


Talk of Middle-Class Tax Cut Makes Wall St. Uneasy
Wall Street is watching warily as leaders of the new Republican majority in Congress and the Clinton Administration vie for the hearts and minds of the middle class with promises of tax relief.
Topping the Republican proposals is a bonus for investors -- an exclusion of 50 percent of long-term capital gains from taxable income.
The measure would lower capital gains taxes to a range of 7.5 percent to 19.6 percent.
President Clinton has countered with a 30 percent exclusion, resulting in taxes of 10.5 to 28 percent, the top rate now.


Mr. Giuliani's Energetic First Year
At the inaugural ceremony last January, he was upstaged by the antics of his young son, Andrew.
But that was about the last time anyone questioned who is in charge at City Hall -- a measure of how thoroughly Rudolph Giuliani dominated city government and politics during a whirlwind and largely successful first year on the job.
He registered several notable accomplishments.
Mr.
Giuliani did not duck the city's deep financial troubles.
Instead he seized upon them to begin shrinking and rethinking the encrusted city bureaucracy, something that students of city affairs have been urging for years.


While Giants Are Watching, Tillman Is Still Running
Da Bears?
That's right, the Chicago Bears.
Don't believe in them, ridicule them if you want.
Go ahead.
Say they will lose by 50 points to San Francisco this weekend or make fun of their offense, saying it is normally about as exciting as a stoplight.
Say the National Football Conference's Central Division had four teams in the playoffs, and that's about four too many.
Laugh it up.
But between the giggling, the Bears players ask for one thing.


For Top Executives, Fed Is the Only Threat To Blue Skies Ahead
Outside the Taco Bell and Dunkin' Donuts shops in the suburbs north of here, help wanted signs are about as common as strip malls.
What is perhaps more surprising are the help wanted signs outside the factories.
"Thank you for considering us for employment," reads one sign outside L &amp; L Products, a maker of gaskets and other auto parts.


Whitecap Reservation Journal; AIDS Is Brought Sadly Home to Canada's Indians
He tells them of the abuse he endured in a residential school and in foster homes in Alberta, how at age 13 he was raped by a man in an Edmonton motel, of the rage that drove him to alcohol, drugs and petty crime as a member of an Edmonton street gang -- and finally of his fight against AIDS.
Ken Ward, 37, an Enoch Cree from northern Alberta, was the first Indian in Canada to declare publicly that he had tested positive for the human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS.
The diagnosis was made on Dec. 29, 1989, and he went public three months later.


OUTLOOK 1995: Forecasting 1994 Proved Hazardous; He Was Close, If for Wrong Reasons...
Among forecasters of 1994 economic growth, Larry J. Kimball was one of the few who was at least able to get his nose above water.
His forecast was almost high enough to match what actually happened.
When he laid out his 1994 projection more than a year ago, Mr.
Kimball, director of the Business Forecasting Project at the University of California at Los Angeles, anticipated strong home construction, strong business investment and strong auto sales.
All three happened.


OUTLOOK 1995: Global Economic Prospects Are Brighter for Most; Canada's Momentum Expected to Continue
Economic prospects around the world look better this year than last.
The decision by several large countries to sell off Government-controlled industries is one big engine of growth.
Yet deficits, inflation and joblessness keep hampering the pace of recovery in many countries.
For many nations, 1994 was a turnaround year as they began pulling out of recession.
Some of the hottest economies, and targets of foreign investment, emerged in once-overlooked markets of Southeast Asia and Latin America.


Osborne Is Finally The Champ
SO here came the Nebraska football fans, leaving the Orange Bowl after the game, pretty much assured of being national champions, yet looking as solemn as church mice.
Maybe they were a bit intimidated by walking into the city streets long after midnight, and did not want to antagonize Miami rooters.
"Smile! You won!" I said to a herd of them.
A few of them tentatively raised their dark red pom-poms and said, "Yay."


Dinosaur Theory: Sulfur Was Villain (but Hero for Humans)
THERE is yet another possible explanation for the catastrophe that befell Earth 65 million years ago, wiping out the dinosaurs and countless other species.
The agent of destruction might have been a global haze of sulfuric acid that blocked sunlight and plunged the planet into a dark, killing chill lasting decades.
This new hypothesis stems from geological studies of a buried crater in the Yucatan Peninsula of Mexico, a giant scar as much as 180 miles wide that is widely believed to be the site where a huge asteroid collided with Earth just before the time of the dinosaur extinctions.
Geologists found the rock in the crater, named Chicxulub, to be unusually rich in sulfur.
If it had not been, they concluded, the dinosaurs might well have survived the impact, thereby changing the course of evolution.


OUTLOOK '95: A Special Section
The nation's economylooks surprisingly strong and some of the world's most powerful economies are rebounding.
But many fear that America's vibrant growth may end as the Federal Reserve continues raising interest rates.
Though the economy has withstood the higher rates, most investors lost money last year.
Will they fare better in 1995?
A special section examines trends in business and the markets including complete year-end stock and mutual fund tables.
SECTION C (2 PARTS)


OUTLOOK 1995: THE ECONOMY Industry Groups Cope With Cost-Cutting and Consolidation; Military Industry Looks to Revamp
The megamergers between Grumman and Northrop, and Martin Marietta and Lockheed grabbed the headlines last year.
But the greatest strides in shrinking the military industry will come not from a bigger-is-better approach but from combining the overlapping operations of competitors.
The acquisition by GM Hughes Electronics of General Dynamics' missile business is perhaps the most vivid illustration of the virtues of such a practice.
It demonstrates how eliminating duplication and shuttering plants can shave costs, increase efficiency and bring in new business, at an increased profit.


Cigarettes: Both Ends of the Issue
Remember the lineup of tobacco company executives before a Congressional committee last year, chorusing their assurances that nicotine is not an addictive drug and that their companies do not manipulate the amount that goes into their cigarettes?
If not, you can see that comical display of corporationally correct thinking tonight on "Frontline."
"The Nicotine War" adds little to news accounts of the campaign by David A. Kessler, head of the Food and Drug Administration, to demonstrate that the cigarette is a means of transmitting nicotine into the body and hooking smokers and hence belongs under his agency's regulatory aegis.
But the program does a tidy job of packaging a dispute that, as the narrator notes, involves science, politics, jobs and public health.


Knicks Sign Kite For Bulk At Center
It wasn't so long ago that Pat Riley had nothing but negative things to say about somebody like Greg Kite.
That's when Riley was coaching the Los Angeles Lakers and Kite was an enforcer of sorts with the hated Boston Celtics and those two teams were dominating the National Basketball Association.


MARKETS &amp; INVESTING: A Wild Ride for Emerging Markets; Pacific Markets Wait for Dawn
The major markets in Europe generally did not do much last year, but there was plenty of action out on the volatile new frontiers of emerging markets, enriching some investors and impoverishing others.
In Brazil, the Bovespa equity index finished the year up by well over half in dollar terms, and other markets in Peru and Chile were not far behind.
But the losers were almost as conspicuous as the winners.
The new stock markets in China's burgeoning cities of Shanghai and Shenzhen ended 1994 down by more than a third.
The most embarrassing performance was turned in by Turkey's stock market, whose value was cut 49 percent over the year.
The Turkish market was a big winner in 1993.


G.O.P. SET TO LEAD CONGRESS ON PATH SHARPLY TO RIGHT
When the opening bell sounds Wednesday to usher in the 104th Congress, the Republicans, as the new majority, will begin their self-described revolution, putting on trial their fundamental belief that they can cure the nation's ills with less government, not more.
For the new Speaker of the House, Representative Newt Gingrich, and his Republican comrades, the first order of business will be to pass new House rules demonstrating that they are more open, responsive and businesslike than the old-order Democrats they have supplanted.
From there, they intend to reclaim for Congress the powers it has ceded to the White House since the New Deal, introducing one of the most ambitious legislative agendas in history as they set about overhauling Congress and the country.


Most Markets Take Holiday, but 2 Fall
On a day when many exchanges worldwide were closed, German stocks fell sharply yesterday and the Mexican market also closed lower.
While some exchanges were open in Asia, Europe and Latin America, all banks and financial markets in the United States were closed yesterday for the New Year holiday.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  REBELS BEAT BACK RUSSIANS  Chechen separatists triumphantly claimed to have battled Russian troops back to the edge of the rebel region's capital, Grozny, in fierce fighting in the steets.
A1


Most Markets Take Holiday, but 2 Fall
On a day when many exchanges worldwide were closed, German stocks fell sharply yesterday and the Mexican market also closed lower.
While some exchanges were open in Asia, Europe and Latin America, all banks and financial markets in the United States were closed yesterday for the New Year holiday.


MARKETS &amp; INVESTING: A Wild Ride for Emerging Markets; Ups and Downs In Latin America
The major markets in Europe generally did not do much last year, but there was plenty of action out on the volatile new frontiers of emerging markets, enriching some investors and impoverishing others.
In Brazil, the Bovespa equity index finished the year up by well over half in dollar terms, and other markets in Peru and Chile were not far behind.
But the losers were almost as conspicuous as the winners.
The new stock markets in China's burgeoning cities of Shanghai and Shenzhen ended 1994 down by more than a third.
The most embarrassing performance was turned in by Turkey's stock market, whose value was cut 49 percent over the year.
The Turkish market was a big winner in 1993.


ResultsPlus
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  Lady Vols Beat Arizona  Nikki McCray scored 22 points and Dana Johnson added 20 as No. 1 Tennessee beat Arizona, 109-57, yesterday in Knoxville, Tenn.
McCray made 10 of 12 shots for the Lady Vols (12-0).
Tennessee shot 63 percent en route to a 51-31 halftime lead over Arizona (5-7).
The Lady Vols used a 12-0 run to widen the gap to 63-33 four minutes into the second half and coasted from there.
The game was Tennessee's first since losing Tiffany Woosley, its senior guard, to a knee injury in Saturday's victory at Vanderbilt.
Woosley tore the right anterior cruciate ligament and probably is out for the season. (AP) MEN'S BASKETBALL  Parks Leads Duke Rout  Cherokee Parks scored 20 points to lead six players in the double figures last night, pacing No. 11 Duke to a 107-61 rout of visiting South Carolina State.
Parks also grabbed eight rebounds as Duke (9-2) ran its nonconference home winning streak to 94 games, dating to a 91-76 loss to Louisville on Jan. 12, 1983.
Trajan Langdon scored 17 points for the Blue Devils.
The Bulldogs are 2-7. (AP) TENNIS  Edberg Defeats Agenor  Top-seeded Stefan Edberg, the defending champion, defeated Ronald Agenor, 6-2, 7-6 (10-8), yesterday in the opening round of the Qatar Open in Doha.
Third-seeded Magnus Larsson, who won the year-ending Grand Slam Cup last month, defeated Karol Kucera, 6-1, 6-4, in the hardcourt warmup to the Australian Open. (AP) Siblings in Arms: The siblings Andrei Medvedev and Natalya Medvedeva teamed for a mixed doubles victory as Ukraine defeated Sweden, 2-1, in the first round of the Hopman Cup, an exhibition tournament in Perth, Australia.
Medvedev and Medvedeva defeated Mats Wilander and Asa Carlsson, 6-2, 6-2, to win the matchup. (AP) Teammates Advance: Patrick Rafter, Richard Fromberg and Jamie Morgan -- Australian Davis Cup teammates -- advanced at the Australian Hardcourt event in Adelaide.
Rafter, seeded fifth, beat compatriot Todd Woodbridge, 7-6 (7-3), 6-1.
Fromberg defeated Jonathan Stark, 6-4, 6-2, and Morgan beat Byron Black, 4-6, 6-2, 6-4. (AP) HORSE RACING  Michael's Star by a Neck  Michael's Star closed on the inside and won the $55,950 Count Fleet Stakes for 3-year-olds at Aqueduct yesterday.
Michael's Star, carrying 115 pounds and ridden by Michael McCarthy, finished a neck in front of Devil's Brew.
Racing coupled in the wagering with Sham Francisco, Michael's Star covered 1 mile 70 yards on the muddy inner track in 1:45 2/5 , earning $33,570 for Hidden Lane Farm with his third straight victory in four career starts.
Devil's Brew, 115, ridden by Matthew Vigliotti, was runner-up in the field of nine, six lengths in front of Lemming, 113, with Jason Lumpkins riding.
The winning entry returned $23.40, $9 and $6.60 for $2 across the board. (AP)


CHRONICLE
After an evening of packing steamer trunks with books for an exhibition in Boston, DON STINE , a rare book dealer from Ocean Township, N.J., recently settled into his desk about midnight.
He carefully pulled out a rare edition of Edgar Allan Poe's "Tales of the Grotesque and Arabesque" that he had bought for a client at an auction at Christie's in New York for $63,000.


MARKETS &amp; INVESTING: A Wild Ride for Emerging Markets; A Choppy Ride for Europe?
The major markets in Europe generally did not do much last year, but there was plenty of action out on the volatile new frontiers of emerging markets, enriching some investors and impoverishing others.
In Brazil, the Bovespa equity index finished the year up by well over half in dollar terms, and other markets in Peru and Chile were not far behind.
But the losers were almost as conspicuous as the winners.
The new stock markets in China's burgeoning cities of Shanghai and Shenzhen ended 1994 down by more than a third.
The most embarrassing performance was turned in by Turkey's stock market, whose value was cut 49 percent over the year.
The Turkish market was a big winner in 1993.


OUTLOOK 1995: THE ECONOMY Industry Groups Cope With Cost-Cutting and Consolidation; Synergen Reflects Biotech's Woes
Sometimes the fortunes of a single company can speak to the state of an entire industry.
Sadly, for the biotechnology industry in 1994, that company was Synergen Inc., which entered the year weakened and exited acquired.
Synergen stock once traded as high as $67 a share, for a market value of about $1.7 billion, but plummeted after the company's lead drug repeatedly failed in clinical trials.
That, along with several other failures of high-profile biotech drugs this year, contributed to a protracted decline in all biotech stocks.
In November, the Amgen Corporation, one of the handful of profitable biotech companies, agreed to acquire Synergen for just $240 million in cash, or $9.25 a share.


History Shows Stocks Will Go Up (or Down)
Looking for a sure-fire way to use history to forecast the stock market?
Here are a few choices.
If they appear to be contradictory, don't let that bother you.
Some of them are sure to be right.
Fives are fine.
The stock market always goes up in years ending in the number 5, like 1995.
That record goes back to at least 1895, and over that stretch the average gain for the Dow Jones industrials in years ending in 5 has been an astounding 31.4 percent.
Much of that is because of an 81.7 percent rise in 1915, when World War I created tremendous demand for American products, but in four other 5's -- 1905, 1925, 1935 and 1975 -- the Dow gained at least 30 percent.


Desert Preserve Favors Hunters Over Visitors; Worse to Come
To the Editor:
The cattle grazing, hunting and other activities foisted on the national park areas in the California desert may be just a taste of what is to come (front page, Dec. 26).


James A. Rahl, 77, Ex-Dean and Expert On Antitrust Laws
James Andrew Rahl, an authority on Federal and European antitrust laws who was a professor emeritus and former law dean at Northwestern University, died last Thursday at his home in Evanston, Ill.
He was 77.
The cause was a stroke, university officials said.


Voters Expect Upheaval In Political Landscape
Not long ago, Bruce Chaffin was a throw-the-bums-out conservative.
But he's not cynical about politics anymore.
"It's going to be wonderful," said the 36-year-old sales executive here, almost giddy about the Republicans' taking control of Congress this week.
"You bet there's going to be some changes, and I can't wait."


A Market Guru Whose Advice Worked in Bad Times
A standout performer among investment newsletter writers last year was a stock market bear whose most recent gains came thanks to a frothy market.
But, in a business where gurus run hot then cold, perhaps more noteworthy is that this bear has managed to do well in markets good and bad.


Buffalo Fires Corey
The Buffalo Bills fired their defensive coordinator, WALT COREY, yesterday after a lackluster season in which the defense improved statistically, but failed to produce big plays.
After four Super Bowls, the Bills finished 7-9 and missed the playoffs for the first time since 1987, the year Corey joined them.
In the team's next-to-last game, the Bills led the Patriots by 17-3 before the defense collapsed en route to a 41-17 loss.


In G.O.P. Plans, a World of Change
From Madison Avenue image-meisters to West Coast petrochemical producers, from mutual fund operators in Boston to cigarette makers in Virginia and the Carolinas, American business has a lot riding on the new Republican leadership that will take control of Congress this year.
The "Contract With America," the House Republican statement of policy priorities drafted before the election that gave the G.O.P. control of Congress for the first time in 40 years, sets out the early agenda.
It calls for sweeping changes in the handling of business lawsuits, substantial tax reductions for capital gains, new incentives to spur investment by industry, additional tax cuts for individuals who put aside savings and curbs on the Federal regulatory burden.


A Market Guru Whose Advice Worked in Bad Times
A standout performer among investment newsletter writers last year was a stock market bear whose most recent gains came thanks to a frothy market.
But, in a business where gurus run hot then cold, perhaps more noteworthy is that this bear has managed to do well in markets good and bad.


Prayerful Silence
To the Editor:
David Klinghoffer is correct that a predetermined spoken school prayer is unacceptable (Op-Ed, Dec. 27).
However, his support for this conclusion is shortsighted.


For Resort Wear, Shine, Shape, Color
Winter divides shoppers into two kinds of people: those who contemplate living through months of frigid weather and those who start thinking about heading someplace warm.
Most of those heading south are packing their bags -- either literally or figuratively -- right about now.
But a few had a head start before the year-end holidays, shopping when the first resort clothes reached the stores.
These early birds have given stores a good take on what women want, at least what they want to wear when it's warm.
Which should translate into what the hot trends will be for spring.


Television in Flux: Networks for Sale, New Ones in Wings
IN almost every area of the television industry, from networks to cable to satellite, analysts see 1995 as a time of intensifying competition and continuing efforts to consolidate power.
"It's going to be an incredibly active year," said Jessica Reif, a media analyst for Merrill Lynch.


Going Once, Going Twice: The Art of the Auctioneer
He peered intently into her eyes.
Then slowly, leaning down as close to her as he could, he paused and in a soft, intimate voice said, "I'll take $3,000,050?"
All he got in return was an icy stare.
Her paddle, it seemed, would never leave her lap again.


OUTLOOK 1995: Global Economic Prospects Are Brighter for Most; Japan Is Struggling To Get Back on Track
Economic prospects around the world look better this year than last.
The decision by several large countries to sell off Government-controlled industries is one big engine of growth.
Yet deficits, inflation and joblessness keep hampering the pace of recovery in many countries.
For many nations, 1994 was a turnaround year as they began pulling out of recession.
Some of the hottest economies, and targets of foreign investment, emerged in once-overlooked markets of Southeast Asia and Latin America.


Television in Flux: Networks for Sale, New Ones in Wings
IN almost every area of the television industry, from networks to cable to satellite, analysts see 1995 as a time of intensifying competition and continuing efforts to consolidate power.
"It's going to be an incredibly active year," said Jessica Reif, a media analyst for Merrill Lynch.


'Dumb and Dumber' Tops Holiday Film Grosses
Perhaps aptly, "Dumb and Dumber," the mindlessly wacko comedy starring Jim Carrey and aimed at 16-year-old (or far younger) boys, was the No. 1 film of a Christmas holiday season characterized by a set of surprise hits and mishaps.
Although no one in Hollywood expects studios to issue classics like "Citizen Kane" anymore, few executives, writers and producers even contemplate making dazzling and risky films on the order of "Chinatown," "The Godfather" or "Five Easy Pieces." A result is a holiday season dominated by children's movies, syrupy romances and adolescent comedies.


Far From the Courtrooms, Tobacco's Rituals Endure
What is the 1995 outlook for tobacco?
Fraught and turbulent, but not inevitably disastrous.
If the industry was under a microscope in Washington last year, it is likely to be caught by television lights in 1995.
For the first time, a class-action suit of smokers who say they are addicted and diseased is going ahead, in a Florida state court.
So is a separate Florida class-action suit involving flight attendants who say they are ill from second-hand smoke.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about a Canadian paleontologist at a dinosaur museum in rural Alberta misstated the given name of the paleontologist in the movie "Jurassic Park" in some editions.
He is Dr.
Alan Grant, not Dale Grant.


Looking Ahead, Warily, to Brighter Days for Wall Street
Wall Street's prospects are looking brighter in 1995.
But after the pain of 1994, that may not be saying very much.
Most analysts predict that this year will be a more "normal" year for the industry, in part because they do not expect to be surprised by another sharp rise in interest rates.
A larger number of takeovers and mergers is expected to fuel the deal business for investment bankers, and the equity markets, which remained relatively strong in 1994, are expected to perform well, helping to lift profits above 1994 levels.


REBELS BEAT BACK A RUSSIAN FORCE
Jubilant Chechen soldiers strolled through the burning center of Grozny today, waving their green separatist flag in triumph after battling Russian troops back to the edge of the city.
The fight for the capital is far from over, but less than 24 hours after the Russian Defense Minister, Gen.
Pavel S. Grachev, announced that his forces controlled the area around Grozny's presidential palace, the only Russians to be found there were dead soldiers and prisoners of war, according to reports from the scene.


Recovery Is Entitled to Respect
AT first, it was tagged the "jobless recovery." Then, the complaint was that average workers were still suffering from shrinking paychecks.
Now, the fear is that the Federal Reserve is about to squash any further growth.
The 1990's expansion, almost four years old, just can't get any respect these days.
But for all the naysaying, what is forgotten is that it's not just how fast you've been going, but how far you've come.
Comparing the 1990's economy at this point in its expansion with a similar point in the 1980's, this recovery looks similarly solid and durable.


Highlights
Rockefeller Center for Sale? Can I Charge It?
If the Brooklyn Bridge really were for sale, there'd be no shortage of buyers -- and they wouldn't ask plodding questions about cash flow or traffic flow.
They'd say, "Wow! I'd own the Brooklyn Bridge!" It's called the "trophy property" syndrome, seen everywhere from Donald Trump's buying the Plaza to a Japanese company's buying Rockefeller Center.
That latter purchase did not turn out too well: when Mitsubishi Estate bought control from the Rockefeller family in 1989, it took on a $1.3 billion mortgage.
It knew rents wouldn't be enough, but assumed that when office leases expired last year, it could jack rents way up.
Guess what: rents are down, the losses will get worse and the Japanese might default and walk away, as if the noble complex were some termite-ridden shack.
Maybe it can wring some deal from the lenders.
Denny's Starts to Clean Up Its Act
Even in a society bedeviled by a lingering racism, Denny's stood out.
For years blacks' complaints piled up -- of being refused service or asked to pay in advance -- to the point that bias seemed institutional.
In May Denny's got the bill, agreeing to pay $54 million to settle thousands of lawsuits.
And later it went a step further in its attempt to wipe this smudge from its name, announcing that a black-owned company would buy as many as 47 Denny's restaurants.
How long will it be until blacks, spying a Denny's, don't see red?
That could take a while.
As the Hafts' World Turns: A Score Card
Whenever the news got too solemn last year, you could always count on the Haft family to provide a bit of soap opera buzz.
In an all-American rags-to-riches-to-ranting story, Herbert and Gloria Haft built their Dart Group empire from a single drugstore, but riches couldn't buy family peace.
These days, they always seem to be suing one another -- father vs. son, husband vs. wife -- and no blood tie proves binding.
In May it was Herbert teaming up with his son Ronald against Herbert's ex-wife, Gloria, and their eldest son, Robert.
Herbert and Ronald won that one, retaining control.
But by September that alliance had collapsed, too, as Ronald tried to oust his father -- a move made more difficult because he needed other family members to back him, and he was not exactly in their good graces.
Soon Ronald sued the company, and Herbert sued Ronald.
Then, presumably, they all met for a cuddly Thanksgiving dinner (perhaps coming to blows over that last piece of pie).
A Simple Pleasure, Made Complicated
Ah, how complicated life has become, even in a place designed expressly to simplify life -- McDonald's.
It used to be blissfully simple: the coffee hot, the drinker sitting and sipping.
But now everyone's hither and yon, perching take-out coffee in mid-dash.
And spilling it.
And suing someone.
So it was that in August an Albuquerque, N.M., jury awarded $2.9 million to an 81-year-old woman burned by McDonald's coffee she spilled in her lap.
McDonald's had arrived at the ideal coffee temperature -- 180 degrees.
But the jury decided that that was too hot -- that McDonald's knew it was playing with fire.
Then the experts emerged -- showing that fast-food drinks ranged from 154 to 184 degrees, with 154 pegged as "sippable." To sort this out, sit down and have some lukewarm coffee.
Some Heavy Huffing and Puffing
Smoking, if not smoke, was much in the air last year.
In New York the City Council faced heavy-duty lobbying on an anti-smoking bill, with Philip Morris hinting that it might leave the city; the Council gave some ground but still passed a tough bill.
Lawsuits against tobacco companies stepped up a notch in scope -- as typified by Mississippi's suing to recover the costs of smoking-related illnesses.
And flight attendants got the go-ahead to file a class-action suit, the first to zero in on second-hand smoke.
But the most vivid image was of top tobacco executives on Capitol Hill -- staring at a placard that read "One American dies every 80 seconds from tobacco use" -- and testifying, to a man, that smoking is not addictive. '94?
What Was I Doing in '94?
If John Sculley had a "delete" key for his resume, he'd surely wipe out 1994.
As the year began, he was saying, "I remain committed to Spectrum," and insisting that the Long Island company -- which most people already sensed was in big, big trouble -- would be a "significant participant in the wireless data communications industry." But within weeks Mr.
Sculley, so recently at the high-tech pinnacle running Apple Computer, made a messy exit from Spectrum.
The lawsuits flew fast and thick -- breach of contract, fraud, you name it -- before a truce was called.


Army Peacekeeping, by the New Book
The Army's new field manual on peacekeeping is required reading for many officers.
It is also worth a look by civilian policy makers and citizens interested in knowing whether the Army is adjusting to its new role in the post-cold-war world.
The short and reassuring answer is, yes.
In a world no longer defined by the Soviet threat, peacekeeping may well be the growth industry for the Army.
But peacekeeping poses a difficult challenge to an Army whose traditional mission has been ground combat and whose standard doctrine has been that of overwhelming force.


Bring On the Huskers! Hold It, This Is College Ball.
The Penn State players wore "National Champion" baseball caps after they ran up the score with all their might today in a 38-20 Rose Bowl victory over Oregon.
They lobbied unashamedly for No. 1 votes and treated their 68-year-old coach like a running back: they handed the game ball off to him.
His hair was matted from a Gatorade shower, but Joe Paterno tucked the football firmly under his armpit -- just the way he taught Ki-Jana Carter -- and gave nothing resembling a consolation speech.


Trying To Find Gold With the Internet
IF business takes flight this year in cyberspace, it may be on Buffalo chicken wings.
Or model rockets.
Or hot-air balloon rides.
Or any of the other countless goods and services being hawked via the Internet global computer web.
Thousands of businesses flocked to the Internet in 1994, and giant corporations are investing billions of dollars in digital technology intended to link them with their customers and suppliers through all sorts of "interactive" services.
All are chasing an emerging market of millions of affluent and computer-savvy consumers -- as many as 200 million by the end of the decade, by some estimates -- in a rapidly expanding global marketplace.


MARKETS &amp; INVESTING: A Wild Ride for Emerging Markets; Ups and Downs In Latin America
The major markets in Europe generally did not do much last year, but there was plenty of action out on the volatile new frontiers of emerging markets, enriching some investors and impoverishing others.
In Brazil, the Bovespa equity index finished the year up by well over half in dollar terms, and other markets in Peru and Chile were not far behind.
But the losers were almost as conspicuous as the winners.
The new stock markets in China's burgeoning cities of Shanghai and Shenzhen ended 1994 down by more than a third.
The most embarrassing performance was turned in by Turkey's stock market, whose value was cut 49 percent over the year.
The Turkish market was a big winner in 1993.


OUTLOOK 1995: THE ECONOMY Industry Groups Cope With Cost-Cutting and Consolidation; Steel's Prospects Are Bright for '95
The domestic steel industry is looking forward to another good year, after a year when soaring demand from automobile and appliance makers had mills straining to fill orders.
With buyers so eager, the steel companies were able to push through several rounds of price increases, and prices are expected to continue rising.
Hot sales and higher prices brought profits to many companies that just a few year ago were struggling to stem losses and shrink capacity.
But few stood out as prominently as the AK Steel Corporation , formerly the foundering carbon steel division of Armco Inc.
Carbon steels are used in autos, appliances and structural applications.


Corrections
A chart on Sunday about appointments to Gov.
George E. Pataki's administration misidentified the adviser from the Cuomo administration who is expected to stay on, at least temporarily.
He is Philip Coombs Jr., the Commissioner of Correction, not Raul Russi, chairman of the Division of Parole.


Lurking On-Line: The Electronic Eavesdroppers
Each day, millions of people log on to computer networks to discuss their lives with complete strangers, whether on safe subjects like pet grooming, lurid topics like foot fetishes or emotionally wrenching issues like alcoholism or child abuse.
But for every person chatting in one of these conversations, many more are eavesdropping -- a practice known in the electronic community as lurking.
Lurking used to be one of the on-line world's most disdained practices.
But just as the Internet community has been forced grudgingly to accept millions of new arrivals to the neighborhood, so has it been forced to accept lurking as an inevitable consequence of all those curious, shy or nosy newcomers.


Greeted at Nation's Front Door, Many Visitors Stay On Illegally
In the comfort of a flight from Belfast, Francis and Theresa S. arrived in the United States three months ago as tourists.
But they had no intention of returning to their home in Northern Ireland after their sightseeing in New York was over.
They were coming to stay on as illegal immigrants.
Unlike the thousands of Mexicans and Central Americans clambering over the flood-lit fences of the southern border, the couple merely walked through an inspection booth at Kennedy International Airport.
An immigration official, checking their passports and plane tickets, smiled and waved them in.


When America Chased Its People Off the Land
Indians are prime-time subjects tonight, as PBS focuses on the dire condition of a few native South Americans and the Discovery Channel looks back at the bitter histories of native North Americans.
"The Tribe That Time Forgot" refers to the Arara people of the Brazilian Amazon.
Long thought to be extinct, they made the newspapers in 1976 when three government prospectors in the Amazon rain forest were found dead.
The arrows identified the killers as Arara.


Nets' Stars Still Doubtful
Derrick Coleman and Kenny Anderson were both at practice today but are questionable for the Nets when the Indiana Pacers visit New Jersey Tuesday night.
Coleman went through the entire practice with the team, but his lacerated left hand still prevents him from holding the basketball with ease.


MARKETS &amp; INVESTING: A Wild Ride for Emerging Markets; Pacific Markets Wait for Dawn
The major markets in Europe generally did not do much last year, but there was plenty of action out on the volatile new frontiers of emerging markets, enriching some investors and impoverishing others.
In Brazil, the Bovespa equity index finished the year up by well over half in dollar terms, and other markets in Peru and Chile were not far behind.
But the losers were almost as conspicuous as the winners.
The new stock markets in China's burgeoning cities of Shanghai and Shenzhen ended 1994 down by more than a third.
The most embarrassing performance was turned in by Turkey's stock market, whose value was cut 49 percent over the year.
The Turkish market was a big winner in 1993.


In Japan, the Clamor for Change Runs Headlong Into Old Groove
To measure how much Japan has really changed in the last year and a half, it is instructive to look not at the upheaval in Parliament, the big stores cutting their notoriously high prices or the devastated stock market, but at the Japan Raw Silk and Sugar Price Stabilization Agency.
This now-obscure agency, which protects Japan's few remaining silk producers with expensive price supports, was once a symbol of Japan's struggle to build a modern economy.


With 12 Minutes to Go, It Is 'Time for Tommie'
The national championship T-shirts were passed around as soon as the Nebraska Cornhuskers entered their locker room early today.
Several minutes later, the door swung open and a security guard yelled, "Clear out, clear out. They want to see their fans."
The Cornhuskers poured back onto the Orange Bowl field, where they had rallied to defeat Miami, 24-17.
Players hugged, danced and waved their T-shirts.
Some 16,000 Cornhusker fans joined in the celebration, savoring this singular moment in Nebraska football history.


Soccer Report
England
Alan Shearer of Blackburn, the leading scorer in the English Premier League, increased his goal total to 23 with a hat trick yesterday in a 4-2 triumph over West Ham United.
Shearer's three goals helped Blackburn rally from a 2-1 deficit at intermission and extended Blackburn's lead to 6 points in the standing.


OUTLOOK 1995: THE ECONOMY Industry Groups Cope With Cost-Cutting and Consolidation; Military Industry Looks to Revamp
The megamergers between Grumman and Northrop, and Martin Marietta and Lockheed grabbed the headlines last year.
But the greatest strides in shrinking the military industry will come not from a bigger-is-better approach but from combining the overlapping operations of competitors.
The acquisition by GM Hughes Electronics of General Dynamics' missile business is perhaps the most vivid illustration of the virtues of such a practice.
It demonstrates how eliminating duplication and shuttering plants can shave costs, increase efficiency and bring in new business, at an increased profit.


Privatizing Airports: Cities' Successes and Giuliani's Plan
What goes on at airports is about the same everywhere: planes land and take off, dropping off passengers or cargo and taking on more; travelers park, eat, shop, use telephones, meeting rooms and bathrooms.
But some airports provide good service at low cost, and some don't, and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani thinks that Kennedy and La Guardia are in the second group.
To move them into the first -- and increase city revenues from the airports, which he says are "scandalously low" -- he would like to sell the airports to a private company or at least hire a private company to run them.


Observer; Wakes Up In Marts
Almost everything Americans buy is now made outside America.
You knew that long ago.
I knew it too, but I hadn't really believed it until various women took me shopping in December.
This meant killing time in women's wear divisions of assorted marts.
What a learning experience these marts afforded.
I'd heard that marts were taking over the world, but I had never thought enough about marts to ask, "What is a mart anyhow?"


Q&amp;A
Butterflies' Work Q.  Do butterflies and moths do a significant amount of pollination, or are they just lightweights that let the bees do all the real work?
A.
Significant pollination of many plants is done by butterflies and moths, sometimes exclusively, and they are not the only animals other than bees that work at pollination.


OUTLOOK 1995: Global Economic Prospects Are Brighter for Most; East Europe Looks To Union With West
Economic prospects around the world look better this year than last.
The decision by several large countries to sell off Government-controlled industries is one big engine of growth.
Yet deficits, inflation and joblessness keep hampering the pace of recovery in many countries.
For many nations, 1994 was a turnaround year as they began pulling out of recession.
Some of the hottest economies, and targets of foreign investment, emerged in once-overlooked markets of Southeast Asia and Latin America.


OUTLOOK 1995: THE ECONOMY Industry Groups Cope With Cost-Cutting and Consolidation; Retailers Battle Mostly Over Prices
Retailing has become a commodity business in many ways.
These days stores are distinguished less by their merchandising flair than by their pricing strategies, which give consumers a powerful weapon.


MARKETS &amp; INVESTING: Market Place; Risk Abroad May Keep U.S. Investors Close to Home
STOCK market investors didn't make much money last year though corporate profits were stunningly high.
The good news of profits being well above forecasts was offset by the fact that the Federal Reserve decided to push up interest rates -- and to keep doing so.
As 1995 begins, there is general confidence that the economy will remain strong at least for this year, although talk of a 1996 recession has emerged.
Corporate profits are generally viewed much more favorably than they were a year ago.
There is hope that the dollar has bottomed and that bonds will not fall much more.


Somalia's Overthrown Dictator, Mohammed Siad Barre, Is Dead
Maj.
Gen.
Mohammed Siad Barre, who was overthrown as President of Somalia in 1991 after ruling that impoverished African country for more than 20 years, died yesterday in exile in Lagos, Nigeria.
Official accounts put his age near 74, but reference books place his birth variously between 1912 and 1920.


OUTLOOK 1995: TECHNOLOGY &amp; MEDIA New Rockets, and Destinations, in Cyberspace; Vroom! Digital Engines Put a Pedal to the Metal
In the muscle-car 1960's, a generation of teen-agers grew up on songs like "Hey Little Cobra," "Dead Man's Curve" and "Little G.T.O." Even now, many 40-something Americans still feel a carbureted chill whenever they hear snatches of lyrics like "three deuces and a four speed, and a 389."
These days, though, Holley carbs, horsepower and cubic inches are passe.
The real speed thrills are to be found roaring down the info highway, where the measure of muscle is MIPS (millions of instructions per second) and bandwidth (how much data can be sucked through a network hose in a single gulp).


Ralph E. Van Norstrand, 57, Ex-House Speaker in Hartford
Ralph E. Van Norstrand, a former Republican Speaker of the Connecticut House of Representatives, died on Sunday en route from his home in Darien to a hospital.
He was 57.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Israel Halts Construction at Disputed Site in West Bank
A bitter dispute over the expansion of a Jewish settlement in the occupied West Bank took a new and uncertain turn today when the Israeli Government halted construction at a site that had been the focus of Palestinian protests for more than a week.
Hoping to placate the settlers, the Government agreed to let them build a planned complex of 500 apartments at a different spot, a hilltop somewhat closer to the center of their community of Efrat and farther from the nearby Arab town of Al Khader.


Police Officers Face Charges Of Abusing Girl
Two New York City police officers who live together were arrested early yesterday and charged with endangering the welfare of a child after the 23-month-old daughter of one of the officers was found to have been physically abused.
When the officers brought the girl to the Mary Immaculate Hospital in Queens Sunday night with a broken left thumb, a doctor determined that she had also been beaten on the buttocks, had a three-week old fracture on her right arm, a possible skull fracture and old breaks to the jaw and left arm, said Detective Kim Royster, a police spokeswoman.


Some Economists Look Into the New Year
Statistics will probably show that the economy throttled back at the end of 1994 to about the 2.5 percent growth rate that the Federal Reserve and most private analysts had considered sustainable.
Growth and consumer inflation figures below are from a review, fourth-quarter to fourth-quarter.
Unemployment figures are fourth-quarter averages.
Job growth figures are from interviews.
Ms.
Tyson was willing to speak only in general terms pending a White House forecast due in February.
Nicholas S. Perna, chief economist, Shawmut National Corp., Boston  Growth 2.9 percent Lagged effect of higher interest rates takes hold with an outside chance of "serious" slowdown in the second half of the year  Unemployment, Job Growth 6.0 percent, 1.75 million jobs This is the job growth that is consistent with Federal Reserve's presumed G.D.P. target of 2.5 percent  Inflation 3.5 percent Prices accelerating a bit but from very low base and wage costs, the dominant factor, still well controlled.
Many fears are misplaced inflation could well be less than 3.5.
Interest rates 7.20 percent Decline reflects growing confidence that growth is slowing, shrinking inflation premium.
There's considerable room for long-term yields to come down so long as inflation is tamed.
Short-term rates peak at about 6.25 percent  Uncertainties, Mainly from Washington.
Fed, which has said it would err of side of restraint, could underestimate impact of moves already in the pipeline and tighten monetary policy too much.
Tax-cut fever could get out of hand.
John O. Wilson, executive vice president and chief economist Bank of America, San Francisco  Growth 2.5 percent Economy will be slowing rapidly at yearend on the way to a much weaker 1996, as soft-landing again eludes policymakers  Unemployment, Job Growth 5.3 %, 2.8 million jobs Dropouts from the labor force will help keep the unemployment rate low.
Job growth in California, where recovery has lagged, set to accelerate  Inflation 3.3 percent More bottlenecks will emerge and wage pressures will show up in the factory-intensive Midwest.
Oil prices likely to rise.
Interest rates 8.3 percent Inflation pressures and fiscal debate push bond rates up.
Overnight rates up to 6 1/2-7 percent.
Uncertainties Tax changes won't be made in time to directly affect the 1995 economy but a nnervous bond market could stumble from a bidding war over cuts, thereby undermining confidence.
Howard Keen Jr.
Chief economist, Conrail, Philadelphia.
Growth 2.4 percent.
To restrain growth, the Fed keeps raising interest rates until slowdown is evident, probably in early spring.
Unemployment, Job Growth 6.0 percent. 2.2 million jobs.
Jobless rate edges up as corporations maintain pressure to keep their production costs down.
Inflation 3.2 percent.
No convincing evidence so far of a "new era" for inflation, but complacency could prove to be dangerous.
Interest rates 7.9 percent.
Long-term rates fairly flat despite lower capital spending by business.
Short-term rates may rise as much as a full percentage point before peaking.
Uncertainties, Resiliency of financial markets and consumers to further increases in short-term interest rates.
Whether auto producers can meet production schedules.
M.
Kathryn Eickhoff, president Eickhoff Economics, New York  Growth 3.0 percent With the consumer pulling back and housing a modest depressant, economy should slow markedly by the second quarter and manage as little as 2 percent rate of expansion in the second half.
Unemployment, Job Growth 2.6 million jobs, 5.4 percent Because of more potential workers than many think, jobless rate could get as low as 5 percent without wages causing faster inflation
Inflation 3.3 percent With companies having gotten a grip on health care costs, wages could rise as much as 4 percent, which managers get, before meeting stiff resistance
Interest rates 8.5 percent Short rates should peak around 6 1/2 percent
Uncertainties, Fed could be forced to overtighten in second half, which could tip economy into recession.
Derivatives pose risk to the banking system.
Laura D'Andrea Tyson Chairwoman, Council of Economic Advisers, Washington
Growth 2.7 percent Moderating from surprisingly robust 1994 as impact of interest rate increases spreads beyond housing to dampen consumer and business spending.
But recovery abroad should buoy exports.
Unemployment, Job Growth 2.3 million jobs 6.2 percent Job creation should post solid gains but unemployment rate, already well under 6 percent, is likely to creep higher.
Inflation 3.2 percent A small rise as wages remain in check under discipline of global competition.
Interest rates.
Doesn't forecast 30-year bond.
Administration's midsession review in July assumed 10-year Treasury notes will average 7 percent in 1995.


OUTLOOK 1995: Global Economic Prospects Are Brighter for Most; Higher Growth Seen For Latin America
Economic prospects around the world look better this year than last.
The decision by several large countries to sell off Government-controlled industries is one big engine of growth.
Yet deficits, inflation and joblessness keep hampering the pace of recovery in many countries.
For many nations, 1994 was a turnaround year as they began pulling out of recession.
Some of the hottest economies, and targets of foreign investment, emerged in once-overlooked markets of Southeast Asia and Latin America.


Dance Music for the Immobile
When electronic dance music started getting too hard and too fast a couple of years ago, it looked to the avant-garde for escape.
It appropriated the synthesizer meditations of Brian Eno, the tape collages of France's classical musique concrete composers and the spacey drones of progressive rock to create what is known as ambient dance music, a form best heard while lying down.
Whatever drum-machine beats there are in ambient dance music are mere sound effects, washing over the listener as part of an electronic collage made up of sampled records, rolling synthesizer arrangements and a panoply of street and nature sounds.
Lately, the avant-garde has been taking ambience back.


Eating Well; When Tofu Meets Bun
A MEAT-AND-POTATOES friend knowingly ate a tofu burger sandwich at my house a few weeks ago.
He asked for seconds.


Nebraska Is No. 1 as Lions Settle for Perfect Season
When the anticipated poll results declaring the Nebraska Cornhuskers the 1994 national college football champions reached the Penn State Nittany Lions early today, the outcome seemed far away, an external factor in a perfect season that ended with the first Rose Bowl victory in school history.
Nebraska's No. 1 standing, by a margin of 42 points in the Associated Press poll of writers and broadcasters and 46 in the CNN/USA Today poll of coaches, came by margins that were greater after the bowls than they had been before.
The third Cornhusker national championship, the first since 1971 and the first in Tom Osborne's 22 seasons as head coach, became an official contradiction of the national championship T-shirts and hats the Lions wore in a dressing room in Pasadena late Monday afternoon, and the No. 1 rings the seniors intend to order.


Felicia Geffen; Arts Executive, 91
Felicia Geffen, a former executive director of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, died on Dec. 21 at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 91 and lived in Manhattan.
She had been suffering from leukemia and osteoporosis, said her daughter, Eloise B. Segal.


Official Quits AT&amp;T To Run A Software Company
One of the AT&amp;T Corporation's top executives announced yesterday that he was quitting as president of the company's Global Information Solutions subsidiary, less than two years after he took the job and midway through his effort to turn around the struggling $7 billion computer unit.
The executive, Jerre L. Stead, will become chief executive of the Legent Corporation, a computer software company in Herndon, Va., with sales of $501 million -- a small fraction of the size of the AT&amp;T subsidiary, which was previously known as the NCR Corporation.


Pro Bono Accounts
* Federation for Children with AIDS, Boston, to Houston Effler Herstek Favat, Boston.


Book Notes
An Elementary Appeal
He'll be 141 years old on Friday.
Although long retired as a consulting detective, he still busies himself as he has for many decades, tending bees in Sussex.
His name is Sherlock Holmes.
Sherlockian scholars agree that his birthday is Jan. 6, and around the world his exploits still thrill readers (not to mention those who follow his adventures on television or videocassette).


Real Estate
A TEAM of developers and architects has been selected to build a commercial and residential project in South-Central Los Angeles in an attempt to revitalize an area devastated by neglect and the riots of nearly three years ago.
The project is the fruit of an effort by businesses to promote growth in an inner-city area.
Officials of the First Interstate Bank selected a site in the neighborhood and sponsored a design competition.


Penguins, as Pilgrims, Find Humans Wanting
If Hans-Ulrich Schlumpf's oddball film, "The Congress of Penguins," catches on, the dolphin could suddenly find itself challenged as the earthly creature with the highest moral reputation.
An eccentric but absorbing mixture of documentary, fantasy and polemic, the film uses the image of hundreds of penguins marching stolidly across the frozen desert of Antarctica as a metaphor for nature's alarm at human cruelty and pollution.
Moving in solemn processional columns, their chests puffed, their beaks raised high, the penguins look like nothing so much as a bunch of 17-century Pilgrims convening an emergency council to discuss the future of their colony.
Expanding on the notion of birds sitting in judgment on humans is the conversation that the Swiss film maker, who wrote the film with Franz Hohler, imagines the penguins are having with one another.
As interpreted by the film's unseen narrator, their alarmed clucks and cries are a collective outcry against the arrival of a party of climate researchers.
The penguins, he suggests, share a collective memory of a time earlier in the century when a whaling outpost on South Georgia Island polluted their habitat and threatened their very existence.
To help fuel the outpost's processing plants, thousands of live penguins were fed into their furnaces.
The film implicitly compares the torching of penguins with the horrors of the Nazi death camps.


A Correction: Commodities in 1994
A table yesterday in the special Outlook '95 section of Business Day garbled the 1994 percentage-change figures for some commodities.
Here are corrected figures for all the listed commoditites.


Molinari Is Offered Directorship Of the Port Authority by Pataki
Gov.
George E. Pataki said late today that he had offered the job of executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to the Staten Island Borough President, Guy V. Molinari.
Mr.
Molinari could not be reached for comment tonight, but in an interview on Monday in which he discussed the offer, he said he had not decided whether to take the job.
A brief statement from Mr.
Pataki today said Mr.
Molinari "will make a decision sometime this week."


Brazil's Horizons Widening With New Common Market
Brazil, South America's industrial giant, has just won more legroom with the start of the Southern Common Market, a customs union that expands by 50 percent the duty-free area open to Brazilian manufacturers.
On New Year's Day, tariffs were ended on 95 percent of goods traded among Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay.
At the same time, the four neighbors adopted common tariffs -- averaging 12 percent -- for goods imported from outside their borders.


A Late Start for Winter


Republican Decisions
House Republican leaders said they would seat Sam Gejdenson, a Connecticut Democrat who won by only 21 votes.
Dick Cheney said he would not seek the Presidency.
Articles, pages B5 and A15.


Personal Health; Help but no sure cure for hair-pulling disorder.
FOR 14 years, Barbara K. could not resist the urge to pull the hairs from her head.
She thought of herself as "sick, flawed, strange, lacking in willpower and self-control," she said recently.
"Until I was 23 years old, I thought I was the only person in the world with this problem," said Barbara, who asked that her last name not be used, to protect her privacy.
The compulsion began at 9, when her parents divorced and her father remarried.
The repetitive behavior helped to keep painful thoughts about her family situation from flooding her mind.
At the same time, though, it trapped her in a vicious cycle: she would pull out her hair, then get mad at herself for doing it, which lowered her self-esteem and prompted her to pull some more.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report in the Company News column of Business Day on Thursday about a decline in the shares of Toys "R" Us Inc. on Wednesday referred incorrectly to the company's sales during the holiday season.
Some industry analysts expected a weak gain; the company had not yet reported its sales for the season. (Yesterday Toys "R" Us said sales at stores open at least a year rose 1 percent in the eight weeks that ended on Dec. 24, compared with a gain of 7.4 percent a year earlier. The results are reported today on page D3.)


Computer Admissions Test to Be Given Less Often
The Educational Testing Service, which creates and administers the standardized admissions test for graduate students, has substantially reduced the number of times the tests will be offered by computer in the next six months.
The action was taken in response to growing criticism that the computerized version of the test, known as the Graduate Record Examination, or G.R.E., was vulnerable to cheating, said Ray Nicosia, a spokesman for the service, a nonprofit organization that tests nearly half a


Tino Perutz, 88, An Early Exporter Of Plastic Products
Tino Perutz, a retired international trader whose company was one of the first to export American plastics, died on Friday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
A resident of Great Neck, he was 88.
He suffered a brief illness, his family said.


New Strife Unsettles Mideast Peace Talks
Almost as if reading from a well-worn script, Israeli and Palestinian leaders pledged today to push ahead in their peace talks even as they warned that their task had become increasingly difficult, to the point of crisis.
Events today followed a pattern that in the last few months has become increasingly familiar, and discouraging, to both sides.


12-Hour Shift For Officers In Nassau Test
Some Nassau County police officers would work fixed 12-hour shifts under an experiment announced today by county officials.
While police officers commonly put in 12-hour days at the turn of the century, unions have long pursued shorter hours, according to experts in police policy and management.
They said most police departments, like New York City's, now place officers on fixed eight-hour shifts.


Part-Time College Teaching Rises, as Do Worries
They call themselves "freeway fliers," the Ph.D. graduates who cannot find full-time faculty teaching jobs and who spend their days commuting back and forth among part-time jobs at various colleges where they have no certainty of employment from one semester to the next.
They are a sign of the times as colleges and universities seek economies by leaving staff jobs vacant, relying on part-time teachers to fill the gaps and save them money on higher salaries and benefits.
And they have aroused debate in academia over whether institutions have acted responsibly in turning out so many highly qualified specialists only to leave them stranded.


New Work In a Word: Kafkaesque
The first publisher of Franz Kafka saved his manuscripts from destruction twice -- once by disobeying Kafka's instruction to destroy them after his death in 1924, and again 15 years later by smuggling them out of Prague in a suitcase the night the Nazis occupied the city.
Now, with a facsimile of the original manuscript of a chapter of "The Trial" published a day after the general copyright expired, a German publisher has launched a new edition he said would save Kafka's works for posterity as he wrote them.


United Stationers Inc.(USTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


O'Connor Takes His Message to Cyberspace
Give 'em that on-line religion.
In a computerized session of give-and-take, John Cardinal O'Connor took his message yesterday to one of the few forums he had yet to address during his tenure as Archbishop of New York: cyberspace.


In America; A Reckless Journey
In a segment of "Eyes on the Prize," the brilliant documentary series on the civil rights movement, the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. is shown at a press conference, saying, "There is nothing more dangerous than to build a society with a large segment of people in that society who feel that they have no stake in it, who feel that they have nothing to lose."
Aristotle understood this. "Poverty," he said, "is the parent of revolution and crime."


Opened Road in Croatia: Path to Peace?
On a map, this is a town like any other in Croatia.
But it lies on a tense though unrecognized border between Government-controlled Croatia and the one-third of the country that has been occupied by rebel Serbs for more than three years.
It is one of the most volatile borders in Europe, so the recent reopening of a major highway through this town is being watched with a mixture of hope and apprehension.


Market Place; Fewer Dividends Being Trimmed
American companies are making fewer cuts in or omissions of dividends than at any time in at least four decades -- a confirmation of the strength of the economy and of corporate profits.
But even as companies are cutting back on this kind of bad news, they are showing signs of being less willing to send out good news -- even when higher profits would seem to justify larger dividends.
That could indicate that board room optimism about the economy has peaked and is starting to turn lower.


A Change in Wireless Computing
The long-heralded era of wireless computing will draw a step closer Wednesday when the Motorola Corporation introduces a version of Apple Computer's Newton hand-held computer that can transmit electronic mail using radio signals.
The new machine, known as the Marco Wireless Communicator, will be priced between $900 and $1,400 and weigh 1.8 pounds.
It will permit users to send and receive electronic messages without being connected to a land-based telephone line.


Mayor Offering New Severance
The Giuliani administration said yesterday that it is undertaking a severance program for the third time in the hope of reducing New York City's work force by another 1,500 workers without laying off employees.
Since last year about 15,000 municipal employees have left the city's payroll through severance programs that are part of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's effort to close the city's budget gap.


Prison Break in Florida


MEXICO'S LEADER GIVES THE NATION A RECOVERY PLAN
President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, who had promised Mexicans personal prosperity during his election campaign last year, announced an economic-stabilization plan today that reduces the purchasing power of workers, cuts corporate profit, trims the nation's budget and sells some state-owned resources.
Investors and financial analysts reacted cautiously to Mr.
Zedillo's announcement, which had been delayed by unexpectedly strong resistance from labor union leaders.


Prosecute Bosnia's War Criminals
An international war crimes tribunal, the first since World War II, is gathering evidence against those who committed atrocities in Bosnia, especially the murderers, rapists and torturers who carried out the Serbs' genocidal policy of ethnic cleansing against Muslims.
The U.S. is right to demand prosecution of these criminals and oppose amnesty.
Other United Nations members, among them Britain and France, seem to regard the war-crimes inquiry as an impediment to peace.
Washington firmly contests that view, saying, "Unless those responsible are held accountable, there can be no lasting peace and reconciliation in Bosnia."


Miami's Sapp to Turn Pro
Miami, which lost to Nebraska Sunday night in the Orange Bowl, took a double jolt today when two of its top underclassmen said they would skip their senior years and enter the National Football League draft this spring.
Defensive tackle Warren Sapp, the Hurricanes' leader with 11 1/2 sacks this season, and running back James Stewart, who rushed for 796 yards, announced their plans at a news conference today.


Why Must Congress Pick On Disabled Kids?; Choice of Cruelties
To the Editor:
Who is more cruel, the Republicans in Congress who want to cut off Supplemental Security Income payments to severely disabled children in low-income families, or the anonymous Democratic Administration officials who want to change the program if it helps these children become productive working members of society (front page, Dec. 29)?


So a Copter Strayed Over North Korea
To the Editor:
Now that the pilot Bobby Hall has been extricated from North Korea, it can be asked: How could a United States Army helicopter wander innocently across one of the most heavily defended borders in the world?


Morrison Restaurants Inc.(RI,N) reports earnings for 13wks to Dec 3


Slapstick With an 18th-Century Edge
Carlo Goldoni's early comedy "The Venetian Twins" (1748) comes to vigorous, ribald, disorderly life in the Pearl Theater Company's production of a translation by Michael Feingold, directed by John Rando.
The play dates from a time when Goldoni was struggling to transport Venetian theater from the commedia dell'arte's wild improvisations on a bare scenario to the performance of fully written plays, and it has remnants of the commedia's slapstick along with an arsenal of tricks Goldoni devised to grab an audience's attention.
The Pearl's version is wonderfully fresh, even if its exuberance at times reminds one of some stage experiments of the 1960's.
Mr.
Rando and the actors approach Goldoni's contorted plot with the boisterous humor the playwright intended, often mocking it in asides to the audience, which he also wanted.
There are elaborate schemes over a horde of jewels and gold, sword fights, fistfights, love duets, seduction attempts, flirtations with incest, battles with the law and endless confusions of identity, especially between twin brothers who have not seen each other in many years and who turn up in the same town on the same day.
Goldoni even had the effrontery to include a murder and a suicide in this overstuffed bag of laughter, and they are surprisingly amusing.


Miller (Herman) Inc.(MLHR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 3


When a Forger Confesses, Who Can Tell?
As a self-proclaimed forger of Old Master drawings and paintings, Eric Hebborn has had few modern equals.
The 60-year-old English-born artist claims to have counterfeited "let us say 500" works that have infiltrated private collections, auction houses, galleries and museums the world over.
An accomplished art restorer, he boasted of being able to "restore" whole paintings that had never existed, deceiving, among others, Britain's royal conservator and longtime traitor and Soviet spy, the late Sir Anthony Blunt.
And he brazenly chronicled his career of hoaxes in an autobiography called "Drawn to Trouble: Confessions of a Master Forger" (Random House, 1993).


Fair Isaac
Shares of Fair Isaac &amp; Company, a specialized software developer for government and business, based in San Rafael, Calif., fell sharply in Nasdaq trading after a Prudential Securities analyst downgraded the company's stock to "hold" from "buy."


The Free-Agent Route Often Led to Dead End
With cash in hand and an eye toward the playoffs and Super Bowl, each National Football League team last spring entered a new era of free agency.
This was a way to reach the end of the rainbow in one giant leap.
Teams scouted and scoured and wooed and dined their choices.
Sign here, on the dotted line, please.
It was Miami on Jan. 29, or bust.


Merl Rouse, 85, Leading Figure In the U.S. Reinsurance Industry
Merl L. Rouse, a retired insurance executive and leader in the reinsurance industry, died on Monday at Berkshire Medical Center in Pittsfield, Mass.
Mr.
Rouse, who was 85, was a longtime resident of Manhattan until he moved to Stockbridge, Mass., last year.
As chief executive of the American Re-Insurance Company from 1961 to 1975, Mr.
Rouse was instrumental in prodding the company to expand overseas.
During his tenure, the company opened offices in Australia, Canada and London, preparing the way to become one of the world's largest reinsurance companies, specializing in insuring other insurance companies against losses they might suffer from liability insurance policies.


Cheney Won't Run in '96; Kemp Likely to Follow Suit
Dick Cheney, the former Defense Secretary and a prominent Republican Presidential prospect, announced today that he would not seek his party's nomination in 1996.
The field may narrow still further because advisers to another well-known contender, Jack F. Kemp, said it appeared increasingly unlikely that Mr.
Kemp would run.
Mr.
Cheney appeared to be preparing a campaign for national office as he toured the country in the last two years on behalf of Republican candidates.
But in recent months he had been less visible.


METRO DIGEST
MAN EXEMPTED FROM SEX-OFFENDER LAW
Responding to a petition from a prisoner nearing the end of an 11-year sentence for rape, a Federal judge exempted the man from a central requirement of "Megan's Law," New Jersey's recently enacted crackdown on convicted sex offenders.
A1.


Suspect in 3 Clinic Assaults Is Arraigned in Virginia
Looking pale, drawn and sleepless, John C. Salvi 3d, the suspect in last week's fatal shootings at two Boston-area abortion clinics, requested a court-appointed lawyer this morning but then delayed a decision on whether to smooth the way for extradition to Boston, where he faces trial on two murder counts and five charges of assault with intent to murder.
The United States Attorney in Boston, Donald Stern, was quoted by The Associated Press as saying today that Mr.
Salvi could face Federal charges that could bring the death penalty.
He did not specify the charges.
Mr.
Salvi could face Federal charges of violating a law that guarantees access to abortion clinics and Federal firearms charges.


Corrections
A chart yesterday in the special Outlook '95 section of Business Day, listing the performance of commodity investments, garbled some 1994 percentage change figures.
A corrected chart appears today on page D6.


A Downside to Breast-Feeding
PUBLICITY about the benefits of breast-feeding has prompted many women who might otherwise have weaned their babies after a few months to continue to nurse them for six months or longer.
The benefits to the baby of breast-feeding are not in question.
They include improved resistance to infection, less risk of allergies and, presumably, psychological comfort.
But what about the mother?
A new study monitored psychological, physical and sexual factors among 19 Australian mothers every day for two months before and two months after they weaned their first babies.
The women kept daily records of 14 measures of psychological, physical and sexual variables, noting them at the same time each day on a three-point or five-point scale of well-being.
All were considered in good physical and psychological health and had been nursing their babies for 6 to 23 months.


Gejdenson To Be Seated In Congress
Republican Congressional leaders said today that they would seat a veteran Congressman from Connecticut, Sam Gejdenson, in the 104th Congress but would proceed with an investigation into his election, which is being contested by his Republican challenger, Edward W. Munster.
The House Oversight Committee could still overturn the results, call for a new election or declare the seat vacant, said Representative Bill Thomas, the California Republican who is chairman of the committee.
Mr.
Thomas said the investigation will be triggered by Mr.
Munster's petition under the Contested Elections Act.


INSIDE
Commuter Teachers
As colleges try to save money by leaving positions vacant and relying on part-time help, more and more teachers find themselves driving from campus to campus to take on single courses.
Page A17.
Quantum Theorist Dies
Eugene P. Wigner, a nuclear physicist who helped usher in the atomic age, was 92.
Page D19.
Nebraska: People's Choice
Nebraska finished No. 1 in two national polls, but The Times's computer ranked Penn State first.
Page B7.


At Last, a Psychiatric Manual On Children Too Little to Talk
PSYCHIATRY is reaching into the cradle, with the publication in November of the first mental health diagnostic manual for problems in infants and toddlers up to 3 years old.
The manual, its authors say, fills a gap left by the focus of other diagnostic systems on older children and adults.
It allows psychiatrists and pediatricians to spot the beginnings of behavioral difficulties that might become more serious if ignored.


Pataki Plan to Limit Terms Faces a Fight
Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposal for term limits faces a tough battle with the Legislature this year, with leaders saying they are not inclined to support it.
"I'm not for it in my heart because I don't think it's good government," said the Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, a Rensselaer County Republican and an ally of Mr.
Pataki.


Europeans Offer to Help Russia Seek Peace in Secessionist War
Germany and France said today that the European Union had asked Russia to invite experts from Europe's largest security organization to try to work out a peaceful solution to the secessionist struggle in southern Russia.
Roland Duque, a spokesman for the French Foreign Ministry in Paris, said that European Union representatives in Moscow suggested on Friday that Russia ask a group from the 53-nation Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to help end fighting in Chechnya.


An Old Wine In New Bottles Retains Its Sparkle
The Metropolitan Opera's three-year-old John Copley production of "L'Elisir d'Amore," which returned to the house on Monday evening, proceeds from the view that this Donizetti comedy is worth its weight in cotton candy.
Beni Montresor's sets, with their pastel shades of pink, blue, yellow and green, offer a storybook view of the Italian countryside.
Its components -- houses, a church, trees -- were painted on flat backdrops that ascended and descended with magical efficiency.
And the bright costumes in which Mr.
Montresor dressed his peasants and soldiers further the fairy-tale imagery, as did Gil Wechsler's soft lighting.
And why not?
There are no brain-breaking themes, cosmic truths or moral lessons here, only a featherweight love story and a florid score that, when sung and played as well as it was on Monday, seems to float effortlessly through the sets and out into the house.
There were a few needlessly silly touches: soldiers who marched backward and did peculiar dance steps, for example.
But for the most part Elizabeth Bachman's staging was direct and traditional.
When Donizetti and his librettist, Felice Romani, gave Nemorino and Adina nothing to do but stand and sing, Ms.
Bachman left them to it.


Stocks Mixed: Dow Up, Nasdaq Off
The stock market, on its first day of trading in the new year, closed mixed yesterday, but with a steep slide in Nasdaq stocks.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 4.04 points, to 3,838.48, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index fell 0.16 point, to 459.11.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index declined 8.38 points, to 743.58.


Accounts
National Pork Producers Council, West Des Moines, Iowa, to Creswell, Munsell, Fultz &amp; Zirbel, Des Moines, to handle advertising, public relations, promotion and consumer events for the World Pork Expo, previously handled by Sunshine Promotions, Indianapolis.
The billings were not disclosed.


McKinney &amp; Silver Gets Five Alive Job
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that it had further broadened its agency roster by naming McKinney &amp; Silver in Raleigh, N.C., to handle advertising and marketing responsibilities for the Five Alive brand of citrus drink sold by the company's Coca-Cola Foods division in Houston.
The billings on the account, which has been inactive for the last decade, have not been determined.
Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York, the last agency to handle Five Alive, will continue to handle Coca-Cola Foods' Minute Maid and Hi-C brands.
A campaign for Five Alive is expected to begin in the spring.


Jess Stacy, 90, Big-Band Pianist For Goodman and Others, Dies
Jess Stacy, one of the leading pianists of the swing era and long a mainstay in Benny Goodman's orchestra, died on Sunday at the Hospital of the Good Samaritan in Los Angeles.
He was 90.
The cause was congestive heart failure after a brief illness, said his wife, Patricia.


Executive Changes
CONVEST ENERGY CORP., Houston, appointed Gary L. Pittman executive vice president and chief financial officer and W. J. Bielstein Jr. executive vice president of exploration and production.
DETROIT DIESEL CORP., Detroit, named Randall L. Lawrence senior vice president and chief financial officer.


Sushi in Just 3 Seconds, From a Robot
ROBOTS have come to New York, and what they have in their cold little plastic hands is sushi.
Quicker than a human, inevitable like the tide, the Suzumo Machinery Company's sushi robot, an $86,000 machine with four pairs of white plastic hands, is turning out 1,200 rectangular pieces of sushi every hour in a Queens commissary, for sale later in fast-food restaurants.
The hands pat the rice once, twice.
Pat, pat.


Holocaust Museum Chooses Scholar as Its Next Director
The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington has nominated Steven T. Katz, whose scholarly work has focused on Holocaust studies and Jewish philosophy, to be its new director.
Dr.
Katz, a professor at Cornell University, would replace Shaike Weinberg, 76, who came out of retirement a year and a half ago to serve as the new museum's first director.
Dr.
Katz recently published the first volume of a trilogy, "The Holocaust in Historical Context," which argues the uniqueness of the Nazi genocide.
He is also the editor of "Modern Judaism," an academic review published by Johns Hopkins University.


A Bittersweet Night For Seminoles' Dunn
The ticket request list was long, longer than that of any of his Florida State teammates.
A Baton Rouge native, Warrick Dunn, had his family to accommodate -- five younger siblings, a grandmother, assorted other relatives.
Everyone wanted to come to the Sugar Bowl.
Everyone wanted to see Dunn and his teammates play Florida.
The most important name was not on the list.
It couldn't be.
A sophomore running back, Dunn was the most valuable player in the Seminoles' 23-17 victory over the Gators Monday evening.
He ran for 58 yards, caught 9 passes for 51 more, and threw a 73-yard touchdown pass on a trick play the Seminoles used for the first time.


Advertising; Saatchi's Bitter Departure Prompts an Industry Debate
The advertising industry fractured into warring camps yesterday in assessing the implications of a decision by Maurice Saatchi -- ousted on Dec. 16 as chairman of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company in London -- to acrimoniously sever his last ties with the agency company that he and his reclusive brother, Charles, started 25 years ago.
The defter of the dueling dual-continent spin doctors?
For the moment anyway, the nod goes to the anti-Saatchi forces, mostly in this country, who are assiduously playing down the possible disruptions at a Saatchi &amp; Saatchi without its best-known Saatchi.


It's Time To Play Hardball on Capitol Hill
Opening day in Congress could produce more baseball than opening day of the 1995 baseball season.
But while Washington lawmakers introduce three bills today aimed at baseball's antitrust exemption, a committee of owners and club executives will discuss matters that will have an impact on their opening day: spring training and replacement players.
On the first day of the 104th Congress, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, and Representative Michael Bilirakis, Republican of Florida, will initiate action in their respective legislative bodies on bills that would strip baseball of its exemption from antitrust laws.
In addition, Bilirakis will introduce a bill that would void baseball's exemption under the sports broadcasting act.


A Darker Side for U.S. In the Mexican Solution
Just before the peso crisis began two weeks ago, Clinton Administration officials celebrated the anniversary of the approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement by proudly announcing the first fruits of victory: Mexico had overtaken Japan as the No. 2 consumer of American exports.
Now the Administration is facing the darker side of the broad economic alliance it pressed so hard to bring to pass.
To restore confidence in the Mexican economy, it has supported -- and helped shape -- a plan that is almost certain to cut back the pace at which American goods flow across the border.
Moreover, it is a plan that seems certain to increase the inducements for Mexican workers to come to the United States illegally.


Advanced Placement Continues Uneroded
To the Editor:
Readers might not concur with the conclusion of your front-page Dec. 28 report that Advanced Placement exams are suffering an erosion in value if they knew the following:


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
4.94
3.15
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.78
5.54
3.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.37
6.19
3.29
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.87
7.82
5.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.92
7.87
6.41
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.81
8.78
7.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.95
6.92
5.54
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sports of The Times; The Bar Is Raised A Notch
EVERY day, Adrian Bailey, who was the senior quarterback on the Erasmus Hall High School football team this past season, must be on his toes.
He knows that if he goes from his home and hangs out at the nearby corner of Church and Flatbush in Brooklyn, he could get in trouble, or worse.
There's crime.
There are drugs.
There are killings.
So he avoids the corner.
Every morning when he goes to school he, like his schoolmates, must pass through a metal detector at the entrance.
"And there are no fair fights," he said recently.
"You do or say something to someone, even unintentionally, and they might shoot you or knife you."


BASEBALL: The Sweetest Sound of All; McDougald, Yankee Star of 50's, Can Hear Again After Operation
There was a tension at breakfast that Gil McDougald, the standout infielder on the great Yankee teams of the 1950's, tried not to acknowledge, a tension that had been building since November.
That was when he had undergone the operation to insert a cochlear implant behind his right ear with the hope of being able to hear again.
McDougald, silver-haired at age 66, but still looking trim in his tan turtleneck, sat in a booth yesterday in the East Bay Restaurant on First Avenue with his wife, Lucille, and one of their daughters, Denise Costigan, one of their seven grown children, in fact.


Why Must Congress Pick On Disabled Kids?; To Punish Heroism
To the Editor:
Letters praising group homes for small numbers of orphans or troubled children in Israel, Austria and the United States (Dec. 27) miss the point of welfare reform proposals and may give the impression that mothers who are poor are by definition abusive or neglectful.


Russian War: Corpses and Wild Dogs
This grim city was strewn today with scores of dead Russian soldiers, who lay in stacks along the broad, tree-lined boulevards.
Wild dogs roamed among them on the streets.
Old women locked out of darkened basements wailed in terror, shielding their eyes from the frightening skies above.
Although many people have thought it was not possible, the fighting for the Chechen capital keeps worsening.
Desperate Russian troops caught inside the city blasted away with tanks, hitting both the presidential palace and the Parliament.
Russian rocket attacks were incessant today.


Curbing Violence at Abortion Clinics
To hear some Washington officials discuss it, protecting abortion clinics from murderous attacks is simply a matter of budgets and cost-effectiveness.
Right after the shooting spree that killed two people and injured five others at two abortion clinics in Massachusetts, Attorney General Janet Reno lamented that "law enforcement does not have adequate resources to provide continuing protection for all threats."
Even after the subsequent gunshot attack on an abortion clinic in Virginia, two Republican Congressional leaders pushed the budgetary excuse vigorously.
Senator Bob Dole, incoming Senate majority leader, called it "pretty hard to police everything" and said it could be "very, very expensive" to do so.
The answer, he said, is to rely more on states and local communities.
Similarly, Representative Henry Hyde, incoming chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, expressed doubt that there were "enough Federal marshals" to assume Federal responsibility for clinics' safety.
He suggested that clinics might hire guards, just as banks do, as "part of the cost of doing business."


CHRONICLE
Oscar Wilde, a writer who was certainly not blocked, was honored with a plaque in London yesterday and is due for more accolades next month, The Associated Press reported.
The plaque went up at the Theater Royal, Haymarket, on the 100th anniversary of the premiere of Wilde's play "An Ideal Husband." Wilde, who died in 1900, will also be recognized in Poets' Corner at Westminster Abbey on Feb. 14.


With No Regrets, Wright Retires as New York Judge
Justice Bruce Wright, called Turn 'em Loose Bruce years ago by critics of his bail policies, last week ended 25 years on the bench with no regrets.
"To say that I would've done things differently means to me I would have been a good boy, kept my mouth shut and availed myself of the benefits of the system," Justice Wright said.
"I don't think I can do that. I don't think I could ever do that."


Simpson's Lawyer Says Account of Shake-Up Is Unfounded
As rumors and press reports about changes in O. J. Simpson's defense team flew around him, Robert L. Shapiro denied today that he had been demoted by his client or displaced by his co-counsel.
When Mr.
Shapiro, newly returned from a Hawaiian vacation, arrived at the Los Angeles County jail on Monday, he was greeted by a phalanx of reporters and camera crews, asking whether his role in the case had changed.
They had been aroused by a report in The Daily News in New York, which stated that Mr.
Simpson had decided to "bench" Mr.
Shapiro and "hand the ball" to his co-counsel, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr.


Gay Ex-Midshipman Drops Bid to Appeal
A midshipman who was removed from the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis after acknowledging that he is homosexual has decided not to appeal to the Supreme Court.
The decision by the midshipman, Joseph C. Steffan, leaves intact a 7-to-3 ruling in November by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit that upheld his removal in 1987.
That ruling conflicts with a decision last year in which a Federal appellate court in San Francisco barred the Navy from removing Petty Officer Keith Meinhold, who said in an interview that he is homosexual.


JUDGE CURBS LAW ON SEX OFFENDERS
Responding to a petition from a prisoner nearing the end of an 11-year rape sentence, a Federal judge today exempted the man from a central requirement of "Megan's Law," New Jersey's recently enacted crackdown on convicted sex offenders.
The inmate, Carlos Diaz, who mailed the complaint to Federal District Court the week before Christmas, had balked at registering his name with police officials in the city where he planned to start a new life, as the law requires.


Mourning the Victims of Two Clinic Shootings
In a church still decorated for Christmas, Shannon Lowney, the 25-year-old receptionist who was the first to die in a gunman's attack on two abortion clinics last Friday, was remembered in a memorial service tonight as "the kind face," the woman behind the desk who made all patients feel welcome at Planned Parenthood.
Alice Verhoeven, the director of the clinic, in nearby Brookline, remembered what Ms.
Lowney had once said before leaving for Maine for what turned out to be a temporary move.
"She said, 'Who will ever hire me?' " Ms.
Verhoeven told the hundreds of mourners who filled every seat, and the aisles, of the Arlington Street Church across from the Public Garden.
"I remember thinking, 'Oh, sweetie, you don't know what a gem you are.' "


Campbell Is Honored
JOHN CAMPBELL was selected as the best driver on harness racing's 1994 Grand Circuit yesterday, the fifth time he has won the honor in the past six years. (AP)


Hospitals Are Tempted but Wary As For-Profit Chains Woo Them
Richard Scott has made deals to take over 137 hospitals in the last year, and he wants more.
Now, his Columbia-HCA Healthcare Corporation has its eye on some Catholic hospitals in Chicago.
Stay away, says Joseph Cardinal Bernardin of Chicago, one of the most powerful clerics in the nation.
The Roman Catholic Church has an obligation to poor people and to the Catholic way of health care, the Cardinal recently warned the 20 hospitals in his archdiocese, and selling to a for-profit chain would be a betrayal.
He reminded them that the archdiocese could withdraw its recognition of any hospital defying him.


Foreign Affairs; Home Alone in Pyongyang
In the past few weeks, American diplomats in Asia have been compiling a list of all the ailments that the North Korean leader Kim Jong Il is rumored to be suffering from.
Kim is reportedly dying of heart failure, kidney failure, liver failure, brain damage, depression, bulimia, dandruff, killer hemorrhoids and the lingering effects of a car accident.
Aside from that, he feels fine.
But the elusive health report on the reclusive Mr.
Kim actually says something quite definitive: We don't have a clue about what is happening in North Korea, and neither does anyone else.
The Chinese have told Washington they don't know who is in charge in Pyongyang.
Ditto the Japanese.
Even the South Koreans, who always insist that they have North Korea wired for sound, now aver that they too are baffled as to why Kim Jr. has not been inaugurated with all the leadership titles of his late father, Kim Il Sung, who died in July and was President and Worker's Party Secretary General.


COMPANY BRIEFS
EASTMAN KODAK CO. , Rochester, said it had completed the $1.55 billion cash sale of the household products segments of its former L &amp; F Products subsidiary to Reckitt &amp; Colman P.L.C., London.
NEW YORK LIFE INSURANCE CO., New York, said its wholly owned subsidiary, New York Life Worldwide Holding Inc., and St.
James's Place Capital P.L.C., London, an investment holding concern, had formed a new company called Life Assurance Holding Corp.
New York Life and St.
James's both contributed $49 million to form the new company.


Castle Energy Corp.(CECX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


UConn's Pressure Defense Makes Villanova Crumble
Villanova may be the team of the future in the Big East, but the Connecticut Huskies let the Wildcats in on a little secret tonight: their time has not quite arrived.
Using a stifling fullcourt press and a tenacious overplaying man-to-man defense, the sixth-ranked Huskies cruised to a 77-62 victory here at duPont Pavilion.


The Victories Speak for Themselves
With Red Auerbach all but in the rearview mirror by yesterday afternoon, Lenny Wilkens was asked to take a moment and consider possible goals on the road ahead.
It was a tossup question, beginning a fishing expedition for affirmation that Wilkens, soon to become pro basketball's top-winning coach, also fancies the helm of the next United States Olympic team.
Wilkens brushed aside this clumsy bait, and countered with a line of his own, typically direct.


Few Details in N.H.L. Talks
Mid-level talks between representatives of the National Hockey League and the players' union aimed at resolving the 95-day lockout continued for a third day yesterday in Chicago.
Neither side discussed any details during the eight and a half hours of meetings.
Arthur Pincus, a spokesman for the N.H.L., declined to comment on whether the talks would continue today.
"I can't tell you about tomorrow," said Steve McAllister, a union spokesman.
"The talks are ongoing. There's really nothing else."


Computer Error Has a Snowball Effect
To the Editor:
John Hockenberry's rather blithe "Pentium and Our Crisis of Faith" (Op-Ed, Dec. 28) will mislead readers into believing that an arithmetic error in the 16th decimal place is nothing to get bent out of shape about.
I am referring to his remark "it's hard to imagine how this kind of accuracy matters." Then he asks: "When was the last time anyone checked the 16th decimal place of an economic forecast in Washington or in a corporate boardroom?"


First Amendment, Too, Belongs at the Mall
To the Editor:
As executive director of a group involved in petitioning the New Jersey Supreme Court for the right to leaflet in malls, I take exception to Barry Rothman's Dec. 29 letter.


Preserving the Taste But Reducing the Fat
TO make a success of chicken paprikash it is useful to have the very best quality paprika.
What is available in the supermarket will do; but the imported Hungarian paprika found in specialty stores is much better.
What makes the chicken paprikash different from the traditional version is the use of lower-fat sour cream and yogurt in place of full- fat sour cream.


G.O.P. IN SENATE HOPING FOR CUTS OF $450 BILLION
Senate Republicans said today that they hoped to cut Federal spending by perhaps $450 billion by 1999, wiping out at least 100 programs.
On the day before the 104th Congress convened, in a Capitol even thicker with anticipation than with moving boxes, the Republicans said they would consider spending cuts in every Federal benefit program except Social Security.
And they said that even if those savings were offset by the bushel of tax cuts that they also wanted to enact, the Federal deficit could be reduced over the five-year stretch by at least $330 billion.


On the Job 3 Months, a Firefighter Gives His Life
Thomas Wylie lived and breathed only to be a firefighter.
Yesterday, in a hospital bed far from the scene of his last fire, he died as one.
Firefighter Wylie, 30, suffered carbon monoxide poisoning during a fire a week earlier, on Dec. 27, when he went into an apartment building in Chinatown searching for victims.
He died at 11 A.M. yesterday at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
The cause of the fire has still not been determined, but officials said yesterday that they were continuing to investigate the possibility of arson.


New Patent Boundaries to Be Set
Tucked away to one side of Lafayette Park and known mainly only to disgruntled inventors and their lawyers, it may be one of the most inconspicuous and obscure Federal courts in the nation.
But two imminent rulings from the court could affect businesses throughout the land.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit is expected any day now to hand down decisions that could offer the clearest guidance yet on two of the murkiest questions in patent law:


Clinton's Luck Takes Upturn On Duck Hunt
A world away from the drained swamp that is Washington, President Clinton toted a borrowed shotgun into a flooded soybean field before dawn today and emerged three hours later bearing two dead ducks and a political message: assault weapons are bad, but banning them doesn't impede hunting, which is a good all-American sport.
"I really started feeling like a person when I was about five minutes out on the water today," Mr.
Clinton said with a grin after the outing on a friend's farm near Cotton Plant, about 80 miles northeast of here.
By the end of the morning, he was eating like two people, downing a farmhouse breakfast of scrambled eggs, sausage, bacon and homemade biscuits with sausage gravy, then stopping an hour later at a country store to split one of its "hubcap"-size hamburgers.


Day One
On the first day of the 104th Congress, the new Republican majority will immediately pass the following major reforms, aimed at restoring the faith and trust of the American people in their government.
That promise is part of the House Republicans' "Contract With America," and the first day of the Republican-controlled 104th Congress is today.
The House agenda for this afternoon calls for 20 minutes' debate and a vote on each of eight reforms.


Quayle, Hospitalized Again, Will Undergo Appendix Surgery
Former Vice President Dan Quayle was admitted to a hospital in Indianapolis over the New Year's weekend for elective surgical removal of an enlarged appendix later this week, his office said yesterday.
It was the second admission to the same hospital in a month for the 47-year-old Mr.
Quayle, who is widely expected to seek the 1996 Republican Presidential nomination.
On Dec. 6, he was discharged from Indiana University Hospital after an eight-day stay for treatment of blood clots in both lungs.
His doctors said they believed that the clots had formed in veins in his leg during prolonged sitting on airplanes and broken off to lodge in blood vessels in his lungs.


New Utah State Coach
JOHN L. SMITH, the football coach at Idaho, was selected yesterday to fill the coaching vacancy at Utah State.
He will replace CHARLIE WEATHERBIE, who is leaving to coach at Navy.


Senate Reports on Whitewater Offer Glimpse of Partisan Battling Still in Store
In what could well be a preview of partisan clashes over Whitewater, Democrats and Republicans on the Senate Banking Committee today issued reports drawing sharply different conclusions about last summer's hearings.
On their last day in control of the committee, Democrats released a report passing no judgment about the propriety of discussions between regulators and senior White House officials regarding an Arkansas savings and loan at the center of the Whitewater investigation.
Their report only implicitly criticized Administration officials for being less than candid to Congress.


Once Again, London Fog Gets a New Chief
Management turmoil continues to buffet the London Fog Corporation, which said yesterday that it had hired Robert E. Gregory Jr., a longtime apparel industry executive, as its third chief executive in six months.
The beleaguered coat manufacturer said C. William Crain, who was Mr.
Gregory's right-hand man at the Gitano Group, had been appointed chief operating officer.


Corrections
A chart yesterday about crime in the Sunset Park section of Brooklyn misstated the number of arrests in the 72d Precinct for 1993 and 1994 and the percentage change.
In the first 50 weeks of 1994, there were 4,540 arrests (not 7,095); in 1993, there were 4,174 arrests (not 5,820).
Thus the increase was 8.8 percent, not 21.9.


House Set to Make Members Subject to the Rights Laws
The first order of legislative business for the new Congress convening on Wednesday is a proposal to subject lawmakers to the civil rights and labor laws they have imposed on private employers and agencies in the executive branch of the Federal Government.
The measure, part of the House Republicans' "Contract With America," has strong bipartisan support from lawmakers, who have long been pilloried by critics as arrogant, hypocritical and elitist -- in short, out of touch with ordinary Americans.


Many Facing Hard '95 Remain Determined to Give
In the first days of 1995, many New Yorkers are wondering how impending government budget cuts and an unstable economy will affect their lives.
Some have not yet recovered jobs lost during the long recession.
Others depend on publicly financed health or child care programs that face decreases in financing.
Letters to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund suggest many donors will face hardships of their own in 1995.
But even among those with uncertain futures, the spirit of giving persists.


Judge Allows Release of Wolves in West
A Federal judge in Wyoming today refused to halt a Federal effort to bring wolves back to the Rocky Mountain West, clearing the way for the animals' return to an area where they were exterminated more than a half-century ago.
With the ruling today, the first of dozens of wolves will be captured in Canada and released, possibly within a few weeks, in Yellowstone National Park and the wilderness of central Idaho, Federal officials said.


Some 417 Feet Above It All


Reporter's Notebook; It's Official: Giuliani Names Right-Hand Man First Deputy Mayor
It took some time to make it official.
But yesterday, as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani began his second year in office, he designated Peter J. Powers, widely recognized as the de facto second-in-command of City Hall, as the First Deputy Mayor.
"He's in fact been the First Deputy Mayor for some time," Mr.
Giuliani said at a news conference.
"So I'm really not promoting him, I'm just acknowledging the fact that he's the First Deputy Mayor and that it's time to have that role back in city government."


Man Executed After Disputed Murder Conviction
Prosecutors never had much difficulty securing convictions in the killing of Etta Ann Urdiales, a 25-year-old paramedic shot to death in a Houston suburb nine years ago.
In fact, they got two different juries to convict two different people in the killing.
The first person convicted was Jesse Dewayne Jacobs, now 44.
After originally confessing to fatally shooting Mrs.
Urdiales, Mr.
Jacobs recanted and blamed his sister, who was later convicted for the same killing.


Farewell to a Trusting Heart; 2 Youths Held in Death of a Magnanimous Social Worker
With soldierly bravado, Hope Fried often called her brand of social work "a tour of duty": skirmishes in the defense of battered children who turned to her for the mothering they had missed.
Her tour ended today at a plot of fresh earth mixed with snowflakes, her younger sister kneeling at her grave's edge, a crowd of friends passing a long-necked shovel.


No Headline
"The Russians are going to bomb, bomb, bomb and bomb. The only thing left to them is to destroy everything from the air." MOVLADI UDUGOV, Chechen Information Minister.  [ A1:1. ]


Creative Executive For Harris Drury
Mike Tesch, a longtime creative executive in New York, is relocating to Florida, joining Harris Drury Cohen in Fort Lauderdale as executive vice president and co-creative director.


AT WORK WITH: Wendy Kaufman; Snapple! Cackle! Pop! A Star Is Born
WENDY KAUFMAN burst into a small room in the student center on the Bronx campus of Fordham University, lugging a case of fruit drink.
"I'm going to have a heart attack!" she exclaimed, as she dropped the case onto a table and gazed at the 25 wide-eyed young women seated before her.
"So, do I look the same as on TV?" she asked, breaking into a cackle.
"You know me! I've got 10 cases out there for you!"


Fun on the Seamy Side, In the 20's and the 90's
THE WILD PARTY The Lost Classic  By Joseph Moncure March  Drawings by Art Spiegelman. 111 pages.
Pantheon. $22.
PULP FICTION  By Quentin Tarantino  160 pages.
Hyperion. $9.95.
Queenie was a blonde, and her age stood still,
And she danced twice a day in vaudeville.
Gray eyes.
Lips like coals aglow.
Her face was a tinted mask of snow.
Studio;
Bedroom;
Bath;
Kitchenette:
Furnished like a third-act passion set:
Oriental;
Sentimental;
They owed two months on the rental.


Benjamin Has a Night to Be Remembered
He gracefully caught a lob pass in midair, gently banked the ball home and pounded his fists all the way down the court.
The Nets were on their way now, and he was the reason why.
"Hard work, that's all," Benoit Benjamin mumbled after the game, almost embarrassed by the attention.
"I just kept staying after practice."


Bond Prices Drop on Fear Of Inflation
Prices of Treasury securities sagged yesterday, beginning the first trading day of the new year the same way they ended last year.
Traders said investors were still worried that inflation would accelerate and cause fixed-income investments to lose value.
The 30-year bond fell 17/32 of a percentage point, to a price of 95 7/32 , for a yield of 7.92 percent, its highest level in three weeks.
The market's latest jitters were tied to the National Association of Purchasing Management report for December, which showed its prices paid index surging.
For some it was a signal that inflation pressures were no longer imaginary.


Girls Don't Want To Have Gym
WHEN asked to describe how they felt about gym class, nearly all of the 15 teen-age girls wrinkled their noses with disgust.
"When I was little, I used to love it," said Rachael Ludlow, 15, a sophomore at Edison High School.
"But most girls don't like to mess up their hair, to get changed or like, you know, be bothered."


Foreign Students: Who They Are
The Institute of International Education, a private organization that adminsiters exchange programs, has released its annual profile of foreign college students in the United States.
The report fround that while Asian sutdents still make up a majority of the foreign students, their numbers are leveling off.
It also found that the number of exchange studens who are women continues to rise.
JOHN HASKINS


F.C.C. Chided In Fox Case
James H. Quello, one of five commissioners at the Federal Communications Commission, said today that the agency had embarked on an overly secretive "star chamber" proceeding to investigate the ownership structure of the Fox Broadcasting Company, a unit of Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation.
In a letter to the Senate Commerce Committee, Mr.
Quello said the agency had damaged its credibility by trying to impose secrecy restrictions on people who testified in the inquiry.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  Western Baseball League
PALM SPRINGS SUNS -- Signed Rafael Jaquel and Rey Brito, pitchers.


Red Phillips, 74, A Basketball Star With City College
Claude (Red) Phillips, a former New York City high school basketball star who gained wider fame when he teamed with Red Holzman to form an indomitable backcourt combination at City College in the early 1940's, died in New York last Wednesday.
He was 74.
Robert Williams, the president of the New York City Basketball Hall of Fame, said the cause was a heart attack.


House Opener: Christians 1, Cost-Cutters 0
Chalk one up for the lobbyists of the Lord.
Congress will open on Wednesday the same way it has opened since the First Continental Congress met in 1774 -- with a chaplain's prayer.


Chemical Tells of Big Peso Loss
Chemical Bank said yesterday that a foreign exchange trader in New York had lost $70 million while making unauthorized deals in Mexican pesos.
The loss will cut the bank's fourth-quarter trading revenue by $40 million after taxes, the bank said.


Bypassed By Plague, And Tours
As an orange dollop of a sun began to set over the dunes of the Thar Desert, Bhagwan Singh Sodha leaned back on a chair outside his house and glumly surveyed the empty mud cottages in this western village, which his family has dominated for centuries.
This year, the tourist season at Khuri, about 60 miles east of the border between India and Pakistan, has collapsed, a result of concern among foreign travelers about a brief outbreak of pneumonic plague elsewhere in India and a virulent form of cerebral malaria here in Rajasthan State.


Mansell Is Passed Over
The Williams Formula One team selected DAVID COULTHARD as its No. 2 driver yesterday, placing in doubt the racing future of the former world champion NIGEL MANSELL.
Coulthard, 23, is regarded as one of the sport's brightest prospects while the 41-year-old Mansell is a champion in both Formula One and Indy-car racing.


Devers-Torrence Again
GAIL DEVERS and GWEN TORRENCE, the 1992 Olympic women's sprint champions, will face each other in the 60-meter dash at the Millrose Games Feb. 3 at Madison Square Garden.
Devers, the 100-meter gold medalist at the Barcelona Games and winner of the 100 meters and 100-meter hurdles at the 1993 world championships, has won the 60 at the Millrose Games for the last two years.
She also won the 60-meter hurdles at the 1992 Millrose.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  RUSSIAN REGION'S GRIM SCENE  The fighting in the capital of a separatist region of Russia kept getting worse, with Russian military leaders apparently desperate about their failure to defeat the outnumbered rebels.
A1  EUROPEAN MEDIATION OFFER  A European security organization is offering mediation to try to settle the conflict in Russia over a secessionist region peacefully, France and Germany said.
A6


Burden of Proof Is Shifted To Applicants for Shelter
The Cuomo administration's parting gesture last week to give New York City more time to shelter homeless families also gives it more muscle to prevent people who cannot prove they are homeless from entering the system.
The 44-page directive, issued on Friday, grants the city up to two days to find shelter for homeless families, instead of immediately.
And within that 48-hour window, the city will be able to apply tougher standards on what constitutes homelessness.
Those standards are typically more difficult to enforce once a family has temporary housing.


A Change in Wireless Computing
The long-heralded era of wireless computing will draw a step closer Wednesday when the Motorola Corporation introduces a version of Apple Computer's Newton hand-held computer that can transmit electronic mail using radio signals.
The new machine, known as the Marco Wireless Communicator, will be priced between $900 and $1,400 and weigh 1.8 pounds.
It will permit users to send and receive electronic messages without being connected to a land-based telephone line.


Man Kills In-Laws And Briefly Holds His Son Hostage
A man stabbed his estranged wife's parents to death in Brooklyn last night and briefly held his 9-year-old son hostage with a knife to his throat before giving himself up, the police said.
Sgt.
Martin Browne, the head of the 61st Precinct detective squad, said the man, identified as Anatuleiy Utenyshev, a Russian immigrant, killed his mother- and father-in-law in their fifth-floor apartment at 1800 Ocean Parkway in Sheepshead Bay, then waited in the apartment for his wife and son to arrive.


New York Needs to Play a Part in Voter Law
To the Editor:
"Put Muscle Behind Motor-Voter" (editorial, Dec. 27) criticizes the effort by Gov.
Pete Wilson of California to have the National Voter Registration Act of 1993, the "motor-voter" law, declared unconstitutional because it fails to provide sufficient funds.
Independent of Federal funds, states have a responsibility to translate the law into action.


Wine Talk
BROKEN all your New Year's resolutions by now?
Not me.
I made only one, and it's going to be easy to keep.
I'm going to drink more zinfandel in 1995.


Schulz of Germany Looks to Foreman
AXEL SCHULZ of Germany thinks he will challenge GEORGE FOREMAN for the World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation heavyweight titles at the Louisiana Superdome in New Orleans on April 22.
Foreman isn't so sure.


Why Must Congress Pick On Disabled Kids?
To the Editor:
I was horrified to read that Republicans are drafting a bill to switch cash grants of up to $446 a month for children with chronic illnesses and disabilities to a less flexible medical voucher system (front page, Dec. 29).
So many expenses in raising children with disabilities cannot be categorized as medical.
The bill's sponsors, including Newt Gingrich, have a myopic view of cost control without caring about ramifications.


The Victories Speak for Themselves
With Red Auerbach all but in the rearview mirror by yesterday afternoon, Lenny Wilkens was asked to take a moment and consider possible goals on the road ahead.
It was a tossup question, beginning a fishing expedition for affirmation that Wilkens, soon to become pro basketball's top-winning coach, also fancies the helm of the next United States Olympic team.
Wilkens brushed aside this clumsy bait, and countered with a line of his own, typically direct.


BANKRUPTCY SOUGHT FOR 46 CROW PROPERTIES
Trammell Crow Interests, the nation's largest owner of warehouses, sought bankruptcy court protection yesterday for 46 of its properties.
The Crow family company owes $295 million on the properties to the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States.
The Crow company says its difficulties pertain only to properties backed by Equitable, not to the company as a whole.
"Each of these loans stands alone, and there is no obligation to contribute additional cash," said Kathy Smalley, a vice president of Crow.
"It doesn't really have implications for any of the other Crow properties." She said Equitable's terms did not allow it to take any other real estate to satisfy the loans.
Yesterday's filing, in Phoenix, covers properties, mostly warehouses, in Arizona, California, Colorado, Georgia, New Mexico, North Carolina and Texas.
Trammell Crow Interests is distinct from the Trammell Crow Company, which specializes in property management.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Mexico's Rescue Plan
Mexico outlined an austerity plan aimed at stabilizing the economy, but some analysts said it would not be enough to win back the confidence of foreign investors.  [ Page A1. ] The plan carries high stakes for President Clinton.
For one, it may raise illegal immigration into the United States.
News Analysis.  [ D4. ]


RESULTS PLUS
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  Vanderbilt Survives Mississippi  Sheri Sam scored 19 points and four other Commodores scored in double figures as No. 6 Vanderbilt beat previously unbeaten and 15th-ranked Mississippi, 91-54, in a Southeastern Conference game last night.


Parking Rules
In New York City, parking rules are strictly observed, except when they aren't - including more than 30 days of exemptions for holidays.
List, page B2.


Chronicle
The symposium poses an intriguing question: "Lawyers Who Write: Where Do They Find the Time?" Some answers will be offered on Jan. 18 when a panel of lawyers and judges who are also poets, novelists or essayists speak at the New York County Lawyers' Association at 14 Vesey Street, near the World Financial Center in lower Manhattan.
LOUIS BEGLEY, a senior partner in Debevoise &amp; Plimpton and a novelist who is the president of the PEN American Center, said: "You simply give up the things that make up so much of most people's happiness. You don't go to the movies, you take few walks and you don't take weekend naps." He writes only on holidays and weekends.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
All in The Family
Part 1 of the college hockey season, early skirmishes and the holiday tournaments, is over.
Now comes Part 2, two months of intraconference play, which leads to Part 3, the championship tournaments.


'Pulp Fiction' Gets Top Prize From National Film Critics
"Pulp Fiction," the exuberant, innovatively structured crime drama directed by Quentin Tarantino, was named the best film of 1994 by the National Society of Film Critics yesterday.
Voting at the Algonquin Hotel, the 42-member group also cited Mr.
Tarantino as best director and gave its best-screenplay prize to him and Roger Avary as the film's co-writers.
Jennifer Jason Leigh was voted best actress for her performance as the caustic, brittle heroine of "Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle." Diane Weist was named best supporting actress for playing a grandly theatrical diva in "Bullets Over Broadway." "Red," the last film in Kryzsztof Kieslowski's "Three Colors" trilogy, was voted best foreign film.


Bonner Begins to Adjust to His Father's Death
This is a difficult time for Anthony Bonner.
But he intends to handle it the way his father would have wanted.
Bonner returned to the Knicks last week after missing six games because of the death of his father, Isaac Bonner Sr., on Dec. 19.
Bonner plans to use the strength his father passed on to him to help him endure.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Boarding a First Avenue bus the other afternoon, I headed toward the rear, to an empty middle space in a three-seater along the windows, only to hesitate when I noted the stocky occupant on the left spilling over into my targeted seat.
There was no such hesitation on the part of the jogger behind me as she shoehorned herself into the space while giving the burly guy a long, icy stare, prompting this equally icy exchange:


Syracuse Holds Off Boston College
Syracuse 81; Boston College 72
In Newton, Mass., Lawrence Moten scored 28 points, 12 during a first-half run that brought Syracuse from 1 point down to 13 ahead, and the 10th-ranked Orangemen held on to beat Boston College.


At the Nation's Table; Northeast Vermont How Fallen Moose Are Put to Use
In northern New England, where the moose population is growing, Vermont has found a way to turn a problem into a gastronomic windfall.
When moose are killed on the road, game wardens, alerted to the accidents by the state police, dress and deliver moose meat to local butchers.
They in turn prepare and freeze it in 20-pound lots (10 pounds of steak, 10 pounds of ground meat).


Houston Effler Wins Microcom Account
Microcom Inc., a marketer of personal computer equipment in Norwood, Mass., has selected Houston Effler Herstek Favat in Boston to handle its worldwide account, which had been at Rosenthal Direct in Wellesley, Mass., for about two years.
The billings were estimated at $2 million.
Houston Effler was awarded the account after a five-month review that also included two other finalists based in Boston: Pagano, Schenck &amp; Kay and Wallwork Curry &amp; Clark.


Food Notes
Celebrating Epiphany
In many cultures the Christmas season continues until Epiphany, Jan. 6, which celebrates the gifts of the Magi.
Sweet breads and cakes, often with little trinkets in them, are traditionally served on the holiday.
One of the more spectacular of these is the rosca de reyes from Panaderia Don Paco Lopez, a Mexican bakery at 4703 Fourth Avenue in Sunset Park, Brooklyn.
A generous wreath of rich, eggy bread decorated with sugar, candied fruits and figs, the rosca de reyes has a few tiny plastic dolls, representing the baby Jesus, baked inside.
It comes in a medium size for $15, large for $20.
Orders can be placed by calling (718) 492-7443.


Death Penalty Applause Brings Foes Alive Again
IN this season, when rulers often proclaim amnesties or commute sentences, the loudest applause that interrupted Gov.
George E. Pataki's inaugural speech came when he said he would soon fulfill his campaign promise to restore the death penalty.
What exactly did that cheering mean?


Hard Choices for U.S.
Mexico's recovery plan, shaped in part by the White House, carries high stakes for President Clinton.
For one thing, it may raise illegal immigration into the United States.
News analysis, page D4.


What 29 Cents Won't Buy Anymore


Pataki to Stress Basic Themes in State of the State Address
Only three days after his inauguration, Gov.
George E. Pataki will restate his priorities and set the tone for his relationship with the Legislature in his first State of the State address on Wednesday.
Unlike his predecessor, Mario M. Cuomo, who used his State of the State speeches to catalogue a vast range of legislative initiatives, Mr.
Pataki is expected to stick to the basic themes he repeated throughout his campaign and transition: tax cuts, controlling state spending, work requirements for welfare recipients, reducing Medicaid costs, privatization, restoration of the death penalty, ending parole for violent felons, ending work release, term limits and giving citizens the right to petition for ballot initiatives.


Suspect in Abortion Clinic Assaults Is Arraigned


School Financing System Faces Court Test
For decades, advocates for poor children have argued that New York State's system of financing public education favors the rich.
And for decades, they contend, the State Legislature has dodged the problem, allowing disparities between rich and poor school districts to grow.
But now the first of two lawsuits challenging the financing system has reached the state's highest court, the Court of Appeals.
If successful, the suit could force the Legislature to change the way 700 school districts raise and spend money, as has happened in New Jersey, Connecticut and about 10 other states where courts have found school financing systems unconstitutional.


Tokyo Journal; A Happy New Year, Briefly Tasted, Cruelly Ended
For the first meal of the new year millions of Japanese people ate a soup containing rice cakes that is intended to get the year off on the right foot.
But for 83-year-old Sadakatsu Ishikawa, rather than insuring his health in 1995, the meal killed him.
Before his family had noticed, Mr.
Ishikawa had choked to death.


Corrections
A chart on Sunday about concentrations of crime in New York City misidentified the precinct with the greatest increase in auto thefts in 1994.
It was the 77th Precinct, in Crown Heights, with a 4 percent increase -- not the 13th Precinct.
That precinct actually had a 30 percent decline.


Eugene Wigner, 92, Quantum Theorist Who Helped Usher In Atomic Age, Dies
Eugene P. Wigner, a physicist who made fundamental advances in nuclear physics and quantum theory and helped usher in the atomic age, died on Sunday at the Medical Center in Princeton, N.J.
He was 92 and lived in Princeton.
The cause was pneumonia, said Princeton University, where he spent much of his career.


Why So Slow to Identify Clinic Suspect's Gun?
To the Editor:
I have been baffled by your news articles on the arrest of John C. Salvi 3d, the accused clinic gunman, in Norfolk, Va.


Jewelry Chain Names a Chief
Finlay Fine Jewelry, which operates the jewelry departments in about 900 stores in the United States and France, said yesterday that it had hired Arthur E. Reiner, a former top executive at R. H. Macy &amp; Company, as its chairman and chief executive.
He replaces Ronald B. Grudberg, who has resigned to pursue other interests, the company said.


Faction of 4 Swings Vote On Sex Issue
A familiar majority that set a more conservative course for the New York City Board of Education re-emerged yesterday when the board voted 4 to 3 to give parents a greater role in teaching AIDS topics, including an explanation of different types of sexual intercourse.
An argument over whether the board was allowing itself to be controlled by conservative factions broke out when a member, Dr.
Irene H. Impellizzeri, proposed adding six sentences to a 224-page draft of the junior high school AIDS curriculum, which is not to be formally voted on for adoption for another two weeks.


Library Postal Increase
To the Editor:
The New Year's postal rise of about 10 percent has been accepted by most people I've seen interviewed on television news broadcasts.


U.S. Replaces Troops in Haiti


No Headline
"We will roll back Federal programs, laws and regulations from A to Z -- from Amtrak to zoological studies." SENATOR BOB DOLE, the new majority leader.  [ A1:6. ]


RESULTS PLUS
PRO BASKETBALL Payton Is Perfect as Sonics Stop the Cavs
Gary Payton turned in the most accurate shooting performance in Seattle team history last night, going 14 of 14 from the floor, as the visiting SuperSonics stopped Cleveland's 11-game winning streak by beating the Cavaliers, 116-85.
Payton scored 32 points and beat Lonnie Shelton's team record of 13 shots without a miss set in 1979 against Cleveland.
Wilt Chamberlain holds the National Basketball Association record of 18 for 18 for Philadelphia against Baltimore in 1967.
Cleveland's winning streak had tied a team record. (AP) Hornets 118, Trail Blazers 106: Scott Burrell made 4 of Charlotte's 6 3-pointers in the third quarter as the Hornets pulled away and beat Portland.
It was the Hornets' first home victory ever against Portland, which was the last N.B.A. team to have won all its games at Charlotte Coliseum.
Alonzo Mourning led Charlotte with 28 points. (AP) Pacers 94, Bullets 90: Reggie Miller scored 17 of his 20 points in the first half as Indiana defeated Washington for its 10th consecutive victory at home.
Indiana, which led by as many as 20 in the third quarter, survived a fourth-quarter rally by the Bullets, who pulled within 3, 93-90, on a jumper by Calbert Cheaney with 2:03 remaining. (AP) Celtics 117, Heat 113: David Wesley's 3-pointer with 15 seconds left in overtime put Boston ahead for good as the Celtics finished with a 12-1 run and beat Miami.
Miami got the first 7 points of overtime to take a 112-105 lead before Wesley started the rally with a free throw. (AP)  (AP) Suns 127, 76ers 122: Charles Barkley scored 14 of his 35 points in the final 8 minutes, helping Phoenix avoid a second straight home loss.
Barkley also had 6 of his 14 rebounds in the final period, and one of his biggest plays was a burst past Clarence Weatherspoon to intercept a pass by Scott Williams with 58 seconds left.
Twenty seconds later, Barkley hit a 10-footer in the lane for a 123-120 lead, the Suns' biggest since the second quarter.
Weatherspoon scored 31 points for the Sixers, who dropped their third straight. (AP) Bulls 86, Nuggets 80: B. J. Armstrong scored the game's final 6 points, including a tie-breaking jumper with 1:46 to play, as Chicago squandered a 21-point lead but still defeated visiting Denver.
Scottie Pippen scored 21 points, Toni Kukoc 20 and Armstrong 18 for the Bulls, who have their first three-game winning streak of the season.
All three victories have come since Kukoc joined Pippen in Chicago's starting frontcourt. (AP) WOMEN'S BASKETBALL Seton Hall Is Upset by Boston College  Toya Squair scored 14 points and Teri McCormick chipped in 6 and pulled down a career-high 10 rebounds as Boston College, playing at home, upset 20th-ranked Seton Hall, 53-49, in a Big East game.
The loss snaps a 10-game winning streak for the Pirates.
Boston College (4-7 over all, 1-2 Big East) shot 51.3 percent from the field while holding Seton Hall (11-2, 2-1) to just 32.8 percent. (AP)


Lillian Vernon Corp.(LVC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Five Charged With Holding Thai Women Captive for Prostitution
Four men and a woman were charged with smuggling at least a dozen women from Thailand into this country and forcing them to work as prostitutes at a heavily guarded Chinatown brothel, Federal authorities announced yesterday.
Officials said that the defendants, all Thai citizens, promised the women lucrative restaurant jobs in New York but instead imprisoned them in the brothel and ordered them to have sex with 400 to 500 men to win their freedom.


Pushed to Tracks, Woman Is Killed by F Train
A man who escaped from a state psychiatric center on Christmas Eve pushed a 63-year-old woman to her death from a Manhattan subway platform yesterday as a train pulled in, the police said.
The suspect walked away, laughing and babbling gibberish, before he was tackled by a computer technician who had watched the attack from an escalator.
The victim was Soon Sin of Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, a retired seamstress who had become an American citizen only a couple of months ago.
She was dragged by the Queens-bound F train, even though officials said the horrified train operator had slammed on the brakes as he came into the station at 34th Street and the Avenue of the Americas.


Student Loan Program Tells a Success Story; Restore Deductibility
To the Editor:
"Young, Eager and Deep in Debt" (Op-Ed, Dec. 29) omits an additional measure taken by the Government contributing to the financial burden on graduates who financed their education with student loans: the elimination of the deductibility of interest on those loans.


Gardem Q.&amp; A.
THAT Christmas tree can have a bright future.
You can toss it unceremoniously onto the curb, or cut off the boughs and recycle them in the garden, adding instant green to forlorn window boxes and brightening sad spots in backyards or terrace containers.
Boughs positioned as vertical spikes around street trees help discourage visiting dogs.


Shareholder Rights Survive a Ruling
Shareholders rights activists said yesterday that even though they lost the case, a Federal appeals court ruling late Tuesday night did little to restrict shareholders from voting on proposals involving social policies at company annual meetings.
The ruling, by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in New York, involved the decision by the Securities and Exchange Commission in October 1992 to allow Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Inc. to decline to put on its proxy a shareholder resolution banning discrimination against homosexual job applicants.


CHRONICLE
"The Mikado" may be a staple of the Gilbert and Sullivan repertory, but STEVE ALLEN is not a name that jumps to mind in connection with that familiar operetta.
So it may be something of a surprise to learn that Mr.
Allen, the comedian and creator of the "Tonight" show, opens tonight in the title role.
He signed on for 10 performances in the New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players production at Symphony Space on the Upper West Side.


Samaritan Is Solace of Victim's Family
Hours after she died beneath the wheels of a subway train, the family of Soon Sin found comfort in two things: She had spent her last morning doing what she loved, and a total stranger had risked his life to catch the man accused of killing her.
Consoling himself in the knowledge that his mother was on her way to do volunteer work at the Korean senior citizens' center in Queens, her son David Shin said she spent her time helping people.


Jumping Off Slopes, A Hobby Even at 40
It wasn't what it seemed, an over-the-hill birthday present for a 40-year-old geologist.
But what else would anyone think?
Here was Walter Wintsch, in charge of hazardous waste projects for New York State, receiving a pass to a ski-jumping clinic.
The gift came from fellow office workers.
"It was just one of those things," said Eric Hamilton, Wintsch's boss at the State Department of Environmental Conservation in Rotterdam, N.Y.
"The time was right."


Market Place; An oil and gas executive bets all on a single well in Colombia.
IN an age when the oil and gas business means the avoidance of risk -- balancing production with refining and marketing, forming elaborate partnerships, hedging in the futures markets -- Robert O. Anderson's gamble was a rarity.
As the chairman and founder of Hondo Oil and Gas Company, Mr.
Anderson sold off or closed the company's refineries and all its producing properties to bet everything on one Colombian well.


Georgia B. Christopher; Professor, 62
Dr.
Georgia B. Christopher, a professor of English at Emory University, died on Dec. 16 in DeKalb Medical Center in Decatur, Ga.
She was 62 and lived in Decatur.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Essay; The Newt Deal
Two years ago, amidst inaugural hoo-hah, the Clintonites puffed themselves up and lurched leftward.
Today, reveling in quasi-inaugural media hype, the Newt Dealers are marching in the opposite direction in a state of similar certitude.
If conservatives are going to shrink government and expand individual freedom, we must first cut the hubris.


Funaki of Japan Wins World Cup Jumping Event
Kazuyoshi Funaki of Japan outjumped Andreas Goldberger of Austria today and won the World Cup ski-jumping competition at Innsbruck's Mount Isel large platform.
The event counts toward the 1994-95 four-hill jumping tournament.
Funaki scored 247.70 points on jumps of 117.50 and 111.50 meters.
Goldberger finished second with 225.60 points (102.00-112.50).


49ers Are Dancing to Sanders's Tune
The San Francisco 49ers are no longer gagged and bound.
Their quarterback scolds their head coach, their cornerback rarely huddles up and their end zone is a dance floor.
Once upon a time, this team had the collective game-face of a chess player, but the organization has finally said, "At ease."
This is a less cerebral 49er team, and the shocker is that no one has been chased into the principal's office, or George Seifert's.
It is all due to a bandana-wearing cornerback, an effervescent rookie, an October punch in the face from Philadelphia and the lingering sound of Jimmy Johnson's tonsils.


Governor Pataki's Emerging Plans
Gov.
George Pataki drew an appealing picture of tax reduction for all New Yorkers in his State of the State address yesterday, but has yet to explain how he would cut spending enough to close the looming budget deficit and cover his tax cuts, too.
Following the example of New York City's Mayor, Rudolph Giuliani, he also pledged a smaller budget than this year's.
In all, he has set a high hurdle.
For the first time, Mr.
Pataki added some of the detail that was lacking when he campaigned for the office.
His key campaign promise still stands, to cut income taxes by 25 percent in the next four years.
New specifics to gladden the hearts of taxpayers included larger marital deductions, tripling tax breaks for day care and a lower tax rate for the lowest earners -- hardly a package of favors for the well-to-do.
But the full picture will not come until Feb. 1, when he presents his budget for the fiscal year that starts two months later.


Excerpts From Governor Rowland's State of the State Address
Following are excerpts from Gov.
John G. Rowland's State of the State address to the General Assembly.
Today is the moment to remake Connecticut as we rapidly approach the 21st century.
Our challenge is to provide the hope and the opportunity, especially to our young people, so they will choose to make Connecticut their permanent home once again.


Michael Molloy, 49, Brokerage Executive
Michael P. Molloy, 49, a brokerage executive who had been missing since Dec. 28, was found dead on Monday in a remote area of the Adirondacks around the town of Stony Creek, about 50 miles north of Albany.
Mr. Molloy died last Thursday or Friday of hypothermia, the authorities said.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the appointment of a director for the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington misstated the arrival date of the the museum's founding director, Shaike Weinberg, who came out of retirement to work for it.
Although the museum did not open until a year and a half ago, Mr.
Weinberg began work on the permanent collection in 1988.


New Law Requires Insurers To Pay for Health Testing
When someone offers wishes for a healthy New Year, take note.
Good health now has the official seal of approval in New Jersey.
Under a new law that took effect on Sunday, insurers must offer coverage for a battery of tests that, with the development of a healthful way of life, could improve the well-being of state residents and reduce the long-term cost of health care.


Is America Ready For All-Home TV?
LAST Friday morning, not long after dawn, a laughing, diamond-bedecked soap-opera star named Gloria Loring lowered a Barbara Bush shrub rose into a large terra-cotta pot, all the while talking about soaker hoses, bare roots and the efficacy of bone meal.
Two hours later, somewhere in the manicured wilds of suburban Connecticut, Mario Buatta led a cellar-to-crown molding tour of the Carpenter Gothic cottage that is his home away from home.


The Great Simulcast: Aqueduct Hooks Up to Gulfstream
One year after "the great simulcasting experiment" was buried in snow and ice, Aqueduct opened a new era of simulcast racing with Gulfstream Park in Florida yesterday.
You could park free, get into the grandstand for a dollar, watch 16 races on television and make 106 bets, all in bright sunshine at both tracks.
Nobody could guarantee that the sunshine would last forever, but New York seemed to have solved the problem of utter confusion that bedeviled the joint venture last year.
The solution was to import the races from Florida into separate lounge areas at Aqueduct with their own TV monitors, betting windows and handicapping statistics, and the management even threw in boxes of New York State apples and Florida oranges to add tone.


True Believers Rejoice in Babylon
Armstrong Williams leaned into the microphone, crooned a few bars of "Happy Days Are Here Again" and then cut loose at the top of his lungs.
"If there's one American in this country who is happy today, it is me!" shouted Mr.
Williams, a radio talk-show host here.
"I've waited 35 years for this day. Some of you have waited a lifetime. You never thought you would see the day that the Republicans would take over."


The Graying of the Waterfront; Older Workers and Union Rules Hamper New York's Port
After 43 years of moving cargo across the docks of New York Harbor, first as a shipper's beast of burden and now as a heavy-equipment operator, Dominick Vacca is getting a bit creaky.
He is still a proud longshoreman, but he can no longer do the more hazardous jobs.
To make out the boss's commands, he needs to wear a hearing aid.
"I'm kind of breaking down in my old age," Mr.
Vacca, 61, said the other day at a terminal here.
He is not the only one.
A graying work force is a growing burden at the Port of New York and New Jersey, holding down productivity and hampering efforts to install new technology.
The average age of longshoremen and shipping clerks, known as checkers, is more than 55.
In the largest union local at the port, the average is nearly 59.


Is That an Onion on the Wall?
ROBERT LEWIS, a lighting designer, lives in South Beach, Fla., in a 1940's artists' compound.
It is shaded by giant mango, key lime and frangipani trees that have inspired some of his designs: first, lamps made of woven bamboo or rice paper on wire frames shaped and colored like fruit, plants and sea shells (below).
And now, "Scandinavian Moderne" lamps -- cylinders woven from birch-veneer strips with shades made of "that fiberglass paper that was popular in the 50's," Mr.
Lewis said.
He designed the lamps for the Hotel Greenview, to open in South Beach this month, and said the hotel's interior decorator, Chahan Minassian, asked him for "cool and vintage looking" shapes to compliment walls colored "like the sky in the evening when the blue is fading." The lamps are $400 to $950.
Information: (305) 538-5201.


Non-Token Appointees Mark Women's Advance
THE names were threaded through Gov.
George E. Pataki's State of the State Message yesterday, the women in his government.
He just mentioned their names and titles, said no more, but the message was not lost on his listeners, especially his Democratic listeners.
"Look at all those women," a Democratic stalwart, who shall remain nameless at her request, fairly screeched into the telephone.
"In real jobs. Look at that. Do you believe it?"
Mr.
Pataki has indeed appointed a lot of women to prominent positions in his new administration -- most of them substantial jobs, not token ones or "women's" jobs.
The budget director is a woman.
The Health Commissioner is a woman.
So is the Parks Commissioner, the communications director and the Social Services Commissioner.
And of course Mr.
Pataki's running mate, Elizabeth P. McCaughey, is now the Lieutenant Governor and designated Medicaid expert.


Calendar: Exhibitions And Tours
Stylish Streets  Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street; (212) 534-1672.


Murder by Texas
Texas has just executed a man with full knowledge that he was not guilty of the crime for which he was put to death.
State and Federal courts and the Supreme Court, also fully aware of the facts, let the execution happen.
Although Texas leads the nation in executions, the unjust killing of Jesse Dewayne Jacobs could happen in any of the 37 states that have the death penalty or states like New York, which are on the verge of adopting it.
All it takes is a dishonorable prosecutor and a number of courts unwilling to demand justice for the accused.


Suspect in 3 Abortion Attacks Is Indicted
John C. Salvi 3d, the suspect in last week's fatal shootings at two abortion clinics in the Boston area, was indicted today by a Federal grand jury here on charges of carrying a gun across state lines with the intent to commit a felony.
Today's two-count indictment will make it easier for the authorities to bring Mr.
Salvi back to Massachusetts from Norfolk, Va., where he was arrested on Saturday on suspicion of firing at an abortion clinic there.
Conviction on each Federal count is punishable by up to 10 years in prison and a $250,000 fine.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 30
Dec. 23
Dec. 31
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.9
7.8
7.7
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.4
3.5
Gasoline stocks
210.2
209.9
224.4
Distillate stocks
143.7
140.4
145.0
Crude imports, daily
7.3
6.6
6.6
Product imports, daily
1.3
1.8
1.4
Crude stocks
329.6
337.9
341.6
Crude production, daily
6.7
6.7
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
95.0
93.0
92.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


The Pop Life
The year just ended was a strong one for pop music, both in terms of the quality of releases and in sales.
Critics found much to like, and so did the accountants.
When all the numbers are added, the sales total for pop music in 1994 is expected to be nearly $11 billion, the highest ever.
The three best selling albums were "The Lion King" soundtrack, "The Sign" by Ace of Base and "II" by Boyz II Men.


Subway Killing Suspect Escaped 4 Times in 1994
Reuben Harris, the homeless man accused of pushing a woman under a subway train yesterday, had escaped from a state mental hospital on Wards Island four times since May, most recently on Christmas Eve, officials said.
The next day, he showed up for a Christmas celebration at his parents' tidy brick house on a quiet block in East New York, Brooklyn.
He told his family then that he hoped to get a job delivering newspapers.
"We knew that was just a dream," one of his brothers said yesterday.


Twins' Mack Signs to Play in Japan
In the biggest contract in the history of Japanese baseball, outfielder SHANE MACK and the Tokyo Yomiuri Giants agreed yesterday to a two-year deal worth about $8.1 million.





Kenneth Patton, 83, Minister and Writer
Kenneth Leo Patton, a retired Unitarian-Universalist minister and author, died on Dec. 25 at his home in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 83.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


German Court to Hear Appeal by Seles
A German court will hear an appeal by MONICA SELES and prosecutors against a suspended sentence given to the man who stabbed her during a tennis match and curtailed her career, court officials in Hamburg said yesterday.


Asphyxiation Killed Man In Custody
The New York City Medical Examiner's office ruled yesterday that the death of a 29-year-old Florida man who died in police custody on Dec. 22 was caused by asphyxiation "due to compression of his neck and chest" as well as acute asthma.
A lawyer for the family of the victim, Anthony Baez, 29, said the medical examiner's finding supported the family's contention that Mr.
Baez died as the result of being choked by the police.


Balanchine, Sousa and Stiefel
Happiness is Ethan Stiefel of the New York City Ballet in George Balanchine's "Stars and Stripes."
As the company reopened its repertory season on Tuesday night after a monthlong run of "The Nutcracker," Mr.
Stiefel reminded us why we go to the ballet at all.
Steps and structures, with the latter especially vital to Balanchine, came together through the talent of an exceptionally gifted dancer.


The Times Appoints Sunday Theater Critic
The appointment of Margo Jefferson as the Sunday theater critic of The New York Times was announced yesterday by Joseph Lelyveld, the executive editor.
Starting in February, she will succeed Vincent Canby, who was recently appointed the chief daily theater critic.
Ms.
Jefferson, 47, has been a book critic of The Times since July 1993.
For two years before that she was a lecturer and teacher in literature and writing, including performing arts criticism, at Columbia University.


CHRONICLE
PIERCE BROSNAN, the actor, opened the Harrods January sale in London yesterday, and in his honor MOHAMED AL-FAYED, the chairman of the store, donated $:50,000 (about $78,000) to Wellbeing, a health research organization, and its ovarian cancer research center in Cambridge, England.
The Evening Standard newspaper quoted Mr.
Brosnan as saying, "I lost a very wonderful lady, namely my wife, to this dreadful disease." His wife, Cassandra Harris, an actress, died in 1991 at 39.


Quayle Is Resting Well After an Appendectomy
Former Vice President Dan Quayle underwent an elective appendectomy yesterday at a hospital in Indianapolis and was resting comfortably, cracking jokes and asking for a hamburger shortly after the procedure, his office said.
The appendix was removed in a minimally invasive procedure in which tubes with a tiny camera and surgical instruments are threaded into the abdomen.


Myer Mendelson, 74, Expert on Depression
Dr.
Myer Mendelson, a retired professor of clinical psychiatry at the University of Pennsylvania known for his studies on depression, died on Dec. 25 at his home in Wynnewood, Pa.
He was 74.
The cause was complications from a stroke, said the Levine &amp; Sons funeral home in Philadelphia.


Journal; Newt's Big Buck
Say it ain't so, Al.
No sooner does Newt Gingrich give up an unseemly $4.5 million advance from HarperCollins and settle instead for a token one dollar than another publisher, Hyperion, announces the August publication of "Enough Is Enough: Pasta, Potholes, and Other Things Worth Fighting For," by Senator Al D'Amato.
As HarperCollins is owned by a media magnate, Rupert Murdoch, who has dealings before Congress, so Hyperion is owned by Disney, which may seek to curry favor on the Hill should it go through with its threat to revive the Disney's America theme park.


Funaki of Japan Wins World Cup Jumping Event
Kazuyoshi Funaki of Japan outjumped Andreas Goldberger of Austria today and won the World Cup ski-jumping competition at Innsbruck's Mount Isel large platform.
The event counts toward the 1994-95 four-hill jumping tournament.
Funaki scored 247.70 points on jumps of 117.50 and 111.50 meters.
Goldberger finished second with 225.60 points (102.00-112.50).


49ers Are Dancing to Sanders's Tune
The San Francisco 49ers are no longer gagged and bound.
Their quarterback scolds their head coach, their cornerback rarely huddles up and their end zone is a dance floor.
Once upon a time, this team had the collective game-face of a chess player, but the organization has finally said, "At ease."
This is a less cerebral 49er team, and the shocker is that no one has been chased into the principal's office, or George Seifert's.
It is all due to a bandana-wearing cornerback, an effervescent rookie, an October punch in the face from Philadelphia and the lingering sound of Jimmy Johnson's tonsils.


If It's 3 A.M. Wednesday, This Must Be the State of the State Speech
If Gov.
George E. Pataki looked a little sleepy as he delivered his first message to the Legislature today, it was because his final preparation came, as staff members can attest, pretty late.
Mr.
Pataki arrived at the Assembly chamber around midnight to practice his delivery and refine the final language.
He stayed until 3 A.M., having run through the speech twice.
He began writing the speech, which was worked over by several advisers and a speechwriter the Pataki camp would not identify, only after giving his inaugural speech, an aide said.
He was tinkering with details until early this morning, officials said.
Scoring Points
"He didn't call us any names," said Ronald Canestrari, a Democratic Assemblyman from Albany and Rensselaer, after Mr.
Pataki's State of the State speech today.
"So we've had a significant improvement already."


The PGA's Power Hitter Returns
Maybe it was the healthful surroundings here at the La Costa Resort and Spa that helped to inspire him -- the idea of pore-cleansing herbal wraps and luffa scrubs and steam baths can have that sort of soothing, cathartic effect.
Whatever the reason, John Daly has returned to the PGA Tour once again with a hygienic outlook and a determination to purge himself of past transgressions.
"There's no way I'm smoking four packs a day -- maybe three," Daly said.
"Eighty cigarettes a day, that's a lot. Maybe 60."


Microsoft Prepares 'Bob,' A Guide for PC Novices
The Microsoft Corporation plans to introduce a software package this week that is intended to make personal computers easier for novices to use, an important element of the company's ambitious campaign to dominate the fast-growing market for home computer software.
The new program, called Bob, features cartoon-like characters that give spoken instructions to users of Microsoft's Windows program, rather than having them choose from lists of commands or type instructions.
This new approach allows people to interact with computers in a way the company says is more more natural than current methods.


Student Loan Program Tells a Success Story
To the Editor:
David Lipsky's "Young, Eager and Deep in Debt" (Op-Ed, Dec. 29) states that "by 1990, the average college student was graduating $10,000 in the red." The average student was doing no such thing.
A study sponsored by the Education Department shows that 55 percent of college graduates had no educational debts upon graduation in 1990.
Of the 45 percent who did have such debts, half owed less than $7,000.


Lawmakers Pursue 'Contract With Fans'
In an effort to spur agreement on a new labor contract in baseball, members of Congress intruded on the Republicans' "Contract with America" yesterday, introducing five baseball bills ranging from complete repeal of the sport's antitrust exemption to binding arbitration to settle the nearly five-month-old strike.
A total of three bills, two calling for complete repeal of the exemption, had been expected from Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, and Representative Michael Bilirakis, Republican of Florida, on the first day of the 104th Congress.
But two Democratic Representatives also introduced bills, both of which had seen brief life in the last term.


Stocks of Auto Makers Help to Lift Market
A brightening outlook for the automobile industry helped lift stock prices modestly yesterday in unusually heavy trading.
Long-term interest rates also eased in the bond market, the dollar strengthened, and gold fell to its lowest level in eight months.
All are signs that gave the financial markets, at least for a day, reasons to be less concerned about inflation.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Orange County, Calif., is at least $172 million short of its fiscal obligations for the next six months, the county's financial advisers said.
Deep cuts in services are expected.  [ Page A1. ] Construction spending rose 0.7 percent in November, led by a sharp increase in private financing.  [ D10. ] International
Mexico's rescue plan disappointed investors, who sent stocks plunging in early trading.
The Mexican stock market recovered somewhat after it was announced that the Finance Minister would meet with foreign investors to explain the economic plan.  [ D1. ] In some respects, Brazil resembles Mexico before its financial crisis: it has an overvalued currency, and it has a growing appetite for imports and a new president.
But some trade experts argue that Brazil is less vulnerable to a crisis because its economy is larger and stronger than Mexico's.  [ D1. ] The United States and Japan will resume automobile trade talks.
But many obstacles to an agreement remain.  [ D1. ] New York's port is need of a larger and more effective work force.
Union rules and aging workers are hampering the port.  [ B1. ] A Federal judge ruled that journalists are professionals and are thus ineligible for the premium pay that the law requires for most workers who put in more than 40 hours a week.  [ D22. ] Companies
Philip Morris plans to reorganize Kraft and General Foods into one new food operation.
The consolidation of the units is aimed at revitalizing the company's lagging food business.  [ D1. ] Compuserve is demanding royalties on programs that enable its on-line subscribers to view thousands of images.
Graphics software companies are in an uproar over the request.  [ D1. ] Dime Savings Bank may have failed to disclose for nearly a month that it was the target of a Federal fraud investigation, a transcript of a court hearing suggests.  [ D2. ] Microsoft's Bob will make its debut this week.
Bob is a program that uses cartoon characters to help novice PC users.  [ D3. ]
Johnson &amp; Johnson will buy Mitek Surgical Products, for $128 million in stock.
Mitek makes implants for use in shoulders.  [ D3. ] Figgie International named a new chief executive -- the third for the troubled conglomerate in less than eight months.  [ D3. ] Norman E. Brinker will step down as chief executive of the restaurant company that bears his name.  [ D3. ] Auto sales, defying rate increases, reached a six-year high.  [ D4. ] Markets
Treasury prices increased for the first time in five trading sessions.
Municipal bond prices also gained.  [ D11. ] Auto issues led an advance in stocks after Chrysler announced strong monthly sales.
The S.&amp; P. 500 index rose 1.60 points.  [ D12. ] The dollar surged against Japanese yen.  [ D21. ] Gold prices tumbled.
Cotton and sugar prices rose.  [ D21. ] Today's Columns
Efforts to clean the environment face more opposition, with costs increasingly being weighed against benefits.
But there are ways Congress can minimize costs and bureaucracy while still pursuing clean-ups.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ] In time of caution in the energy industry, Hondo Oil and Gas has taken a big gamble on a natural gas well in Colombia.
While the well may be worth about $2 billion, the company has a long way to go before it can begin to realize any profits.
Market Place.  [ D12. ] It's not quite Juan Valdez Jr., but a campaign for Colombian coffee growers presents a hipper, edgier attitude to try to grab younger coffee drinkers.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D22. ]


Aggressive Iona Defense Puts Manhattan Off Guard
Iona frustrated if not infuriated Manhattan with an aggressive zone defense tonight at Mulcahy Center in the opening game of the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference for both teams.
As a result the Jaspers executed poorly on offense, especially in the late going, and Iona came away with a 73-66 triumph.


Warning for Brazil in Mexican Crisis
After Mexico, what major Latin country has an overvalued currency, a growing appetite for imports and a new president?
Brazil.


Yeltsin Orders Bombing Halt On Rebel City
Under criticism at home and abroad for Russia's military offensive in the secessionist region of Chechnya, President Boris N. Yeltsin announced today that he had ordered a halt in the aerial bombing of Grozny, the rebel capital.
The order, which was to take effect at midnight, did not apply to artillery or rocket launchers, which continue to pound the city.
Mr.
Yeltsin's press office said the decision was "guided by the desire to prevent an increase in the number of victims among the civilian population."


The Man at Yeltsin's Side: Some Russians See a Sinister Role
Though increasingly isolated, life at the top for Boris N. Yeltsin may not be all that lonely.
The Russian President has rid himself of scores of advisers and confidants over the last few years, but he still has at least one man always at his side: the chief of presidential security, Aleksandr A. Korzhakov, a former K.G.B. major who has been his bodyguard since 1985.
Tennis partner, drinking companion, political hatchet man, Mr.
Korzhakov, 44, is increasingly perceived by some Russians to have the kind of access and bent for power that characterized the role of Rasputin, the zealous monk who haunted the court of the last Czar.


ROWLAND AVOIDS PARTISAN APPEAL
While Republicans around the nation were basking in their newly-won power, John G. Rowland, the first Republican governor of Connecticut in 20 years, took office today with a speech that never mentioned his party, avoided appeals to partisanship and called on legislators to work together as a team.
In the State of the State address that Mr.
Rowland delivered this afternoon, he did not include the more strident language of his campaign.
He did not mention throwing people off the welfare roles or fume about possible court-enforced busing.


Davis Makes His Point, but Starks Only 2
The Knicks don't dislike Lenny Wilkens. They just dislike losing.
So with Wilkens poised to make history last night, the Knicks made Wilkens wait -- again.
Denying Wilkens in his bid to become the National Basketball Association's winningest coach, New York (16-12) won its season-high fourth consecutive game with an 89-80 victory over the Atlanta Hawks at Madison Square Garden.


French Brace For Violence From Algeria
Bracing for new reprisals for the deaths of four Algerian militants who hijacked a French airliner to Marseilles late last month, France has stepped up surveillance of Islamic groups in France and canceled Air France flights to and from Algeria.
Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said today that France would also send a team of experts to Algeria to improve security for the dwindling community of French oil workers, business executives, missionaries and diplomats still living in the convulsed former French colony.


INSIDE
The Eye's Hidden Role
Researchers say the eye has a function independent of normal sight: registering light that regulates the body's internal clock.
Page A21.
Forced Prostitution Charged
Five people were charged with smuggling women from Thailand and forcing them to work as prostitutes in Chinatown.
Page B1.
Death in Police Custody
The New York Medical Examiner said asphyxiation caused a man's death in police custody.
Page B1.


City Hall Restoration Should Return Jefferson to Place of Honor
To the Editor:
I hope that when Deputy Mayor John S. Dyson restores New York's City Hall (news article, Dec. 30) he will repair the patinated plaster statue of Thomas Jefferson by Pierre David D'Angers (now pushed to the side in the Council chambers).
The statue deserves to be returned to the landing at the juncture of City Hall's two magnificent, curvilinear staircases.
From there it would be seen from the Rotunda below, as originally intended.


Unfair to Luxembourg
To the Editor:
As a native of Luxembourg, I write regarding "Tipplers and the Temperate: Drinking Around the World" (Week in Review, Jan. 1).


The Best of Pop


Ramos Signs With Major League Soccer
TAB RAMOS, the United States midfielder who suffered a serious head injury during the World Cup last summer, yesterday became the first player to sign with Major League Soccer.
The start of the league has been delayed until 1996, and Ramos, 28, will be loaned to Tigres of the Mexican first division for the rest of the 1994-95 season. (AP)


'A New Era': Excerpts From the State of the State
Following are excepts from Gov.
George E. Pataki's State of the State message yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times.
. . .
The agenda of reform and renewal that I will put forward is specific and extensive.
It sets out clear priorities but let me also say it's not meant as a list of everything that we will try to accomplish together in 1995.
I know there is much to do; that each and every lawmaker here has ideas worthy of attention by this Legislature and by this administration.


Imitating Art of Life, or Something
If while watching the news magazines tonight, you should suffer from intimations of displacement or double vision, no need to call 911.
It's them, not you.
Along with moving around, the evening's three network magazine shows are going in for cannibalizing other television programs.
To begin, at 9 P.M., the new time for CBS's "Eye to Eye," Connie Chung goes eyeball to eyeball with "Seinfeld," the NBC hit.
The hour includes a piece about politicians' loss of privacy that may strike you as borrowed or stolen in significant part from "F. D. R.," which ran on PBS in the fall.
That "American Experience" program also made much of the fact that Roosevelt's inability to walk went unreported by the press for all the years of his Presidency.
To rub in the similarity, once again Doris Kearns Goodwin, the author of "No Ordinary Time: Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt: The Home Front in World War II" (Simon &amp; Schuster), serves as presiding expert.


Pay Athletes, Says Former N.C.A.A. Chief
WALTER BYERS, reversing the view he held for most of his 36 years as head of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, says it is time to pay college athletes.
"In light of the hypercommercialization of today's college athletics, dramatic changes are necessary to permit athletes to participate in the enormous proceeds," said Byers, who retired as N.C.A.A. executive director in 1987.
"College athletes don't need new rules. They need new freedoms."


Far From Capitol's Din, A Hero at Clinton School
The library is named for his wife.
The recreation room is named for his mother.
But the whole shebang is named for him, and if President Clinton was not the tallest timber in Washington today, he was a proud bastion of beige concrete block and shiny new linoleum at the William Jefferson Clinton Elementary Magnet School.
As the new Newtonian era dawned in Washington, Mr.
Clinton was out among the people who helped him get there in the first place as he dedicated the school in the suburban community of Sherwood this morning.
In doing so, he once again styled himself as the determined outsider intent on grappling with the nation's problems, even in the face of a Republican Congress abuzz with big, bold notions.


A Woman, Forever Changed by Gunfire, Will Not Give Up
The month was September, and the girl was sitting on a relative's stoop, savoring the afternoon sun.
Then came the gunfire, ripping through the summer calm and changing the texture of her life forever.
A stray bullet lodged in Sharon B.'s spine that day in 1988, paralyzing her legs.
She was an unintended victim of violence, and to this day she is not sure why the shots were fired.
At 16, Miss B. had to drop out of high school and spend a year in the hospital, relearning how to dress and bathe and trying to accept that she would never walk again.


Bridge
Three decades ago, Columbia University, rarely outstanding on sporting fields, had a winning bridge team with a brilliant coterie of players.
Their coach and adviser was a graduate engineering student named Jim Becker, who died last April and had a game named for him last Friday at the Greater New York Bridge Association's Winter Regional Championships.
Two members of that Columbia team showed up and duly won the Jim Becker Memorial Pairs.
One, August Boehm of Manhattan, has pursued a successful bridge career as player, writer and teacher.
The other is Richard Margolis, a rabbi from Baltimore who gave up the game for many years when his superiors discovered, by reading this column, that he had won an event on a Saturday.


Sony Classical Confirms Resignation of Its President
Gunther Breest, the president of the classical record division of Sony since 1988, has resigned his position in what some in the company have characterized as a dispute over what direction Sony repertory should take.
Word of Mr.
Breest's resignation began to spread through the record world just before the holidays, but Mr.
Breest, who is based in Hamburg, could not be reached, and Sony officials denied that he was leaving.
His departure was announced in Hamburg on Tuesday, in a statement that said he had left for "personal reasons" as of Dec. 31.


Another Socialist Seeks to Succeed Mitterrand
A former Education Minister, Lionel Jospin, today made a bid for the Socialist candidacy in France's presidential elections, but the latest polls said the conservative Prime Minister, Edouard Balladur, remained the strong favorite to succeed Francois Mitterrand.
The Socialist Party lost its preferred candidate last month when Jacques Delors decided not to run after he steps down this month as president of the European Union's executive commission.
Polls said he was more popular than Mr.
Balladur.
The Socialists have given themselves until the end of this month to find a new candidate.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $100 million of debentures due in 1997 through Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
Callable in one year, the issue is priced at par to yield 8.045 percent.


Is Taos Lurching On the Road to Paradise?
IT was the appetizer that made the dinner illegal: grilled polenta with mushrooms.
No joke.
New Mexico health officials had ordered the restaurateur, Carlo Gislimberti, to stop serving wild porcini and chanterelle mushrooms he had picked in the mountains near here.


The Gingrich Paradox
There is no way of telling yet whether Newt Gingrich's inaugural speech to the House of Representatives yesterday was a genuine expression of born-again statesmanship or a brilliant tactical exercise.
One hopes the former is true, that his gracious speech was not merely a masterly effort to make his "Contract With America" more palatable, but the emergence of a politician larger and more generous than his agenda.
In any case, it was a surprising and startlingly effective performance -- animated, anecdotal, humane.
It also left little doubt that, at least for the moment, Newt Gingrich is America's pivotal political figure, Bill Clinton and Bob Dole included.
Nor is there any telling how long the Speaker's magnanimity will last.
It certainly was not in evidence during the snarly press conference that preceded his swearing-in.
But once he took the gavel, he could hardly have done a better job of portraying his avowedly partisan "Contract With America" as an inclusive and non-threatening document that even his opponents could embrace without fear.
Nor could he have been more energetic in his efforts -- we are "commoners together," he said of the House -- to invite his critics' help.


Quick Indignation After CBS Interview
The new House Speaker, Newt Gingrich, today started his day gnashing his teeth and condemning the news media because of a television interview with his mother.
In an interview to be broadcast Thursday on the CBS News television program "Eye to Eye With Connie Chung," Mr.
Gingrich's mother, Kathleen Gingrich, said her son once called Hillary Rodham Clinton "a bitch."


PATAKI PROMISES A REDUCED BUDGET AND LOWER TAXES
Emphasizing his pledge to reduce the size of state government, Gov.
George E. Pataki promised today in his first address to the Legislature to propose a budget for the coming year that would spend less than the state will spend this year.
In his 45-minute State of the State address, Mr.
Pataki, the first Republican Governor in 20 years, also rededicated himself to cutting state income taxes by 25 percent over four years.
And he announced that he would sign an executive order declaring a moratorium on new state regulations, except those needed to protect public health and safety or to promote job creation.


Funeral Is Held for Nine Who Died in a Fire


Furniture With a Forlorn Past
CHRIS LEHRECKE'S simple, chunky furniture designs were tailored from intricately layered plywood, reminiscent of monks dressed in Armani.
The environmental concerns that led Mr.
Lehrecke (pronounced LAIR-ick-uh) to avoid using rare hardwoods from rain forests has now led him back to the woods -- with a twist.
The Brooklyn designer's new line of tables and stools, which resemble modern adaptations of African designs, are made of fallen and diseased trees cleared from city parks, which would otherwise be turned into chips to be burned or used for landfill.
The designer works with Dan Bishop of Parkwood Furniture Arts, a sawyer who collaborates with the New York Botanical Society and other municipal agencies.
Mr.
Bishop (in the background), who seems to know the provenance of each board, gives the reclaimed wood new life at his sawmill shanty near Kennedy International Airport.


U.S. and Dime in Dispute On Disclosure of Inquiry
Dime Savings Bank may have failed to disclose for nearly a month that it was the target of a Federal fraud investigation, a period during which active trading in the company's stock occurred.
On Dec. 1 Dime filed a statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission, in which the bank disclosed that it had received a letter from the United States Attorney's office in Concord, N.H.
That letter, which Dime said it received on Nov. 22, informed the company that it was the target of a Federal investigation into its mortgage loan business, according to Dime's filing.


Ole Miss Stuns Road-Weary Arkansas
Mississippi 76, Arkansas 71
Fred Johnigan scored 5 points in the last 1 minute 1 second, including a 3-point play with 21 seconds left, and Mississippi beat third-ranked Arkansas, 76-71, last night at Oxford, Miss.
Johnigan's last basket and free throw came after Corey Beck's 3-pointer with 33 seconds left pulled the Razorbacks within 2 points at 73-71.


Ice Bowl, the Catch and a Generation Gap
Fritz Shurmur, the second-oldest assistant coach in the National Football League, likes to tell his youthful Packers about their rich history.
So this week he has ended film clips of their practices with the classic Ice Bowl game of 1967: Bart Starr's beating the Cowboys with 13 seconds left on a 1-yard run, taking the N.F.L. championship and going on to Super Bowl II.


Corrections
The $25 and Under column in Weekend on Friday misstated the telephone number for the Candle Cafe, a vegetarian restaurant at 1307 Third Avenue, at 75th Street, in Manhattan.
Its number is (212) 472-0970.


Kicking Up Heels While Laughing Away the Years
Geraldine O'Dwyer had not danced professionally since her days as a Rockette at Radio City Music Hall, 40 years and five children ago.
But after two trips to the "Fabulous Palm Springs Follies," she knew she was on the wrong side of the footlights.
So last June, she auditioned for the cast.
Mrs.
O'Dwyer met one of the show's prerequisites: at 66, she was 16 years older than the minimum age required for all performers.
But only after doing some tap and samba dancing, repeatedly strolling down some steps and belting out "The Lady Is a Tramp" was she chosen.
It has changed her life.


St. John's Is All Heart As It Defeats Providence
St.
John's lost Maurice Brown; it lost James Scott and for a while it lost its poise.
But somewhere in all that adversity, the Red Storm established itself as a team of more heart than hype.
This young and emerging St.
John's team isn't supposed to win the kind of Big East game it won last night in beating the Providence Friars, 89-74, before 12,113 in the Civic Center.


A Formula for a Whole New Sound
The development of a new, worthwhile group sound in jazz is a rare thing, given the music's fealty to its classic triumvirate of piano, bass and drums.
But the drummer Leon Parker has done it.
In constructing his band, he has kept the bass, thrown out the piano and added a percussionist.
And he has written music, or radically reinterpreted standards, in a way that makes all the instruments, including the bass and two horns, work percussively and independently.
On Tuesday night at Iridium (44 West 63d Street, Manhattan), where he and his group will be through Saturday night, it was also clear that Mr.
Parker wasn't just using instrumentation or written bass lines to dictate the sound.
He was after dynamics, and on tune after tune the music ballooned and shrank, creeping in at times on little cat feet, then suddenly erupting.
Mr.
Parker, who recently released his first album, "Above and Below" (Epicure), thinks dramatically.


AT HOME WITH Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway; The Baby Makers
IT was an odd sort of family reunion.
A photographer had assumed command of Arlene Eisenberg's living room and seemed to be trying to cajole Ms.
Eisenberg and her two daughters into a posture that at least suggested family.
The women looked stiff.
The photographer persisted.
Ever so solicitously, she said things like, "Is it wrong to have your hand on each other's shoulder, like you're relating physically? Would that work?"


The Pop Life
The year just ended was a strong one for pop music, both in terms of the quality of releases and in sales.
Critics found much to like, and so did the accountants.
When all the numbers are added, the sales total for pop music in 1994 is expected to be nearly $11 billion, the highest ever.
The three best selling albums were "The Lion King" soundtrack, "The Sign" by Ace of Base and "II" by Boyz II Men.


East Europeans Are Reacting Nervously to Russian Fighting
In the countries of Eastern Europe that five years ago were satellites of the Soviet Union, the fighting in southern Russia has set off nervous reactions.
In some capitals, the apprehension has been expressed by long silences, prompted by concerns of offending Moscow.
Prominent among the fears is that an authoritarian and strongly nationalistic government is re-emerging in Moscow of the kind that repressed desires for independence in the region in the Communist era.


The Task Before Pataki: Goals and Hurdles
The Governor proposes, but in most cases, it is the Legislature that disposes.
The Senate majority is Republican, like Gov.
George E. Pataki, but the Assembly majority, under Speaker Sheldon Silver of Manhattan, is Democratic.
Mr.
Silver said yesterday that "there's nothing the Governor put on the table that we can't talk about;" here are some of the that are now the subjects of discussion.
Sam Roberts


Victor Riesel, 81, Columnist Blinded by Acid Attack, Dies
Victor Riesel, the crusading syndicated labor columnist who was blinded by an acid attack in 1956, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 81.
The cause of death was a heart attack, according to his son, Michael.


Physicians Health Services
Class A shares of Physicians Health Services, a health maintenance organization, set a 52-week high of $31.25 yesterday before closing at $28.125.
It said it had hired an investment banker to assess "strategic alternatives."


Looking at Sexual and Racial Roles
The Altogether Different festival opened on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater with a program that was certainly different and, even more, a puzzle.
In "S/He," Jane Comfort examines sexual and racial role-playing in a series of sketches, a procession of characters and situations that is set to music by Mio Morales and incorporating text by Ms.
Comfort and excerpts from the Senate confirmation hearings of Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas.
In the witty opening number, a tiny, scruffy man played by Ms.
Comfort and a towering, lushly endowed woman played by Andre Shoals lip-synch their way through a bit of rap banter that both espouses and shifts traditional sex roles.
The closing number features a white, male Anita Hill, a white, female Clarence Thomas and a quartet of finger-popping black female Senators.


Dole Offers Foreign Policy Initiatives
Bob Dole took up his role as Senate majority leader today with a two-pronged attack on the Administration's foreign policy, introducing legislation to stop observing the arms embargo against Bosnia and to give Congress more control over the scope and financing of United Nations peacekeeping.
The move represented the first foreign policy confrontation between the new Republican majority in Congress and the Administration.
And it underscored the intention of the Republican-dominated Congress in general -- and Mr.
Dole in particular -- to put the Administration on the defensive and try to wrest control of at least part of the foreign policy agenda from the Democrats.


U.S.-Japan Auto Talks To Resume
The United States and Japan announced Wednesday that they would resume stalled negotiations on automobile trade before the end of the month.
The decision to restart the talks, which were suspended in early October, will have the immediate effect of removing a potentially thorny issue from the meeting between Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama of Japan and President Clinton, which will be held in Washington next week.


Another Life For Castaways
IT'S not enough to be green these days.
Good design also has to be "genuinely comfortable" and appropriate for "an aging society." So decided the judges at the 1994 International Design Fair in Nagaoka, Japan.
Among the 57 winners in a field of 600 entries was Dwight Huffman, 27, of Ithaca, N.Y., whose resourceful furniture is made of salvaged wooden pallets discarded from loading docks.


To build a young image, the Colombian coffee federation tries a campaign with bolder flavor.
BEER, liquor and soft drinks are not, it turns out, the only beverages trying to establish more youthful images among consumers in their 20's and 30's.
So, too, is coffee, through the National Federation of Coffee Growers of Colombia, the world's largest individual coffee exporter.
The federation's purpose is to convince coffee drinkers that the estimated 1.85 billion pounds of arabica beans it exports annually, which are about 5 cents a pound more expensive than alternatives from other nations, are better tasting and therefore worth their premium price.
And now it is also trying to create a revitalized, more contemporary image for its product.


Players' Offer Could Bring End to Lockout
Hockey's bitter labor lockout could end on its 99th day on Saturday when the National Hockey League owners meet in New York to vote on a collective bargaining proposal from the N.H.L.
Players Association.
The offer came yesterday during the fourth consecutive day of bargaining in Chicago between top lieutenants of both sides.


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI PLEDGES TO REDUCE SPENDING Emphasizing his pledge to reduce state government, Governor Pataki promised in his first address to the Legislature to propose a budget for the coming fiscal year that would spend less than the state will spend this year.
A1.
Mr.
Pataki made it clear that the first thing he intends to change is the Governor's relationship with the Legislature.
News analysis, B7.
"He didn't call us any names," said Assemblyman Ronald Canestrari.
"So we've had a significant improvement already." B7.
IN HARTFORD, ROWLAND APPEALS FOR UNITY On a day when Republicans around the nation were basking in their newly won power, John G. Rowland, the first Republican governor in Connecticut in 20 years, took office with a speech that never mentioned his party, avoided appeals to partisanship and called on legislators to work together as a team.
A1.
Governor Rowland marched in his own parade through Hartford; former Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. took a limousine.
B8.
WOMAN PUSHED IN FRONT OF SUBWAY TRAIN A man who escaped from Manhattan Psychiatric Hospital on Christmas Eve pushed a 63-year-old woman off a subway platform to her death as a train pulled in, the police said.
A1.
Reuben Harris had escaped from a state mental hospital four times since May.
B3.
Soon Sin, the subway victim, spent her last morning doing what she loved.
B3.
NEW YORK CITY  FAMILIAR MAJORITY ON SEX EDUCATION The four-member majority that set a more conservative course for the New York City Board of Education re-emerged when the board voted 4 to 3 to give parents a greater role in teaching AIDS topics, including an explanation of different types of sexual intercourse.
B3.
REVENUE SHORTFALL TO WIDEN BUDGET GAP In a sign of the city's deepening fiscal difficulty, Mayor Giuliani said that there would be a shortfall in tax revenues for the fourth quarter of 1994.
Administration officials said the shortfall would be at least $200 million and would lead to even more budget cuts.
B4.
OFFICIAL, FACING INQUIRY, QUITS CITY POST City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi's second-in-command resigned as he faced an investigation into his purchase and financing of a West Side cooperative apartment.
B5.
A MESSAGE NOT LOST ON THE LISTENERS The names were threaded through Governor Pataki's State of the State Message: the women in his government.
He just mentioned their names and titles, and said no more, but the message was not lost on his listeners, especially Democrats.
Metro Matters, B6.
REGION  INSURERS TO PAY FOR TESTING Good health now has the official seal of approval in New Jersey.
Under a new law, insurers must offer coverage for tests that could, with the development of a healthful way of life, improve the well-being of state residents and reduce the long-term cost of health care.
B9.
MAN HELD IN SLAYING OF ESTRANGED WIFE A judge had granted Joanne Martinez a temporary restraining order against her estranged husband, and a ruling was due on whether to forbid Jacobo Martinez from contacting her indefinitely.
Mr.
Martinez dutifully appeared in court; his wife did not.
She was lying dead in her Jersey City apartment.
B9.
Neediest Cases B2


Corrections
An article on Dec. 27 about the dispersal of large brokerage houses around Manhattan misidentified the investment firm at 60 Wall Street, as well as its parent company.
The firm is J. P. Morgan Securities, not J. P. Securities; it is a subsidiary of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, not the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company.
The article and a related chart, listing Manhattan's 20 largest brokerage houses, omitted an explanation of the ranking.
It was based solely on the amount of floor space occupied by the companies.


Gingrich Takes Capital by Storm With Eye on History
Newt Gingrich took the Capital by storm today like many of the generals he has studied -- before dawn, with a plan and with an eye on history.
As he achieved his longtime dream of becoming Speaker of the House, his method was also characteristically Newtonian -- expansive, buoyant, heavy on the symbolism and a bit disjointed.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the .22-caliber rifle tossed away by John C. Salvi 3d, a suspect in two killings at abortion clinics, referred incorrectly in some editions to the manufacturer, Sturm, Ruger &amp; Company.
It is American, not German.


Harlan Logan, 90, Editor and Politician
Harlan Logan, who after careers as a teacher, magazine editor and public relations consultant became a State Representative when he retired to New Hampshire in 1961, died on Dec. 16 in Hanover, N.H.
A longtime resident of Meriden, N.H., he was 90.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, said his daughter Lois Evans of Manhattan.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED SIGNAL INC., Morristown, N.J., has signed a long-term agreement with Ford Motor Co., Dearborn, Mich., to be its sole supplier of spark plugs in North America and Europe.
Terms were not disclosed.
FREEPORT-MCMORAN RESOURCE PARTNERS L.P., New Orleans, has completed its acquisition of nearly all the domestic assets of the sulfur division of Pennzoil Co., Houston.


Thomas Daffron, 83; Editor at The Times Led Edition in Paris
Thomas A. Daffron Jr., a former editor at The New York Times, died yesterday at Sarasota Memorial Hospital in Sarasota, Fla.
A former resident of Suffern, N.Y., he was 83 and had retired in Florida.
The cause of death was heart and kidney failure, his family said.


Lewis &amp; Gace Bozell Gets Prozac Account
Eli Lilly &amp; Company of Indianapolis said yesterday that it had selected Lewis &amp; Gace Bozell Healthcare Worldwide in Fort Lee, N.J., to handle advertising for Prozac, the antidepressant, previously handled by Deltakos/Ferguson/Commonhealth Group in Parsippany, N.J.
Billings were not disclosed.


Excerpts From House Speech by Gephardt on Ceding Control to G.O.P.
Following are excerpts from remarks by Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the minority leader, at the opening of the 104th Congress yesterday as recorded by the Federal News Service:
Ladies and gentlemen of the House, I first want to thank my Democratic colleagues for their support and their confidence.
I noted we were a little short, but I appreciate your friendship and your support.


After an Assault, Questions on School's Duty
A Chicago public school classroom was apparently the scene of a disturbing assault last winter that raises questions about the duty of teachers and schools to protect students during school hours.
According to a complaint filed by lawyers for a 9-year-old girl, a 12-year-old boy forced the girl to crouch under a desk during class and perform oral sex while the substitute teacher sat a few feet away.


Wilkens Stands and Waits Again
About 90 minutes before the tip-off last night, Lenny Wilkens looked as cool as usual.
He was sipping a cup of coffee, wearing neither a tie nor sportcoat.
But inside, Wilkens was feeling the pressure as he attempted -- once again -- to become the top-winning coach in National Basketball Association history.
"What's wearing on me is the inconsistency of our ball club," said Wilkens, whose Atlanta Hawks dropped their eighth game in the last 11 with an 89-80 loss to the Knicks at Madison Square Garden last night.
Now Wilkens has to wait until tomorrow night at home against Washington to attempt -- once again -- to achieve his 939th N.B.A. coaching victory, one more than Red Auerbach had with the Boston Celtics.


Johnson to Buy Mitek Surgical Products
Hoping to expand the market for a new generation of surgical aids that tie tissue to bone, Johnson &amp; Johnson said yesterday that it would acquire Mitek Surgical Products Inc. for $128 million in stock.
Mitek makes a winged, titanium alloy bone implant that surgeons use as an anchor for tethering torn shoulder tissues back into place.
Founded by three Massachusetts Institute of Technology engineers in 1985, the company is expected to earn $4 million on $25 million in revenue in 1994, analysts said.


Treasuries Gain in Price, Ending a Losing Streak
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher yesterday for the first time in five trading sessions but most traders viewed the rise as a technical correction rather than as a precursor to even higher prices.
The price of the benchmark 30-year bond rose 22/32 , to 96, for a yield of 7.85 percent, down from 7.92 percent on Tuesday or about where it was last Thursday.
A three-month bill fell 9 basis points, to 5.68 percent, and a six-month issue dropped 10 points, to 6.27 percent.


Journalist Is Artist, Judge Says, Denying Pay
In a decision that could have widespread implications for the nation's newspapers, magazines and broadcasters, a Federal judge here has ruled that many of today's journalists are too creative and talented to be regarded as drones of the workplace.
They are real professionals, said Judge Norma Holloway Johnson of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia in a case involving a former top reporter for The Washington Post.
And that, she said, makes journalists ineligible for the premium pay -- one-and-a-half times the regular hourly wage -- that the law requires for factory workers and most others who put in more than 40 hours a week.


Software Companies Upset By Demands for Royalties
Companies that make graphics software for viewing pictures on computer screens are in an uproar over what they say is a sudden and surprising demand that they begin paying royalties on a technology already used by millions of people.
Demanding those royalties is the Compuserve Information Service, one of the leading on-line networks for personal computer users.
Compuserve caught many graphics software developers off guard by posting a notice electronically on Dec. 29 that the companies had until Jan. 10 to pay Compuserve a royalty on any programs they sell that enable Compuserve subscribers to view thousands of images available over the network.


Fans Don't Tire of Long Bowl Games
If college football games were any longer, they would be mini-series.
Bowl games, for Osborne's sake, last long enough to roast a 12-pound turkey.
"Everything lasts longer now," said ESPN's Beano Cook.
"College games used to be three hours. The only thing that doesn't last as long is marriage."


Weicker, Warm, Shares Rowland's Cold Moment
Gov.
John G. Rowland marched in his own parade through the cold and mostly empty streets of Connecticut's capital today, flanked by other elected officials and spouses who wanted to share his moment.
Even William E. Curry Jr., a Democrat who was defeated by Mr.
Rowland in November, trudged along hatless and red-faced, waving at the street people and office workers watching from their smoked-glass retreats.
Former Gov. Lowell P. Weicker Jr. took a limousine.


Economic Scene; Cleaning the environment gets harder, but there are solutions.
CLEANER is better -- but at what price?
Last month, 31 counties in New York and Pennsylvania backed away from a voluntary commitment to reduce smog by burning a more expensive blend of gasoline in privately owned cars.
And while small acts of resistance do not make a counterrevolution, the message can be ignored only at environmentalists' peril.
For two decades Washington has been basing policy on the conventional wisdom that Americans will happily pay to make it safe for anyone to drink the water and breathe the air anywhere in the country.
But now that the easy cleanup battles have been won -- and politicians without ties to the environmental lobbies dominate Congress -- the assumption is sure to be questioned.


Speaking for House Speaker And Enjoying the Trappings
Tony Blankley, Newt Gingrich's sybaritic spokesman, was sitting in his new office in the Capitol, enjoying the view from the top.
His wine glasses, champagne glasses and brandy glasses were on a shelf of the bookcase.
His Winstons were on his desk.
"And soon," promised this loyal soldier in the Republican revolution of austerity, "I'll be getting a cappuccino maker in here."


Nina Leen Is Dead; A Photographer
Nina Leen, one of the first female photographers for Life magazine, died on Sunday at her home in New York City.
Ms.
Leen was secretive about her age, but Alison Hart, a press agent for Life, said she was believed to be in her late 70's or early 80's.
Ms.
Leen photographed many subjects but was best known for her pictures of animals.
Among her 15 books were two studies of bats, published in the 1970's.
To make the pictures for these books, she used special cameras and lighting and overcame an aversion to the animals.


Melvin Williams Searls Jr.; Commercial Envoy, 59
Melvin Williams Searls Jr., a business executive who left the oil industry to become the first commercial counselor in Beijing in 1982 after the United States re-established ties with China, died last Wednesday in his home in Arlington, Va.
He was 59 and also resided in Vail, Colo.
The cause was a brain tumor, said his wife, Aurel Brown Searls.


Nautica Enterprises Inc.(NAUT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Simpson Defense Drops DNA Challenge
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson dropped their challenge to the admissibility of crucial DNA evidence in the case today, substantially clearing the way for opening statements.
And, Judge Lance A. Ito said today, those statements will be made before a sequestered jury.
Only a few evidentiary matters -- including whether the jury may hear about either Mr.
Simpson's tumultuous relationship with his former wife, Nicole, or the racial attitudes of a Los Angeles police detective assigned to the case -- must now be resolved before testimony starts.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  YELTSIN ORDERS HALT IN BOMBING  Under mounting criticism for Russia's offensive in the rebel region of Chechnya, President Yeltsin said he had ordered a halt to the bombing of the rebel capital.
A1  EAST EUROPEANS WARY OF RUSSIA  In Eastern Europe, the fighting in southern Russia has set off nervous reactions.
In some capitals, the apprehension has been expressed by long silences, prompted by concerns of offending Moscow.
A9


When Public Officials Earn Outside Income
To the Editor:
Is it unethical for a public official, while in office, to earn outside income?
That is the issue that seems to cause William Safire to reach contradictory conclusions in "Royalties in Office" (column, Jan. 2).


For Furniture, A French Twist
CHRISTIAN ASTUGUEVIEILLE lives in a grand 1870 building not far from the Place de la Concorde, and its small elevator rises with glass doors jiggling at the center of a swirling sculptured wood stair.
Entering his apartment, a visitor smells incense in the air, music seems to waft out of the walls and shadowy shapes move slowly in the distance, hinting at the suite of rooms that lies beyond the 11-foot-high entrance foyer.
One could be in a jungle clearing, with trees swaying overhead and making soft rustling sounds, rather than in the half-dozen ornate rooms that are home to Mr.
Astuguevieille, the French designer, and Georg Dressler, his business associate.


Donald MacCampbell, 85, Literary Agent
Donald MacCampbell, a literary agent in Manhattan for more than 50 years, died on Dec. 26 at Stamford Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 85 and lived in Darien.
He suffered a brief illness, said Maureen Moran, an editor at Donald MacCampbell Inc. in Manhattan.


Sports of The Times; 'Three-peat' Lore Haunts The Cowboys
IT has usually been injuries or the aging of the best players, if not both.
Sometimes the other team makes a big play.
Once the coach was no longer on the sideline.
For one or more of those reasons, not one of the five previous back-to-back Super Bowl champions has ever even advanced to a third consecutive Super Bowl, much less accomplished a "three-peat." And now, as the Dallas Cowboys try to do what no other National Football League team has, two of those reasons haunt them.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section on Dec. 29 about infant mortality in the region labeled the rates incorrectly.
The figures were actual deaths per 1,000 live births, not a percentage.
In New York, the rates were 15.8 for blacks, 7.1 for whites and 8.8 for others; in New Jersey, 18.7 blacks, 5.9 whites and 8.4 others; in Connecticut, 17.2 blacks, 6.2 whites and 7.6 others; in the United States overall, 16.8 blacks, 6.9 whites and 8.5 others.


The First 100 Days
Main developments as Congress convened on Wednesday:
HOUSE -- Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, elected Speaker on a foreordained party-line vote, presided over the voting on a package of internal rules reducing the number of committees and subcommittees, banning proxy voting in committees, establishing more stringent budget counting rules, opening more committee proceedings to the public and requiring a three-fifths vote to raise income taxes.
The package also included legislation sponsored by Representative Christopher Shays of Connecticut to put Congress under the Fair Labor Standards Act, the 1964 Civil Rights Act's ban on discrimination in employment, the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Age Discrimination Act, the Family and Medical Leave Act, the Occupational Safety and Health Act and several other labor measures from which Federal lawmakers had previously exempted themselves.


Burnett Executive Joins a DDB Unit
The DDB Needham Dallas Group unit of DDB Needham Worldwide said yesterday that it had hired Jim Ferguson, a senior vice president and creative director at Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago, to become chief creative officer at its three agencies, effective Jan. 30.
Mr.
Ferguson, 40, will assume creative leadership at the Dallas Group's Tracy-Locke, Focus and DDB Marketing Communications agencies, overseeing 150 creative employees who work on accounts with billings estimated at $500 million.
The accounts include GTE and Pepsi-Cola.
He succeeds David Fowler, who was dismissed unexpectedly in October.


House Proud
THERE have always been people who buy houses with the idea of returning them to the period in which they were built.
When Clark Frankel bought a 1787 Cape Cod in Winthrop, Conn., a house that had been relentlessly "updated," he set about remaking it in its historic image.
No detail has been left unrestored, including the kitchen sink.


Open-Door Policy?
Having won election on a platform of change, Gov.
George E. Pataki used his first address to the Legislature today to make clear that the first thing he intends to change is the governor's relationship with the Legislature.
It is probably the most important thing his fledgling administration can do.
Without a strong working partnership with both houses, one of which is controlled by Democrats, Mr.
Pataki, a Republican, has little hope of accomplishing his larger goals of cutting taxes, shrinking government, toughening criminal penalties and reducing welfare spending.


Iran May Be Able to Build an Atomic Bomb in 5 Years, U.S. and Israeli Officials Fear
Iran is much closer to producing nuclear weapons than previously thought, and could be less than five years away from having an atomic bomb, several senior American and Israeli officials say.
"The date by which Iran will have nuclear weapons is no longer 10 years from now," a senior official said recently, referring to previous estimates.
"If the Iranians maintain this intensive effort to get everything they need, they could have all their components in two years. Then it will be just a matter of technology and research. If Iran is not interrupted in this program by some foreign power, it will have the device in more or less five years."


Debt Official, Facing Inquiry, Quits City Post
City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi's second-in-command resigned this week, as he faced an investigation into his purchase and financing of a West Side cooperative apartment.
Mr.
Hevesi said that Michael W. Geffrard, who as First Deputy Comptroller supervised the issuance of city debt and management of the city's pension funds, handed in his resignation effective Jan. 2.
Mr.
Geffrard had previously served as the director of the Office of Public Finance under Mayor David N. Dinkins.


Designs That Come Full Circle
WHEN design inspiration strikes twice: the nearly psychedelic rug design called "Spirale" (above), so of-the-moment it is part of a new collection at ABC Carpet and Home.
But it's really a remake of a 100-year-old design by Koloman Moser, who formed the Wiener Werkstatte with Josef Hoffman in 1903.
In 1896, an arts magazine in Munich used the word Jugendstil, or Youth Movement, to identify the Viennese version of the Art Nouveau style, a creative, spiritualized response to the depersonalized Industrial Revolution.


More Juniors Declare Draft Eligibility
Scratch quarterback JOHN WALSH from the 1995 Brigham Young lineup and mark him as a National Football League hopeful.
With a week to go before the Jan. 11 deadline for underclassmen to declare their professional eligibility, Walsh, who passed for 4,166 yards and 33 touchdowns in leading B.Y.U. to a 10-3 record as a junior this past season, declared himself eligible yesterday for the N.F.L.'s April draft.
Walsh will be one of three highly regarded quarterbacks in the draft, along with Alcorn State's STEVE McNAIR and KERRY COLLINS of Penn State, both seniors.


Peace Program Is in Danger, Salvadorans Tell the U.N.'s Chief
El Salvador's program of reconstruction and reconciliation is short $137 million and in danger of losing momentum in its critical last phase, the country's Vice President and leading members of the former rebel army told Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali today.
"Peace is not enough," the Vice President, Enrique Borgo Bustamante, said Tuesday.
"We need social peace. We need to remake whatever was Salvador. We need to walk that last part of the road, and we feel so short of breath."


Man Is Sentenced In Student's Killing
Chandran Nathan, a Queens man whose obsession with a young woman led to the slaying of her fiance and to her suicide, was sentenced today to 37 1/2 years to life in prison.
"This was one of the most despicable acts I've ever seen," said Judge Donald E. Belfi of Nassau County Court, who said he was imposing a sentence that would assure that Mr.
Nathan "never gets out of jail."


Brothers Poles Apart, Yet Close, Even Orbiting
GENTLEMAN SPY The Life of Allen Dulles By Peter Grose Illustrated. 641 pages.
A Richard Todd Book/Houghton Mifflin. $30.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
7.50
5.98
3.46
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.68
5.78
3.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.27
6.37
3.24
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.81
7.87
5.87
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.85
7.92
6.40
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.75
8.81
7.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.91
6.95
5.56
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Pop Life
The year just ended was a strong one for pop music, both in terms of the quality of releases and in sales.
Critics found much to like, and so did the accountants.
When all the numbers are added, the sales total for pop music in 1994 is expected to be nearly $11 billion, the highest ever.
The three best selling albums were "The Lion King" soundtrack, "The Sign" by Ace of Base and "II" by Boyz II Men.


Torvaianica Journal; Sunny Italy Turns a Scowling Face to Immigrants
In this seaside town, battened down for the winter, the sudden notoriety is not terribly comfortable.
But Torvaianica, population 7,000, has endured it ever since a 15-year old girl was struck and killed by a car carrying four drunken Moroccans a week ago.
The police in this Tyrrhenian port south of Rome said it appeared that the girl, Sara Folino, was hit accidentally.
But on Dec. 28, the morning after the accident, a Moroccan was attacked by an Italian with a knife at a bus stop along Viale Danimarca.
Later that day four Italians pulled a Moroccan from his motorbike and beat him up.
Then on New Year's Day, a Moroccan in nearby Tor San Lorenzo was wounded by gunfire from a passing car, and an Indian man was stabbed with a knife.


Allwaste Inc.(ALW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


The Pop Life
The year just ended was a strong one for pop music, both in terms of the quality of releases and in sales.
Critics found much to like, and so did the accountants.
When all the numbers are added, the sales total for pop music in 1994 is expected to be nearly $11 billion, the highest ever.
The three best selling albums were "The Lion King" soundtrack, "The Sign" by Ace of Base and "II" by Boyz II Men.


North America to See Casals Festival Concert
Just in time for tourist season, the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network's "Stage" series presents the "38th Annual Pablo Casals Festival" tonight in what is being billed as the first North American concert telecast of this prestigious event in Puerto Rico.
The Puerto Rican tourist agency could hardly ask for more.
The legendary Pablo Casals -- cellist, composer and conductor -- established the Festival Casals in 1956.
Raised in Catalonia, not far from Barcelona, he had fled Franco's Spain in the 1930's and become an ardent opponent of fascism.
His ties to Puerto Rico were through his mother, who was born there.
The festival's first concert was held on April 22, 1957.
Casals performed a cello solo by Bach; his guest, the pianist Rudolf Serkin, offered Mozart and Schubert selections.


Eduardo Mata Is Dead at 52; Conducted Dallas Symphony
Eduardo Mata, a Mexican conductor who was the music director of the Dallas Symphony from 1977 to 1993, was killed yesterday when the plane he was flying crashed near the Cuernavaca airport in Mexico.
He was 52 and lived in Xochitepec, Mexico.
Also killed in the crash was Maria Anaya, a friend.
In his years on the Dallas podium, Mr.
Mata improved the orchestra's performance standard and brought the ensemble into the national and international spotlight.
He campaigned vigorously for the building of the Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center, which opened in 1989.


U.S. Military Has Real Readiness Problem
To the Editor:
"Are U.S. Forces Ready to Fight?" (editorial, Dec. 27) concludes that the military is not facing a serious readiness problem.
You premise this conclusion on the assumption that since the Pentagon's operations and maintenance budgets are larger and its force structure smaller than a decade ago, when readiness was unquestioned, there ought not to be a problem today.


A Little F Sharp With Your PC?
UNTIL recently, the home computer was relatively silent -- quietly crunching numbers or processing words without ever speaking them.
But now it has found its voice.
It talks to you.
On occasion, it even bursts into song.
It has acquired a new persona.
To make the most of the computer's new talents, new add-on speakers are becoming available.
Their job is to make sure the computer is in good voice.


Nets Unable To Hold Off Magic Surge
The Nets bottled up Shaquille O'Neal for most of four quarters, made the crucial shots for most of four quarters and exchanged cold stares for most of four quarters.
But over those final few minutes, well, it's all a blur.
In the latest uprising from underachievers, the Orlando Magic fended off the Nets for a 113-110 victory before a roaring throng of 16,010 at the Orlando Arena tonight.
The Magic swarmed around the Nets in the final minutes to force three 24-second violations and benefited from a controversial traveling call against Derrick Coleman with 13 seconds remaining.


Apple Selects Its Second Clone Maker


Talk Radio, D.C.
After years of shouting in the hinterlands, talk-radio hosts gathered to raise a cacophony of chatter in the heart of the city that many of them consider America's citadel of waste, corruption and out-of-touch politicians.
Article, page A24.


Refunds in Payments For City Employees
Nearly $500 million will be refunded to New York City and more than 110,000 part-time and temporary municipal employees for Social Security payments made from 1986 to 1991 that were not required, Social Security officials said yesterday.
The officials said that the first payments, totaling $22 million, would be made over the next few weeks to employees who worked in 1986 and that initial refunds would run from a few hundred to a thousand dollars each.


Orange County Can Meet Only 60% of Its Budget
Orange County, Calif., facing a budget deficit far greater than the spending cuts it has already made, has enough money to cover only about 60 percent of its share of the general budget, the county's financial advisers disclosed today.
In the most comprehensive statement to date on the county's fiscal crisis after it declared bankruptcy last month, the advisers, in a report to the newly installed Board of Supervisors, said that the county government was at least $172 million short of its fiscal obligations for the next six months.
That is more than four times the spending reductions the previous five-member board adopted last month.


Joseph Holland, 84, Veteran Stage Actor
Joseph Holland, whose long stage career included a number of Shakespearean roles, died on Dec. 28 at his home in Santa Fe, N.M.
He was 84.
The cause was heart failure, said his companion, Vincent Newton.


Campo Electronics Appliances &amp; Computers Inc.(CMPO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Peso Down; Mexican Stocks Fall
Uncertain over the Government's plan to overcome Mexico's economic crisis, stock markets in both the United States and Mexico lost ground today as the peso sank further against the dollar.
Earlier in the day, the Mexican market saw some panic selling, sliding almost 6 percent at one point.
It recovered after investors learned that the Mexican Finance Minister, Guillermo Ortiz, was scheduled to meet with foreign investors in New York on Thursday morning.


Blending Kraft and General Foods
In what amounted to a public acknowledgment that after six years it had failed to blend its Kraft and General Foods operations, the Philip Morris Companies announced yesterday that it would merge its lagging food businesses into a single reorganized company, to be known as Kraft Foods.
In dissolving its Kraft U.S.A. and General Foods U.S.A. units, which together make up the nation's largest food company, Philip Morris will create a new food operation with 55,000 employees, 3,500 of them in the sales force.
The consolidation will begin in April and continue for several years.


TRANSACTIONS
Auto Racing
INDY RACING LEAGUE -- Announced the resignation of Jerry Hauer, commissioner.
Named Jack Long executive director.
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Named Jim Rowe trainer.
Announced the resignation of Rico Petrocelli, hitting and infield instructor, of Trenton of the Eastern League.
National League  PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Re-signed Larry Bowa, Denis Menke, Johnny Podres, Mel Roberts, Mike Ryan and John Vukovich, coaches, to one-year contracts.
Named Sonny Bowers midwestern scouting supervisor, effective Jan. 1.
Japan League  TOKYO YOMIURI GIANTS -- Agreed to terms with Shane Mack, outfielder, on a two-year contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  CHICAGO BULLS -- Activated Luc Longley, center, from the injured list.
Placed Larry Krystkowiak, forward, on the injured list.
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Suspended B.J.
Tyler, guard, for one game for violation of team policy.
Waived Jaren Jackson, guard.
Signed Jeff Grayer, guard.
Football  National Football League  CAROLINA PANTHERS -- Named Jim McNally offensive line coach and Richard Williamson receivers coach.
Hockey  East Coast Hockey League  NASHVILLE KNIGHTS -- Acquired Chad Seibel, defenseman, from the Greensboro Monarchs for Brandon Coates, forward, and Derby Bognar, defenseman.
Soccer  Major League Soccer  MLS -- Signed Tab Ramos, midfielder, and loaned him to Tigres of the Mexican First Division for the remainder of the 1994-95 season.
College
BROCKPORT STATE -- Named Anne Fowler women's lacrosse coach.
CANISIUS -- Named Chuck Williams football coach.
EASTERN MICHIGAN -- Named Rick Rasnick football coach.
GEORGIA TECH -- Named Pat Watson offensive coordinator.
ILLINOIS -- Named Chris Cosh assistant head coach.
LOUISIANA STATE -- Named Morris Watts offensive coordinator.
TEXAS TECH -- Promoted Larry Hoefer, part-time football coach, to full-time outside linebackers coach.


Interest in Merry-Go-Round
An investor group has expressed interest in making a proposal to bring Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc., the troubled specialty store company, out of bankruptcy protection, people close to the company said yesterday.
The group, which has asked to see the company's books, includes Dennis Bookshester, former vice chairman of Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Company, and is advised by Henry Miller, a reorganization expert at Salomon Brothers.
It has not made a formal proposal, lawyers for the company's creditors say.


Decision Today For Marbury
Stephon Marbury, the star Lincoln High School point guard who has been the nation's most heavily recruited college basketball prospect, has finally made up his mind between Georgia Tech and Syracuse, his friend and mentor, Lou d'Almeida, said last night.
But if you want to know Marbury's choice, you'll have to wait until he makes the announcement, himself, sometime today.
Marbury's enchantment with Syracuse and Georgia Tech has not wavered since he was 14 years old.
As he explained it in Darcy Frey's recent book, "The Last Shot," he was drawn to the two schools "because at Syracuse you play in front of 32,820 people" and "because Georgia Tech knows how to treat its point guards."


An Executive Shift at Brinker International
Norman E. Brinker, the chairman of Brinker International, said today that he would step down as chief executive of the restaurant company and concentrate on global expansion and legislative concerns.
Ronald A. McDougall, the company's president, will assume the office of chief executive on June 29.
The changes in titles and duties were approved by Brinker's board at Mr.
Brinker's request.


Excerpts From Gingrich's Speech on Party's Agenda for the 104th Congress
Following are excerpts from the speech yesterday by the new Speaker of the House, Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, on the opening day of the 104th Congress, as transcribed by The New York Times:
This may seem particularly appropriate to say on the first day because this will be the busiest day on opening day in Congressional history.
I want to read just a part of the "Contract With America," not as a partisan act but to remind all of us of what we're about to go through and why.


Rise in Retail Sales Of Licensed Goods
The retail sales of licensed merchandise in North America rose 5 percent in 1994, to $70 billion, according to the 18th annual licensing industry survey by the Licensing Letter, a newsletter based in Brooklyn.
The survey, published in the newsletter's January issue, attributed the growth in sales, from $66.6 billion in 1993, to the popularity of merchandise linked to entertainment properties like the television series "Mighty Morphin Power Rangers" and the film "The Lion King"; sales of such licensed items rose 9 percent, to $17.2 billion.


Jersey City Man Held in Slaying Of Wife in Presence of Children
An estranged husband who had been ordered by a court not to contact his wife has been charged with murdering her in the presence of her four young children.
The man, Jacobo Martinez, had a court date here Tuesday with his wife, Joanne.
A family court judge had granted Mrs.
Martinez the temporary restraining order in December, and a ruling was due on whether to forbid Mr.
Martinez from contacting his wife indefinitely.


Study on Ailing Gulf War G.I.'s Called a Failure
A panel affiliated with the National Academy of Sciences said today that the Government's research on the health problems of Persian Gulf war veterans had been badly organized and had failed to determine if the gulf war syndrome really exists.
The panel recommended that Vice President Al Gore's office should coordinate a better organized study of complaints by thousands of veterans that they contracted illnesses in the gulf.


From Chrysler, the Next Generation Mini-Van


Accounts
*
Busch Entertainment Corp., St.
Louis, to GSD&amp;M Advertising, Austin, Tex., to handle advertising for the Sea World of California theme park, previously handled by D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Los Angeles.
In November, Busch Entertainment's parent, the Anheuser-Busch Companies, dismissed D.M.B.&amp; B.'s St.
Louis office on its flagship Budweiser beer brand.
GSD&amp;M already handles the Sea World of Texas account; most other Busch Entertainment theme parks are handled by DDB Needham Chicago, the new Budweiser agency.
Billings were not disclosed.


Human Eye Found Doing Second Job
Boston researchers have demonstrated for the first time that the human eye has two functions, one of which is independent of its ability to see.
Just as the human ear controls both hearing and balance, the eye, these researchers showed, not only permits conscious vision but also independently registers light impulses that regulate the body's internal daily clock.
Even people who are totally blind and have no perception of light can have normal hormonal responses to bright light, the researchers found.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Renewed the contracts of Brian Butterfield, Tony Cloninger, Billy Connors, Rick Down and Willie Randolph, coaches; Glenn Sherlock, bullpen catcher; and Tim McCleary, assistant general manager.
Re-assigned Clete Boyer to roving instructor.


Educational Oasis on Rikers Island; School at Adolescent Center Is Striving to Raise Hopes
In the halls of the Adolescent Reception Detention Center on Rikers Island, there are rapists and muggers, murderers and thieves awaiting judgment.
But when Sharon Jones looks at the teen-agers there, she sees mechanics and writers, printers and scientists.
"Whatever they might be to other people, to me they're students," said Ms.
Jones, principal of the Rikers Island Educational Facility, a surprising oasis of order, possibility and education for young men who mostly never before appreciated the value of school and who mostly never before bothered to attend.


Mason Is Showing the Knicks Flashes of His Old Form
All Pat Riley wants for the new year is the old Anthony Mason.
"I've seen it in the last three or four games," said Riley, referring to Mason's improved play, which has helped the Knicks win a season-high four straight games.
"He's back on the boards, he's making things happen. He's running the floor, he's posting up strong and he's getting his opportunities."


Bombing of Rebel City Lets Up, But Not the Attacks on Yeltsin
There were reports today of a respite in the bombing of the embattled capital of Chechnya, as ordered by Boris N. Yeltsin.
But it brought no reprieve to the Russian President, who remains under attack at home and abroad for his military offensive against the secessionist southern region.
Western press reports from Grozny, the rebel capital, supported Russia's claim that bombing was limited to the outskirts of town, but Russian reports contradicted it.


U.S. and Allies to Press Russia for Chechnya Peace Settlement; Kohl Cautions Yeltsin
Under increasing pressure to take a stronger position against the Russian assault on the secessionist region of Chechnya, Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany said today that he had told President Boris N. Yeltsin that civilian casualties were too high.
But in a telephone call with the Russian President on Wednesday, Mr.
Kohl said, he had emphasized that Germany still regarded the conflict as an internal Russian affair.
Mr.
Kohl said in a statement issued by his office that he welcomed Mr.
Yeltsin's order to cease bombing of Grozny, the Chechen capital.


CHRONICLE
FELIX DE WELDON, the sculptor, who has executed more than 2,000 public commissions, on every continent -- 33 of his monuments stand in Washington alone -- is going to Graceland in Memphis this weekend to unveil his latest creation: a bust of Elvis Presley.
"I was there on a visit last year and noticed that there was no permanent bronze of him there," Mr. de Weldon said yesterday from his office in Los Angeles.
"I felt he should be permanently remembered, so I offered to do this as a present."


For Children
Ice Skating
Bear Mountain Ice Rink  Bear Mountain State Park  Bear Mountain, N.Y.  (914) 786-2701, ext. 266  Recommended ages: 3 and up  Through March 12
Skating at the foot of Bear Mountain can be inspiring: not far from the outdoor rink is the Bear Mountain Inn, a Bavarian-style fieldstone lodge, while a sliver of the Bear Mountain Bridge is visible in the distance.
The 60-room lodge sits by Hessian Lake, which is ringed with fir trees, further contributing to the faux Alpine setting.


Suspect in Abortion Attack Returns to Massachusetts
Declaring in a rambling, six-page letter that he wants the death penalty if convicted, and will become a Roman Catholic priest if acquitted, John C. Salvi 3d was returned to Massachusetts by Federal marshals tonight to face charges in last week's fatal shootings at two abortion clinics in a Boston suburb.
Mr.
Salvi, a 22-year-old would-be hairdresser from Hampton Beach, N.H., was flown here from Norfolk, Va., where he had been held in the city jail since his arrest on Saturday on suspicion of shooting into an abortion clinic in that city.


U.N. Chief Chides Security Council on Military Missions
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali accused the Security Council today of "micromanaging" peacekeeping operations at the expense of his authority and that of ground commanders.
And he criticized governments he did not name for demanding strong and costly action and then failing to support it.
In a progress report on the last two years of United Nations intervention in world crises, Mr.
Boutros-Ghali also said the world body should take a harder look at the negative effects of sanctions on people living under renegade governments.





Results Plus
N.B.A.
Spurs Win Squeaker  David Robinson scored 25 points and Sean Elliott added 20, including two free throws to decide the outcome with 4.6 seconds to play, as San Antonio defeated Utah, 104-103, last night in Salt Lake City for its 10th victory in 11 games.
Utah's Karl Malone had 29 points and 11 rebounds.


Jim Lee Howell, Ex-Giants Coach, Dies at 80
Jim Lee Howell, the perennial Giant who played in four championship games and coached the team to three others during a career that began in the leather-helmet era of the 1930's, died on Wednesday at his home in Lonoke, Ark.
He was 80, and according to his wife, Susan, who would give no precise cause of death, he died of natural causes after a three-year illness that began when he broke his hip in a fall.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the opening day of the 104th Congress misidentified Representative Patrick Kennedy's home state in some editions.
He is a Democrat of Rhode Island, not Massachusetts.


Regulators See No Need for Tougher Rules on Derivatives
Federal regulators and members of the Senate Banking Committee expressed little enthusiasm today for putting broad new controls on the derivatives market after the heavy losses in Orange County, Calif.
But they said a few narrow regulatory changes might be needed.
The Acting Treasury Secretary, Frank N. Newman, led several financial regulators in telling the committee at a hearing today that he saw no current need for Congress to introduce broad rules covering derivatives, which are financial contracts that vary widely in value with interest rates, stock prices, currencies or commodity prices.
The existing legislation provides adequate discretion to regulators, he said.


Corrections
A music review on Tuesday about a recital by the soprano Angelina Reaux at Merkin Concert Hall on Saturday night misstated the title of a song by Kurt Weill and Ira Gershwin.
It is "This Is New," not "This Is Now."


Art in Review
David Moreno
Feature Gallery  76 Greene Street  SoHo  Through Jan. 14
David Moreno's paintings are growing stranger, which means better, with each show.
His monochromatic surfaces cluttered with toylike objects still seem intent on getting in touch with Minimalism's repressed Child Within.
And in his new work he adds a take on that movement's spiritual pretensions through a few off-handed non-Western references.


Art in Review
Viola Frey  'Plates 1968-1994'
Nancy Hoffman Gallery  429 West Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Jan. 11
Viola Frey's works here are distant cousins to the old-fashioned decorative plates that once hung in dining rooms: handpainted dishes depicting the trades of street vendors, the lives of Parisian coquettes or the monuments of Rome.
But Ms.
Frey's ceramic plates, 2 or 3 feet in diameter and a half-foot deep, approach the scale of tondo reliefs.
If you put one in your dining room, its piled-up figures, garish colors and pitted surfaces would stop conversation.


A Bankruptcy Peculiar to California
Here's one cutting-edge California phenomenon that is not likely to make it big elsewhere in the nation: the first major bankruptcy of a local government caused by taking risky bets with taxpayers' money.
The $2 billion investment loss that forced Orange County to declare bankruptcy in December can be traced largely to local recklessness in the face of fiscal and economic pressures that are peculiar to California.
Indeed, while a number of municipalities around the country have been plagued by losses from financial derivatives gone bad, the worst troubles are concentrated in this state.
Apart from Orange County, for instance, a recent nationwide survey of local governments found that six other California counties stood out as engaging in "significantly more aggressive" investment strategies than was typical.


Give Finns Credit For Molotov Cocktail
To the Editor:
E.
S.
Linett (letter, Dec. 30) states that the Russians coined the term "Molotov cocktail" during the 1941 Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union.
This is wrong.
It was the Finns who first used this term for home-made incendiary devices during the 1939-40 Soviet invasion of Finland.


Rail Death: Mother, 93, Says 'Why?'
For more than 24 hours, La Chang Soon did not know of her daughter's fate.
Her own health failing, the 93-year-old woman was told that her daughter had been hospitalized after falling ill.
But as time wore on, the truth could no longer be hidden.
Yesterday the sobs of a grieving mother filled the family's small Brooklyn apartment as a steady stream of visitors offered condolences and prayers.


If Pataki Really Rode With Teddy Roosevelt
To the Editor:
"Teddy Roosevelt Along as Pataki Begins Ride" (news article, Jan. 1), describing the admiration of Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York for the Republican Roosevelt, raises questions about Mr.
Pataki's grasp of American political history.
He may have been exposed to some of the country's finest scholars as an undergraduate at Yale, but he does not seem to have retained much of what they sought to teach him.


Stock Prices Decline In Day of Heavy Trading
The stock market went nowhere in heavy trading yesterday.
Stock traders have been tracking the bond market, where interest rates rose and prices fell yesterday, said Todd Clark, senior block trader at Mabon Securities.
"It shows the lack of conviction out there," he said.


Paying for Public TV
To the Editor:
Re "The 1% Solution" (Op-Ed, Dec. 29): Alvin H. Perlmutter is right that some of the cost of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting should be borne by commercial broadcasters, because the Federal Communications Commission has given them their broadcasting frequencies free, although those frequencies are public property of almost incalculable value.


A Plausible Mexican Rescue Plan
President Ernesto Zedillo of Mexico, addressing shaken investors and anxious citizens, has proposed a coherent strategy to counter the plunging peso.
The plan may not work as advertised; it could be improved.
But it is probably good enough to return the economy, after a period of painful retrenchment, to prosperity.
Mexico has run large trade deficits that it has paid for with foreign loans.
To keep loans flowing, Mexico offered investors high interest rates and a stable peso -- which Mexico sustained by buying excess pesos with dollars.
When dollar reserves dwindled to alarming levels, Mexico was forced to let the peso float free.
It plunged about 30 percent, driving up consumer prices overnight.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  CRITICISM OF YELTSIN MOUNTS  Despite reports of a respite in the bombing of the separatist capital of Chechnya, President Yeltsin remains under attack at home and abroad for his offensive against the secessionist region.
A1  U.S.
OPENS RUSSIAN PEACE EFFORT  After weeks of calling the conflict in Chechnya an internal matter, the Administration is set to open an effort with Western Europeans to persuade Russia to accept a negotiated end to the crisis.
A8


INSIDE
Moynihan Cut From Panel
New York's Democratic Senator is being pushed off the Foreign Relations Committee so that a Republican will not lose his seat.
Page A21.
Clinic Suspect's Statement
In a rambling written statement, the suspect in shootings at three abortion clinics said he wanted to be executed if found guilty.
Page A12.
Hitler Defaulted; Bonn Pays
Sixty years after Hitler defaulted on $210 million that American investors lent Germany, Bonn is moving to pay the last of the debt.
Page D1.
Jets Get New Coach, Again
The Jets' owner, Leon Hess, saying he wants to win now, dismissed Pete Carroll after one season and hired Rich Kotite to succeed him.
Page B7.


Variety Chooses Eisaman, Johns
Variety Inc., the publisher of the Variety and Daily Variety entertainment trade newspapers in Los Angeles and New York, said yesterday that it has named Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws Advertising in Los Angeles as the first agency to handle its business-to-business advertising.
Billings were not disclosed.
Eisaman, Johns was awarded the account after a six-month review that also included three other undisclosed finalists.
A campaign is expected to begin in the spring.


Student Lauded by Pataki for Heroism Is Suing the State
Just days after being proclaimed a hero in Gov.
George E. Pataki's inaugural address, Jason McEnaney, the sophomore at the State University at Albany who was shot while breaking up a campus hostage drama, announced yesterday that he was suing the state.
Mr.
McEnaney's lawyer, Neil T. Shayne, acknowledged at a news conference that "being singled out by the Governor in a very generous act" had made the family's decision to sue the state "more difficult."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Despite a boom year, Detroit could not budge the Japanese from their share of the United States car and truck market.
Japanese auto makers overcame the effects of a stronger yen and a sluggish economy at home to increase their share of the American market by two-tenths of a percentage point in 1994.  [ Page A1. ]


Examining Gay Issues in Racial Settings
"The Darker Side of Black," Isaac Julien's terrifically smart and cool-headed study of Jamaican dancehall music, accomplishes more in 55 minutes than many documentaries do in twice that time.
The film, which opens today at Cinema Village, focuses on issues brought up just over two years ago by the release of the dancehall rapper Buju Banton's record "Boom Bye Bye," which advocated shooting homosexuals.
Then the Jamaican dancehall star Shabba Ranks gave an interview in which he supported the song's hateful language and declared that homosexuals deserved to be crucified.
Under pressure, he later said that while homosexuality was wrong, he did not condone physical violence against anyone.


Carroll's Complains He Needed More Time
Pete Carroll learned on the job -- learned too late, he said today -- that he should have been tougher.
And he would have been, he insisted.
But Carroll won't get that chance.
He was dismissed as the Jets' coach after only one year on the job.
Nevertheless, he wasn't second-guessing himself over his performance in guiding the Jets to a 6-10 record.


Lasers to Be Tested By Transit Police
It won't live up to the Hollywood flash of James Bond gadgetry, but the New York City transit police hope the effect will be just as daunting for would-be criminals in the subway.
In what officials call the first step in a "Star Trek" vision of the future of policing the subway system, a dozen officers will begin an experiment today in which their 9-millimeter service pistols will have tiny laser sights attached to the barrel.


Mexico Can Meet Its Debts, Finance Chief Tells Bankers
International investors seemed to increase confidence in Mexico's future yesterday as the country's new Finance Minister, Guillermo Ortiz, told banking officials that his country could pay its debts.
In a whirlwind day in New York, Mr.
Ortiz also sought to reassure investors by saying that Mexico would ask the International Monetary Fund for its stamp of approval on the economic-recovery plan it announced on Tuesday, after having devalued the peso in December.


The Spoken Word
WENDY WASSERSTEIN, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
The playwright will speak with Terrence McNally, author of "Love! Valour! Compassion!," and the actor Nathan Lane.
Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets, $16.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
"MADAMA BUTTERFLY," Kaplan Penthouse, 10th floor, 70 Lincoln Center Plaza.
Bridget Paolucci, a writer and lecturer, will discuss the Metropolitan Opera's new production of the Puccini opera.
Tomorrow at 11:45 A.M.
Part of the Metropolitan Opera Guild lecture series.
Tickets, $8.
Information: (212) 769-7028.


Husband and Wife Killed Outside Home In Maspeth, Queens
A husband and wife arriving home from work were shot to death Wednesday night, apparently by someone who confronted them outside the entrance to their apartment in Maspeth, Queens.
Tan Choon Heng, 30, and his wife, Ling Ying, 25, were slain in a rear yard of the two-story, two-family house at 44-22 65th Street in a middle-class neighborhood not far from the Queens-Midtown Expressway, the police said.


The First 100 Days
Main developments in Congress yesterday: HOUSE -- The House took the day off after Wednesday's marathon opening session, but the Speaker, Newt Gingrich, testified before the Ways and Means Committee as it opened a discussion of the Republican "Contract With America." He said the nation's tax code punished Americans more than it helped them, and he urged that people think creatively about alternatives, like giving tax credits for people who buy laptop computers.


Marbury Makes Choice: Ga. Tech
The Big East was the big winner last year in the sweepstakes for the top high school player in New York City, perhaps the country.
Yesterday, Stephon Marbury chalked one up for the Atlantic Coast Conference.
In a mild surprise, Marbury gave his oral commitment to attend Georgia Tech instead of Syracuse, the Big East school that was his favorite as a child.
The Lincoln High School star, who is rated as the top point guard prospect in the nation, said U.C.L.A. and Minnesota were also in the running.


Art in Review
'Masterpieces of  Fashion Photography'
James Danziger Gallery  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through Jan. 14
'Outside Fashion'  'Style and Subversion'
Howard Greenberg Gallery  120 Wooster Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Jan. 14


Retailers Finish Year On Disappointing Note
Bargain hunting after the holidays helped prop up sales at the nation's chain stores in December, but the gains retailers eked out for the entire month were still disappointing.
Had it not been for strong after-Christmas sales, the month would have been dismal for most retailers, who reported sales yesterday.
"Unfortunately, there was more traffic in stores the Monday and Tuesday after Christmas than in the two or three days before," said Kimberly K. Walin, who follows retailing stocks for Lehman Brothers.


Executive Changes
AMRION INC., Boulder, Colo., a provider of vitamins and nutritional supplements, named Barre L. Rorabaugh chief operating officer.
COOPER INDUSTRIES, Houston, appointed Sheldon Erikson president and chief executive of its Cooper Cameron unit, and Thomas R. Hix senior vice president for finance and chief financial officer for the unit.


Accounts
LCF&amp;L, New York, was awarded the accounts of the Baltimore and Houston Mercedes-Benz dealer groups, previously unassigned.
That brings the total number of Mercedes dealer groups the agency handles to six with combined billings estimated at $7 million to $9 million. *
Nissan Sweden, Nacka Strand, Sweden, to Hallstedt &amp; Hvid/TBWA, Stockholm, to handle its account, previously at Garbergs, Stockholm.
TBWA already handles advertising for the parent Nissan Motor Co. in markets like Britain, France and Spain.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.


Art in Review
Donald Sultan  'Wall Flowers'
Paul Kasmin Gallery  74 Grand Street (between Wooster and Greene Streets)  SoHo  Through Jan. 28
Donald Sultan is one of those artists who do one thing really, really well.
His reputation rests essentially on a single series of paintings, showing huge yellow lemons set against tar-black backgrounds; the excitement lies in the contrast between the lemons' rounded, sensual outlines and the absolute flatness with which they are painted.
His new work at Paul Kasmin suggests that the lemons are a hard act to follow.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Senate's first day under Republican control misstated the term of Senator Bob Dole's first period as majority leader.
It was 1985 to 1987, not 1981-86.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.31
6.59
3.08
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.71
5.68
3.03
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.30
6.27
3.22
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.85
7.81
5.79
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.88
7.85
6.34
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.74
8.75
7.32
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.92
6.91
5.55
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Home Video
The new year finds the video industry promoting advanced concepts and, as befits an industry whose new product is primarily used movies, stirring old ingredients.
Today, at the Winter Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, Nev., for example, the alliance of Sony and Philips will demonstrate its compact digital video disk, or DVD.
Carrying a full-length movie and selling for about $20, the DVD invites comparison with the audio CD introduced in the early 1980's.


Report Says G.O.P. 'Contract' Will Be Costly for New York
New Yorkers would pay more for subway tokens, school lunches and even water under the Republicans' "Contract With America," according to a study released today by Representative Charles E. Schumer.
He says the legislation would cost the city $1.9 billion in Federal aid next year.
Across the region, governors and mayors are only beginning to grapple with what the plan to simultaneously cut taxes and balance the budget might mean for their own spending plans.
In Connecticut and New Jersey, officials said they had no way to assess the potential impact.


Sardonic Hospital Comedy
"The Kingdom," Lars von Trier's four-part, four-and-a-half-hour series, is a made-for-television film that should gladden the hearts of the handful who might be pining for Denmark's answer to "Twin Peaks." Unfolding over 279 minutes, the drama, set in a giant Copenhagen hospital nicknamed "the kingdom," metamorphoses from a soap opera with Gothic pretensions into a comedy of the supernatural.
As events become increasingly far-fetched and the far-fetched turns ludicrous, the film never forsakes its tone of deadpan earnestness.
Imagine an occult "E.R." involving an exorcism, voodoo rites and stolen body parts, and you have some idea of the film's bizarre tonal juxtapositions.
Contributing to the film's weirdness is its eye-straining color scheme.
The entire movie, which opens today at the Walter Reade Theater, was shot in a blurry orange-toned sepia, with some scenes using hand-held cameras.
In the initial episode, the color suggests a hyper-realistic point of view.
Long before the end, the color seems part of the joke in a movie that is a prolonged tongue-in-cheek assault on film and television realism and ultimately on rationality itself.


Restaurants
The first time I ate dinner at Primavera, the bill was so high I called the waiter over.
He looked concerned, then added it up.
"It is correct," he said.
"Perhaps you didn't realize that the specials were expensive."
"How much were those plates of pasta with truffles?" I asked.
After all, I'm a professional eater.
I know white truffles are expensive.
Earlier in the week, I had paid $60 for a plate of white truffle pasta at Daniel.
I expected Primavera's price would be about the same.
No such luck.


Economy in New York Region Is Stagnant, Unlike the Nation's
Economic expansion and job growth in the New York region have come to a virtual halt since July, and higher interest rates are further undermining the region's prospects, according to economists, executives and government officials.
Although the New York region shows few signs of sinking back into recession, the experts say the local economy remains one of the weakest in the nation, when business activity elsewhere is so robust that the Federal Reserve has raised interest rates six times since February to ward off inflation.


The Successor to 'Einstein's Dreams'
GOOD BENITO
By Alan Lightman
215 pages. Pantheon Books. $21.
In his first novel, the best-selling "Einstein's Dreams" (1993), the physicist and writer Alan Lightman spun his love of science into a playful series of improvisations on the subject of time, creating an utterly delightful, Calvinoesque meditation on mankind's precarious, time-ridden existence.
The interface between the hard, cold, logical world of physics and the fuzzy, unpredictable realm of human emotions is also the subject of Mr.
Lightman's latest novel, "Good Benito." This time, however, he has chosen to focus not on the philosophical implications of physics but on the soul of an individual physicist.
The result is a novel that is considerably more conventional than "Einstein's Dreams" but also more moving and direct.


Republicans Defeat Lobbyist Gift Ban and a Move to Weaken the Filibuster
With the House taking the day off after an opening session of more than 14 hours, Senate Republicans today moved to center stage in the task of making the 104th Congress a vehicle of change, pushing for a law that would require Congress to abide by workplace rules that it sets for private industry.
But as the Republicans kept the Senate in session past suppertime to work for their own proposed changes, they voted unanimously to kill a Democratic effort that would have made it easier to end filibusters.
And they buried a Democratic move to forbid members of Congress to accept gifts from lobbyists.


Prices Fall On Fears of Brisk Growth
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday amid investor concern about the employment report for December that is scheduled to be released this morning.
Behind much of the selling was worry that the numbers would show brisk economic growth that could cause inflation to accelerate and interest rates to rise.
The 30-year bond fell 11/32 , to a price of 9521/32 for a yield of 7.88 percent, up from 7.85 percent on Wednesday.
The long bond, by the close of the New York market, gave back about half of Wednesday's gain.


Kelly to Have Surgery
Bills quarterback JIM KELLY will have arthroscopic surgery on his left knee on Wednesday.


So Far, the St. John's Freshmen Aren't Acting Their Age
Although St.
John's heralded freshman class provided much optimism coming into the 1994-95 season, the caution flags were waving nevertheless.
Freshmen, no matter how talented, are still freshmen, prone to excitability and unpredictable mistakes.
But through the first nine games of the season and two Big East tests on the road, the Red Storm's freshman threesome of Felipe Lopez, Zendon Hamilton and Tarik Turner has provided more production and played with more poise than Coach Brian Mahoney could have hoped for.


Seagram Acquiring Dole's Juice Unit
The Seagram Company continued its diversification away from its core alcoholic beverage operations yesterday, saying that it would buy the juice business of the Dole Food Company for $285 million in cash.
The acquisition will build the domestic market share of Seagram's Tropicana brand juice subsidiary and extend its global reach.


Budget Director Quits to Take State Senate Job, Forcing Giuliani to Juggle Staff
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's budget director resigned yesterday, forcing the Mayor to juggle his senior fiscal staff as the city faces mounting financial problems this fiscal year and a looming $2 billion deficit next year.
The budget director, Abraham M. Lackman, who was a major architect of Mr.
Giuliani's strategy to reduce spending and cut the size of the municipal work force, will return to his home in Albany to become the top fiscal aide to the Republican-controlled State Senate and a special adviser to Joseph L. Bruno, the Senate majority leader.
Mr.
Lackman had held a lower-level fiscal position in the Senate before coming to City Hall.


Jack Denton Scott, Cookbook Author And Novelist, 79
Jack Denton Scott, a versatile writer whose work ranged from cookbooks to mystery novels, died on Tuesday at his home in Corning, N.Y.
He was 79.
He suffered a long illness, said Maria Scott, his wife and frequent collaborator.


Connection Is Sought in Deaths of Six Elderly Men
The Manhattan District Attorney's office is investigating a possible link between the 1993 death of an elderly member of a prominent Greek-American family in New York City and the mysterious deaths of five elderly men in San Francisco.
All six men, according to law-enforcement officials, are believed to have had digitalis in their blood streams.
That drug, used to treat heart ailments, can be fatal in large doses.
And, shortly before their deaths, all six men had been befriended or married by younger women who are members of an extended family who stood to inherit their money.


Kotite Was Winning While He Was Losing
He stood there with a big, fat, lit cigar in one hand and a game ball clutched in the other hand.
Rich Kotite had just been awarded the ball for his sharp game plan executed beautifully by his players in the Eagles' 31-13 victory over the Giants in Philadelphia.
The season was 1990.
Kotite was the Eagles' offensive coordinator.
What a media darling.
What a glow he had that afternoon and how patient he was answering each question from each inquisitor.
You could tell he had the smarts, the personality and the makings of an National Football League head coach.


Moscow, Bowing to I.M.F., Will Loosen Controls on Oil Prices
In a decision that could hasten needed loans to Russia, the Government has bowed halfway to foreign pressure and agreed to start liberalizing the domestic oil market.
A decree, signed by Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin but not yet published, eliminates the requirement that oil companies sell more than half their production at artificially depressed domestic prices, World Bank officials said.
The International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the United States all lobbied vigorously for such a step.


Storm Damages Cup Yacht
A violent windstorm in San Diego ripped through the America's Cup compound of the PACT 95 syndicate Wednesday night, causing as much as $400,000 in damage.
The wind tore apart a 6,100-square-foot sail loft, severely damaged the team's new 60-foot yacht and sent mainsails worth $50,000 flying through the air like kites.
The sail loft, a makeshift building of vinyl tarp and steel tubing, was built to withstand winds up to 70 miles an hour, said Robert Hopkins Jr., vice president of PACT 95.
But the wind lifted the entire building off the ground.
Loft debris crashed into Young America, PACT's new cup yacht, which was sitting in an outdoor cradle.


Quick Movement on a Broad Variety of Issues Before the House and Senate
As the 104th Congress began its second day in office, attention shifted to committees considering the legislative agenda Republicans have set for their party.
The new Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich of Georgia, said he was determined to pass the legislation by mid-April.
Legislation
With many Democrats backing the new Republican majority, the Senate is moving swiftly toward a vote on legislation that would make it harder for Congress to impose rules on state and local governments without also providing Federal money to pay the costs.


Man in the News: Michael Demaree McCurry; Articulate Defender
In his 18 years in Washington politics, Michael D. McCurry, the new White House spokesman, has learned a lot about defending Democrats in trouble, having represented a Senator facing indictment and three failed Presidential candidates with equanimity and wit.
He showed those qualities just minutes after President Clinton officially announced his long-expected appointment as press secretary today, when a reporter noted that Mr.
McCurry had worked in 1992 for one of Mr.
Clinton's rivals for the Democratic nomination, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, and asked if he had any reservations now.


Unsigned Players Called Free Agents
With Congress and the National Labor Relations Board already involved, the Major League Baseball Players Association opened a new front yesterday in their multifaceted attack on the owners' unilateral implementation of a salary cap.
The union informed the clubs that the approximately 800 unsigned players who were tendered contracts two weeks ago are free agents, or will become so, because the changes the clubs made in the uniform player's contract made the tenders improper.


The Buckle
Shares of the Buckle Inc. rose sharply in Nasdaq trading yesterday.
The fashion retailer reported that unlike other specialty retailers, it had a strong Christmas season, posting a 7 percent increase in same-store sales for the five weeks that ended on Dec. 31.


Showtime Selects Young &amp; Rubicam
Showtime Networks Inc. in New York said yesterday that it had selected Young &amp; Rubicam New York to handle its account, which had been at Amil Gargano &amp; Partners in New York for the last three years.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade publications have estimated them at $6 million to $8 million; they might increase significantly this year as Showtime's parent, Viacom Inc., expands its entertainment operations.


Agencies Named In Kmart Review
The Kmart Corporation yesterday identified six agencies that are being considered in the review of its national image advertising account.
The account, with billings estimated at $125 million to $175 million, has been at Ross Roy Communications in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., since 1969, but that agency declined Kmart's request in November to participate in the review.
Kenneth W. Watson, Kmart's executive vice president for marketing and product development in Troy, Mich., listed the contenders as Ally &amp; Gargano in New York, Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas in New York, N. W. Ayer &amp; Partners in New York, BBDO New York, Campbell Mithun Esty in Minneapolis and Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG in New York.


Richer Than You Feel
Americans may feel battered by tough economic times, but by world standards they are doing just fine.
The 400,000 residents of Luxembourg, says a survey by the World Bank, were the richest people on earth in 1993.
Output per person, a rough proxy for income, averaged $29,510.
Residents of the U.S. ranked second, averaging almost $25,000 each.
These figures take explicit account of price differences: a dollar of income in Luxembourg was calculated to buy approximately the same amount of goods and services as a dollar spent in the United States.


Market Place; Hitler Defaulted, but Now Germany Will Pay Debt
Sometimes a bad debt turns good. You just have to wait a half-century.
Between the two world wars American investors lent Germany the then huge sum of $210 million as part of the first great international effort to bail out a bankrupt country.
A few years later Hitler came to power and defaulted on the loans.
Now the German Government is taking steps to pay the last of the money owed.


A Deadly, Dying Fringe
The killings of two abortion clinic workers in Massachusetts may lead many citizens to believe that America's seemingly endless struggle over a woman's fundamental right to choose abortion is intensifying once again.
Wrong.
Instead, what is now happening -- from the March 1993 killing of Dr.
David Gunn in Pensacola, Fla., through the July 1994 Pensacola murders of Dr.
John B. Britton and a volunteer, James H. Barrett, to the shootings of Shannon Lowney and Leanne Nichols in Brookline last week -- is the death throes of an anti-abortion movement in which almost every remaining participant realizes that the war to overturn Roe v.
Wade has been irretrievably lost.


Merrill Lynch Will Cut 180 Global Capital Jobs
Sounding what could be an ominous note for the new year on Wall Street, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the country's leading underwriter of stocks and bonds, said yesterday that it planned to lay off 180 employees in its global capital markets group.
The cuts, which include people at all levels of the company's various capital-raising businesses, come when the number of new stock and bond issues has fallen dramatically from the record levels in 1993.


Discretion Ruled in the Paula Jones Case; Captain of Our Ship
To the Editor:
"Too Much Immunity in the Jones Case" (editorial, Dec. 30), on Judge Susan Wright's ruling in the Paula Jones case on President Clinton's immunity while in office, considers pros and cons, yet ignores the most salient point: that any President can be held hostage by an unscrupulous opposition orchestrating false accusations of personal misconduct.


Discretion Ruled in the Paula Jones Case
To the Editor:
"Too Much Immunity in the Jones Case" (editorial, Dec. 30) misses the point of Judge Susan Wright's decision to postpone Paula Jones's sexual harassment trial until after Mr.
Clinton has ceased to be President.


There's a Car Under Here Somewhere


Confusion Reigns As Mishaps Delay Brooklyn Subways
A freakish series of minor mishaps in the Brooklyn subways caused long delays and jam-packed trains for a quarter-million riders during the morning rush hour yesterday, transit officials said.
The tie-ups started at 6:22 A.M., when the signal system on the IRT broke down between the Nevins Street and Atlantic Avenue stations.
With the automatic switching system frozen, workers had to signal the 2, 3, 4, and 5 trains through the station with electric lanterns.


'94 Grammy Nominations: Not Just the Familiar
The 37th annual Grammy Awards will be a battle between the old and the new.
Some 435 nominees for the annual music awards, which will be given out in a ceremony on March 1 in Los Angeles, were announced yesterday by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences in a news conference at the Hard Rock Cafe in Manhattan, and they include more young artists in top categories than in recent years.
In the competition for record of the year, an award given to a single, a new artist, Sheryl Crow ("All I Wanna Do"), is going up against old hands like Bruce Springsteen ("Streets of Philadelphia") and Bonnie Raitt ("Love Sneakin' Up on You").
For album of the year, the young gun Seal ("Seal") challenges Tony Bennett ("MTV Unplugged"), Eric Clapton ("From the Cradle") and the operatic juggernaut of Placido Domingo, Luciano Pavarotti and Jose Carreras ("The Three Tenors in Concert '94").
More dramatically, in the best spoken word or nonmusical album category, the punk-rock poet Henry Rollins must compete with the Bible (as read by Gregory Peck).


A Mother's Love Turning Into Smothering Love
Here is a scene that's really hard to pull off.
As the mother of seven sons, Susan Sarandon tries explaining to one of them why she has carried him off the football field after he has been injured, treating him like a baby in front of his adolescent friends.
It seems that when a woman has a child, the mother part of her becomes like a grow-toy, one of those creatures you put in water that expand to 300 times its size, and this "monster mother" part takes over, she explains.
Whew!
In that flashback in "Safe Passage," and throughout this small, appealing drama about a family in crisis, Ms.
Sarandon does the miraculous work of turning the stuff of melodrama -- an overwrought plot and strained dialogue -- into a deft portrayal of a woman who is strong-minded, self-doubting and scared for the life of one of her sons.
The film begins with Mag Singer's (Ms. Sarandon) prophetic dream that one of her children is in trouble.
As she goes on a paper route with her 14-year-old, Simon (Nick Stahl), the last son living at home, she runs through some possibilities.
The dream could have pointed to Alfred (Robert Sean Leonard), the reserved, responsible eldest, or to Izzy (Sean Astin), the dedicated scientist.
It turns out that the endangered child is Percival (Matt Keeslar), who should have been the obvious choice because he is a marine stationed with a United Nations peacekeeping force in the Sinai.
When the family hears a television report that Percival's barracks has been bombed, all the sons come home to wait for word about him.


For Many Subway Riders, a Greater Feeling of Fear
First came a firebomb that injured more than 40 people two weeks ago.
Then, on Wednesday, an escaped mental patient shoved a grandmother from a subway platform, killing her.
Despite the assurances of the Metropolitan Transit Authority's $1.7 million advertising campaign that the subways are safer and more pleasant, many riders yesterday said they had had more than enough.


Oregon Knocks U.C.L.A. Off the Road to No. 1 Ranking
Oregon 82, U.C.L.A. 72
Henry Madden scored 7 points in a crucial three-minute stretch late in the game as Oregon came from 13 points behind in the second half last night to stun No. 2-ranked U.C.L.A., 82-72, in the Pacific-10 Conference opener for both teams.


Snow and a Cease-Fire in Bosnia


Cowboys Resent Written-Off Tags
The worst thing you can do to a sleeping giant is wake him up.
And the Dallas Cowboys are wide awake.
Sleeping giant?
Would anyone assume that a team that won the last two Super Bowls and finished with a 12-4 record this season was even yawning, let alone sleeping?


New Net Knows All About Fresh Starts
The bulk of Orlando Arena wanted answers.
The Magic fans wanted to know where he came from and, of supreme importance, why he kept raining down 3-pointers over the outstretched arms of Anfernee Hardaway in the second quarter.
This reserve Nets guard, maybe 6 feet 3 on his tippy toes, they had never heard of him.


State to Fight 'Megan's Law' Injunction


Inside Art
The Kimbell and Sotheby's
Even as the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth has been adding to its small collection, it has also been pruning, slowly and steadily.
Over the last several years, it has sold -- publicly, at auction, but also privately -- pictures important enough to cause a stir among museum colleagues and dealers.
And it hasn't gone un noticed that when the Kimbell sells at auction, Sotheby's in New York is invariably chosen.
Given the curiosity in of the art world, it is only natural that people have been wondering just what the museum is up to.


With Copter Pilot's Return, U.S. Will Send Oil to North Korea
Less than a week after North Korea's release of a downed American helicopter pilot, the Department of Defense said today that it would begin shipments of oil to the country as part of a deal that is designed to end the North's nuclear weapons program.
That the Pentagon is paying $4.7 million to buy and ship the first 13.5 million gallons of oil to North Korea has angered many Republicans, who have charged that the Clinton Administration is propping up a rogue Government.


The G.O.P. Squeeze on New York
In his first speech as House Speaker, Newt Gingrich smoothly portrayed the Republicans' "Contract With America" as an uplifting program for the nation.
But tranquilizing rhetoric cannot mask the program's potential harm for a city that already exports more Federal tax dollars than it gets back.
That powerful message emerges from a report, issued by Representative Charles Schumer of Brooklyn, that provides rough estimates of the impact of G.O.P. spending cuts on the residents of New York City.
The chilling numbers document an obligation to protect their constituents that now falls on members of the city's Congressional delegation, especially Alfonse D'Amato, New York's influential Republican Senator.
Mr.
Schumer makes a straightforward calculation.
To fulfill the contract's pledge to balance the Federal budget and cut taxes, Congress would have to cut about $350 billion out of the budget in the year 2002.
But the contract would exempt Social Security, defense and interest on the national debt, thus drastically narrowing the places to find the money.
It means Congress would have to chop 30 percent out of all the non-exempt programs.


Landlords Don't Get a Fair Shake in New York's Housing Court; Legal Safety Net
To the Editor:
You did a superb job of capturing the chaos that is New York housing court (news article, Dec. 28).


First 81 Teachers Qualify For National Certification
In a move to professionalize teaching and raise its standards, a crop of veteran teachers has become the first to receive national teaching certification.
The 81 middle-school and junior high teachers, who had to pass a stringent yearlong assessment, were announced yesterday in Washington by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.


Scottsboro Journal; A Close Call for Geese on an Alabama Golf Course
Next Monday, as the sun rises over the tranquil backwater of the Tennessee River, stately Canada geese will descend toward the ponds and fairways of the Goosepond Colony Golf Course, which has become their sanctuary and home.
The geese will never know how close thay came to being blasted out of the air.
The public golf course's board decided this evening to cancel a controversial goose hunt on the course, a hunt that enraged both animal rights groups and hunters.


U.S. and Allies to Press Russia for Chechnya Peace Settlement
After weeks of calling the conflict in Chechnya an internal matter for Russia to solve, the Clinton Administration is set to open a high-level effort with Western Europeans to persuade Russia to accept a peaceful end to the crisis.
Senior White House aides have drafted a letter for President Clinton's approval to be sent to President Boris N. Yeltsin that appeals to the Russian leader to stop inflicting civilian casualties in the breakaway republic.
The letter asks Mr.
Yeltsin to consider a proposal sent earlier in the week by the European Union to find a way to end the war, beginning with the involvement of the 53-nation Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.


Quick Movement on a Broad Variety of Issues Before the House and Senate
As the 104th Congress began its second day in office, attention shifted to committees considering the legislative agenda Republicans have set for their party.
The new Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich of Georgia, said he was determined to pass the legislation by mid-April.
The Budget
Senators from both parties said today that Congress would soon approve a constitutional amendment to require a balanced Federal budget, even though there are profound uncertainties about how it would be enforced.


Clintons Reply to a Whisper With a Gesture and a Joke
Hillary Rodham Clinton responded today to the cutting remark made about her in a television interview with a gentle dose of hospitality, and President Clinton defused the situation with a bit of humor about his own outspoken mother.
In an interview broadcast tonight on the CBS News program "Eye to Eye With Connie Chung," Representative Newt Gingrich's mother, Kathleen, was coaxed into saying that her son had referred to the First Lady as "a bitch." Mrs.
Gingrich made the remark after Ms.
Chung urged her, "Why don't you just whisper it to me, just between you and me."


AT&amp;T Seeks Stake in India's Phone Market
Following other major American companies that have set their sights on India's potentially huge markets, the AT&amp;T Corporation said today that it would seek a share in the $7.5 billion expansion of India's creaky telephone system.
"With a population of nearly 900 million people and less than one telephone for every 100 people, it's clearly one of the largest telecommunications markets in the world," said John Legere, a senior executive of AT&amp;T Asia/Pacific Inc., at a news conference.


J. Miller Leavy, 89; Prosecuted Celebrated Cases
J.
Miller Leavy, who gained fame in 1957 as the first prosecutor to win a murder conviction based exclusively on circumstantial evidence, died on Sunday in Eagle Rock, Calif.
He was 89 and lived in Toluca Lake, Calif.
The cause was complications resulting from Parkinson's disease, said his brother, Zadoc H. Leavy of Los Angeles.


Falling For Primitives
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 3 review of PBS's "Tribe That Time Forgot" mentions barbaric practices and the thoroughgoing communism of the Amazon's Arara people.
You then repeat without comment (but implied agreement) the message of the program: Arara existence is "endangered" by mining and industrialization.


Lorillard attempts a tricky balance by selling Kent cigarettes as both a premium and discount brand.
DECADES ago, Lorillard Inc. promised smokers they would "feel better about smoking with the taste of Kent." Now the company is hoping they may feel better about smoking with the price of Kent.
Without any fanfare, Lorillard, the nation's fourth-largest cigarette company and one of the stealthiest marketers in any industry, has begun selling a so-called value-priced variety of Kent that costs less than premium brands like Newport, Lorillard's strongest seller, or other types of Kent.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows: KOICHIRO KURITA, Witkin Gallery, 415 West Broadway (near Spring Street), SoHo. (Through Jan. 28.) Handsome if unexceptional black-and-white landscapes of Cape Cod, Canada, Scotland and elsewhere by a Japanese photographer who often finds a melancholy beauty in such subjects as a branch caught on the edge of a waterfall.


South Pole Epic Ends in Apres-Ski Party
An epic polar adventure is to end here today as four Norwegian skiers break camp at the South Pole to head home after nearly two months of hardships reminiscent of the historic expeditions that first traversed this hostile continent.
One skier, Liv Arnesen, 40, a former Oslo schoolteacher, became the first woman ever to ski unaccompanied from the edge of the Antarctic continent to the South Pole.
Three men also reached the Pole, along a different route.
One of the men has no arms but uses a prosthetic right arm.


Art in Review
William Merritt Chase 'Master of American Impressionism'
Spanierman Gallery  45 East 58th Street  Manhattan  Through Jan. 31
If a teacher can be judged by his successful students, the American painter William Merritt Chase (1848-1916) was an amazing man.
Charles Demuth, Marsden Hartley, Charles Sheeler, Georgia O'Keeffe, Edward Hopper and Guy Pene Du Bois profited from his tutelage, though they also departed from his example.
They were the members of the 20th-century American vanguard.
He was a purveyor of the domestic idylls of the Gilded Age.


Timothy Melester, AIDS Educator, 40
Dr.
Timothy Melester, a Manhattan surgeon and educator, died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 40 and lived in TriBeCa.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said his companion, Craig Lucas, the playwright.


No Headline
"God knows what she could've gotten my mother  to say." PRESIDENT CLINTON to Newt Gingrich, about Connie Chung.  [ A20:5. ]


Mercedes Golf Postponed
The opening round of the Mercedes Championships was postponed today by a fierce storm that came in off the Pacific Ocean on Wednesday night, blowing down trees and inundating the golf course at the La Costa Resort and Spa with more than two inches of rain.
Lakes appeared overnight in the flooded ninth, 10th and 18th fairways.
At the seventh and 11th holes a total of 18 trees were felled by winds that were clocked near 50 miles an hour.
The tournament director, Mike Shea, deemed the course unplayable early today and said the 31 players in the field, all of them 1994 tournament winners, will play 36 holes on Friday.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LDDS COMMUNICATIONS INC. , Jackson, Miss., said it had completed its $2.5 billion cash acquisition of Wiltel Network Services from the Williams Companies.


2 Chinese Are Banned
Two Chinese female champions have been disqualified for using banned substances during the world weight lifting championships in November, the International Weight Lifting Federation said yesterday.


Lines Blur for Kerrigan and Harding
One year after Nancy Kerrigan was clubbed on the knee by associates of her figure-skating rival Tonya Harding, the roles ascribed to the two skaters, once in stark contrast, have become more complicated.
What was once Nancy in white and Tonya in black -- good girl vs. bad girl -- has bled into gray.
Infamy being its own celebrity, Harding is undergoing somewhat of a Nixonesque rehabilitation.
Kerrigan, meanwhile, is learning painfully that heroes are afforded vast adulation but little latitude in their public conduct.


Convicts' Escape Turns Into Crisis for Britain's Conservatives
Three convicts who broke out of a maximum security prison on the Isle of Wight on Tuesday were still at large today and as more details about their escape came to light, the episode turned into a crisis for the Government of Prime Minister John Major.
The breakout followed a string of problems, ranging from inmate rioting to lax supervision and security, that have plagued Britain's outmoded prison system.


Diner's Journal
The Critic's Cross
Being a restaurant critic is every bit as good as you might imagine it to be: I know I have the world's greatest job.
But there is one drawback.
Restaurant critics don't return to the restaurants they have reviewed until it is time to review them again.
And yet so many of the restaurants I reviewed in 1994 were so good that I find myself longing for the chance to revisit them in 1995.


A Witty Debater Emerges as Point Man
With a political style that frequently seems more suited to an opposition backbencher in the British Parliament, Representative Barney Frank, Democrat of Massachusetts, has earned a reputation during his 14 years in Congress as a sharp-tongued and quick-witted debater, an astute deal maker and one of the most colorful and quotable figures in the Congress.
Over the years, Mr.
Frank's wit and sting have often rankled as many members of his own party as it has Republicans.
But for Democrats still reeling from their crushing electoral defeat in November, Mr.
Frank -- a 54-year-old unabashedly liberal, openly gay lawmaker with a lock on a seat from a safe district -- has emerged as a point man in the fight against the Republican majority.


Democrats Bumping Moynihan From Foreign Relations Panel
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who is a leading Congressional figure on international matters, has been asked to step down from the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to make room for junior Democrats left without leading committee assignments and for members of the new Republican majority.
The move was first reported in The Forward, the Jewish newspaper in New York City, which expressed concern that Mr.
Moynihan, a longtime advocate of Israel, had been pushed aside with White House approval.


Art in Review
Karl Baden
Robert Mann Gallery  42 East 76th Street  Manhattan  Through Jan. 21
Move over, Garfield.
Karl Baden has found a steady supply of cantankerous but lovable pets in his black-and-white photographs of dog and cat shows around New England.


Owner Fills Up the Jets' Empty Tank With Kotite
In a stunning and uncharacteristic move by the owner, Leon Hess, who said, "I'm 80 years old and I want results now," the Jets dismissed Coach Pete Carroll today after one season and replaced him with Rich Kotite.
"I'm entitled to some enjoyment, and that means winning," said Hess today, virtually branding the team as quitters under Carroll for their late-season collapse.
Their five straight defeats insured a losing record for the 18th time in 35 seasons and entrenched the Jets' reputation as a perennial losing franchise.


Clinton Asks For Delay on Harassment Suit
President Clinton's lawyers today asked a Federal court to put off efforts to force him to submit to pretrial questioning in connection with a sexual harassment lawsuit brought by a former Arkansas clerical worker.
The lawyers also told a Federal appeals court that they intended to appeal a court ruling last month denying the President immunity from such lawsuits.


Old-World Poland With an East River View
IF there isn't a local law of urban proximity, there should be, and it would go like this: The closer an enclave is to Manhattan, the farther it seems to be from Manhattan.
Leafy Whitestone, Queens, for example, or sleepy Edgewater, N.J.
The prime case may be Greenpoint, Brooklyn, nestled into the northwest corner of the borough by the East River.
Close as it is to Manhattan, Greenpoint is arguably even closer to Cracow, Poland.
A side street in old Cracow is where the tiny, always busy Rzeszowska Bakery seems to belong, for example, although it's at the corner of Manhattan Avenue and Java Street in Greenpoint.
On a recent mild Sunday morning, the bakery's door was flung open, allowing bees to find their way to the cheese babkas dotted with dried cherries atop the counter.
One wall is graced by a Madonna, the opposite wall by a Polish eagle.
A dainty white curtain embroidered with roses, so typical of Polish shops, drapes the door to the kitchen.


On Stage, and Off
The Science of Limited Runs
And they heard him exclaim as he drove out of sight, "I wonder how all those Christmastime shows worked out?"
The Christmas break, when the city is fat with tourists and reunited families who'd rather see a show than have another fight, is limited-engagement time.
Producing those brief interludes is a science unto itself.


Officer in Choking Inquiry Was Under Scrutiny, Officials Say
The police officer who is the focus of an investigation into the death of a 29-year-old Florida man had been assigned to work with a sergeant because officials were concerned about his confrontational conduct, said two law-enforcement officials familiar with the case.
Fellow officers, also wary of his behavior, asked not to be teamed with him, the officials said.
The officer, Francis X. Livoti, 35, has been stripped of his gun and his badge and put on desk duty following the death of Anthony Baez, who died when the police attempted to arrest him in the early morning of Dec. 22.


Crucial Advance Made in Blood Cell Research
Researchers reported today that they had found a simple way to isolate human stem cells, the elusive progenitors of all the body's red and white blood cells.
The method could quickly replace the current cumbersome methods and facilitate studies of these pivotal cells, which are needed for gene therapy and bone marrow transplants.
The trick, discovered by Dr.
David Scadden and his colleagues at New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston, was to exploit the fact that stem cells are quiescent and do not grow in circumstances when other marrow cells do.
Dr.
Scadden's group forced those other cells to grow and, as soon as they started to divide, forced them to commit suicide, leaving behind mostly stem cells.


Of Advances, Royalties And the Sales of Books
To the Editor:
While I agree with William Safire's conclusion in "Royalties in Office" (column, Jan. 2), he was unclear in defining a publisher's advance on royalties.


Quick Movement on a Broad Variety of Issues Before the House and Senate
As the 104th Congress began its second day in office, attention shifted to committees considering the legislative agenda Republicans have set for their party.
The new Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich of Georgia, said he was determined to pass the legislation by mid-April.
The Speaker
House Speaker Newt Gingrich was the first and only witness to appear today before the House Ways and Means Committee as the panel, opened its discussion of the Republican "Contract With America." One of his bolder ideas was offering tax credits to poor people who buy laptop computers.


Robert Marquis, Is Dead at 67; Noted Architect
Robert Marquis, an architect widely known for his efforts to inject a social consciousness into a profession he frequently criticized as indifferent to human needs, died on Tuesday in San Francisco.
He was 67.
The cause was complications following pancreatic surgery, said his partner, Gita Dev.


Panel on Labor to Urge Changes Aiding Unions and Employers
A special commission formed to develop labor policy for the Clinton Administration will recommend that Congress change the nation's labor laws so workers can organize unions more easily and employers will have more freedom to enlist workers and managers in committees that deal with workplace issues.
The recommendations, disclosed in interviews with commission members, drew cautious responses, even from the Administration.
A Labor Department spokeswoman said there would be no comment before the release of the report, which is scheduled for Monday.
A.F.L.-C.I.O. officials also withheld formal comment, but union leaders privately expressed disappointment.


Joe Slovo, a Stalinist Who Battled Apartheid, Is Dead at 68
Joe Slovo, the Communist intellectual widely credited with being a mastermind of South Africa's national reconciliation, died early today, his spokesman, Stephen Laufer, announced.
He was 68.
The cause was cancer of the bone marrow.


Challenges for Governor Rowland
There was good reason for the conciliatory tone in John Rowland's inaugural address as Governor of Connecticut.
The first Republican governor in 20 years, he faces a split Legislature, with a solid Democratic majority in the House and a new but slim Republican majority in the Senate.
Indeed, Democrats gained more House seats in Connecticut in the November elections than anywhere else in the country.
If Mr.
Rowland really means to repeal the state income tax -- his principal campaign promise -- he is going to need help.
Mr.
Rowland heaped praise on his predecessor, the maverick independent Lowell Weicker, who defeated him in 1990.
He promised compassion, "to help our young and old, our ill and afflicted, when they need help and have no other resources." And, attentive to urban deterioration in Bridgeport, Hartford and New Haven as well as smaller cities, he implored "each and every civic-minded resident" of the state to help revive them.


On My Mind; The Real Revolution
Special to the new Congress, here is a dispatch from the revolution.
In El Segundo, Calif., just before Christmas, Mattel Inc., the toy manufacturer, made some announcements.


Landlords Don't Get a Fair Shake in New York's Housing Court
To the Editor:
It is hard to have a serious policy debate about the deficiencies of New York City Housing Court when you repeat the propaganda disseminated by tenant advocates (news article, Dec. 28).


Subway Death Stirs Call for More Curbs On Mental Patients
The state's top mental health official said yesterday that the man accused of pushing a woman to her death under a subway train should not have had the freedom to walk away from a mental hospital and that the state needed to improve the security at its mental institutions.
Dr.
Bruce Feig, the executive deputy commissioner of mental health, said the suspect, Reuben Harris, should have been classified as dangerous -- a designation that would have required tighter control of his movements -- but was not.
"He had the freedom to go from his locked ward to his rehabilitation program unescorted, and he should not have," said Dr.
Feig.


Drexler Says Blazers Haven't Kept Promise
CLYDE DREXLER says he has gone public with his request to leave the Portland Trail Blazers because management hasn't followed through on its promise to trade him.
"I'm trying to force their hand," the 32-year-old guard said yesterday by telephone from Boston, where the Blazers play tonight.
"That's what this is all about, because I don't like being mistreated."


The Neediest Cases; A Chance to Build Her Resume and Her Self-Respect
For 16 years, she had a job that required energy, innovation and skill: raising three children on her own.
But when Kathleen B. started looking for a new career, she said, she met with condescension and scorn.
Ms.
B., 45, was on welfare from the time her first son was born, in 1978, until last summer.
The hostility she encountered over the years, she said, made her feel worthless.
She had finished three years at New York University, but dropped out for financial reasons when she was 21.
The next decade, she said, was a blur of depression and anger caused by something she had long tried to forget: sexual abuse during her childhood.


N.H.L. Owners Say Proposal Doesn't Foster More Hope
Heading toward another critical Board of Governors meeting in New York tomorrow, the owners and executives of the National Hockey League teams expressed pessimism about the latest collective bargaining proposal from the Players Association.
The teams will vote on the plan submitted by the union on Wednesday in what shapes up as a last-ditch effort to end the lockout that has delayed the start of the season since Oct. 1.


School Bus Drivers Screened With Care
City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi said yesterday that a study of school bus drivers in New York City had found that 39 out of about 4,600 had had their driver's licenses suspended at some time, including one driver who had worked for seven weeks while his license was suspended.
Nonetheless, the Comptroller found in an audit that rigorous screening generally insured safe, reliable transportation for the city's schoolchildren.


A Russian Newspaper Turns More Scornful
Most Russian newspapers have been unsparingly critical of the Government's offensive in the secessionist region of Chechnya, but the Wednesday issue of Moskovsky Komsomolets was by far the most withering.
Beneath a front-page headline that read, "The Most Talentless Commander in Russia," editors superimposed a photograph of a grinning Defense Minister, Pavel S. Grachev, over another of dead Russian soldiers laid out on the snow.
The doctored photo makes it look as if the general's left foot is shoved against one body.


David Smith's Anti-Medals
The American artist David Smith (1906-1965) was a busy man in the 1930's.
He not only worked hard to forge a major abstract sculptural style, but also produced one of the more intriguing examples of political figurative art to emerge from the prewar period.
"Medals for Dishonor" was the title he gave to a series of 15 small cast-metal narrative reliefs on antiwar themes that he completed between 1937 and 1940.
Densely symbolic, bitterly satirical in tone, they were created in off hours, at night and on weekends, using such unorthodox media as dentist's drills and jeweler's tools.
And the results may have been cast in part from melted-down family silver belonging to his wife, Dorothy Dehner.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "A CHRISTMAS CAROL," Richard Rodgers Theater, 226 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
A one-man performance featuring Patrick Stewart.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.


Kiev Journal; Out of Ukraine's Torment, a Jewish Flowering
Yaakov Bleich, a 30-year-old Orthodox rabbi who came here from Brooklyn five years ago, might be expected to encourage the Jews in this city to emigrate from their birthplace, a land with a history of centuries of anti-Semitic persecution.
"When I came, I said get them out of here as quickly as possible," Rabbi Bleich said.
"But I've modified my aim."


Walken Conjures Up The King
THE place is limbo, the time an unspecified present.
At the start of "Him," Christopher Walken's woozily conceived, fantastical new play, Elvis Presley (Mr. Walken), identified as Him in the program, looks rather more trim than when he left us more than 17 years ago as a bloated wreck of a man, dependent on chemicals and disconnected from the reality of day.
He wears an understated Las Vegas jumpsuit and cape of what seems to be green velvet, cut full, though he no longer has a belly to hide.
He's surprisingly healthy, and he's definitely fed up.
He's furious with Bro (Rob Campbell), his runty twin brother, who was still-born all those years ago and whom he now accuses of feeding on his "oceanic public memory." It's Bro, he says, who's responsible for the trashy stories of Elvis sightings that litter the supermarket tabloids.
"It's just fun," says Bro.
"They want you to come back."


Drug Makers Will Settle Patent Fight
Genentech Inc. and Eli Lilly &amp; Company said today that they had reached a settlement ending a longstanding patent infringement dispute over a genetically engineered growth hormone.
Under terms of the settlement, Lilly will pay Genentech $145 million plus future payments contingent on the sale of certain products.
Both Genentech, of South San Francisco, Calif., and Lilly, of Indianapolis, sell genetically engineered versions of human growth hormone for the treatment of short stature in children who do not have enough of the natural protein.
Lilly's Humatrope accounted for $200 million of the company's $6.45 billion in 1993 revenue.
At Genentech, Protropin represented about $217 million of the company's $608.2 million in revenue that year.
Genentech recently introduced Nutropin, a similar growth drug.


CHRONICLE
On Tuesday, lines snaked out the doors of post offices around the country as customers stocked up on the new 32-cent stamps and the 3-cent makeup stamps.
By Wednesday, vending machines in New York post offices began flashing "Sold Out." And then there the matter of Marilyn Monroe.
Yesterday, the Postmaster General, MARVIN T. RUNYON, was at the Planet Hollywood theme restaurant, where he and ANNA STRASBERG, director of the Lee Strasberg Theater, unveiled the design for the new 32-cent Marilyn Monroe stamp, the first in a series honoring film legends.


3 Jazz Musicians Win Endowment Awards
The National Endowment for the Arts has awarded American Jazz Master fellowships to the bassist Ray Brown, the drummer Roy Haynes and the composer, band leader and pianist Horace Silver.
The awards, with each recipient receiving $20,000, have been given annually over the last 14 years to those who have made significant contributions to jazz music.
Past recipients include Count Basie, Miles Davis, Ella Fitzgerald, Dizzy Gillespie, Jon Hendricks, Ahmad Jamal and Sarah Vaughan.


Simpson Lawyers Clash on Abuse Evidence and Witness Lists
Judge Lance A. Ito predicted today that opening statements in the trial of O. J. Simpson could begin on Jan. 18 or 19.
But then, pondering critical questions before him about whether and how often and in what fashion Mr.
Simpson abused his late wife, and whether the jury should hear about any of it, he backed off.
"I see two dozen discrete issues and incidents," Judge Ito said.
Then, referring to the unfinished pretrial business, he added, "We could be here for a while."


The New, Irreverent Approach to Mounting Exhibitions
The idea that the contemporary art exhibition is a malleable form to be approached creatively is hardly new.
It has asserted itself at regular intervals for most of the 20th century, or at least since the Dadaists and then the Surrealists started making their presences felt.
But lately, in certain museum and gallery shows, the convention of the exhibition has seemed more up for grabs than usual: something to be played with, rethought and reshaped like an artistic medium.


New House Rules
In its first session, on Wednesday and into early yesterday morning, the Republican-controlled House of Representatives adopted several changes in rules and procedures, all of which take effect immediately.
COMMITTEES -- Three standing committees -- District of Columbia, Merchant Marine and Fisheries, and Post Office and Civil Service -- and 25 subcommittees were eliminated.


With Guests Like These. . . .
In "Houseguest," the stand-up comedian and sitcom actor Sinbad creates a twist on the man who came to dinner.
He plays a streetwise dreamer from Pittsburgh named Kevin Franklin, whose money-making schemes run to buying lottery tickets and watching get-rich-quick videos while munching hamburgers.
His investments include a shipment of 1994 baseball cards, so it's no wonder that he owes money to some thugs.
He hides out by pretending to be Derek Bond, an old friend of Gary Young (Phil Hartman), a suburban lawyer with posh friends and a family in need of therapy.
The mistaken-identity trick is supposed to work because Gary and Derek haven't seen each other since summer camp 25 years before.
But it's a bad omen for the film that Sinbad looks at least 10 years younger than Mr.
Hartman, who looks about 10 years younger than Ron Glass, as the real Derek.
It's a worse sign that no one in the film notices this conspicuous difference.
Sure enough, "Houseguest" turns out to be an inane fish-out-of-water comedy.
Along the way it turns into a virtual McDonald's commercial, too.
The fact that you can hardly tell the difference is a good clue to the movie's bad-television flavor.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK REGION'S ECONOMY SPUTTERS
Economic expansion and job growth in the New York region have come to a virtual halt since July, and higher interest rates are further undermining the region's prospects, according to economists, executives and government officials.
Although the New York region shows few signs of sinking back into recession, the experts say the local economy remains one of the weakest in the nation, when business activity elsewhere is so robust that the Federal Reserve has raised interest rates six times since February to ward off inflation.
A1.
SECURITY AT MENTAL HOSPITALS CRITICIZED
The state's top mental health official said that the man accused of pushing a woman to her death under a subway train should not have have had the freedom to walk away from a mental hospital and that the state needed to improve the security at its mental institutions.
Dr.
Bruce Feig, the executive deputy commissioner of mental health, said the suspect, Reuben Harris, should have been classified as dangerous -- a designation that would have required tighter control of his movements.
A1.
For more than 24 hours, La Chang Soon did not know of her daughter's fate.
Her own health failing, the 93-year-old woman was told that her daughter had been hospitalized after falling ill.
But as time wore on, the truth could no longer be hidden.
B4.
First came a firebomb that injured more than 40 people.
Then an escaped mental patient shoved a grandmother from a subway platform, killing her.
Despite the assurances of the Metropolitan Transit Authority's advertising campaign that the city's subways are safer, many riders said they had had more than enough.
B4.
NEW YORK CITY  SERIES OF MISHAPS DELAYS SUBWAYS
A freakish series of minor mishaps in the Brooklyn subways caused long delays and jam-packed trains for a quarter-million riders during the morning rush hour, transit officials said.
B4.
REPORT SAYS CHANGE WILL BE COSTLY
New Yorkers would pay more for subway tokens, school lunches and even water under the Republicans' "Contract With America," according to a study released by Representative Charles E. Schumer.
He said the legislation would also cost the city $1.9 billion in Federal aid next year.
B2.
REGION  STUDENT HERO IS SUING STATE
Just days after being proclaimed a hero in Gov.
George E. Pataki's inaugural address, Jason McEnaney, the sophomore at the State University at Albany who was shot while breaking up a campus hostage drama, announced that he was suing the state.
Mr.
McEnaney's lawyer, Neil T. Shayne, acknowledged at a news conference that "being singled out by the Governor in a very generous act" had made the family's decision to sue the state "more difficult." B5.
SHOOTING SUSPECT LOSES BID FOR FREEDOM
Flanked by five lawyers, Colin Ferguson asked to be released from jail to prepare his defense against charges that he killed six people on a Long Island Rail Road train a year ago.
Judge Donald E. Belfi of Nassau County Court quickly rejected the motion, but he approved a new team of legal advisers to help Mr.
Ferguson, who is representing himself.
B5.
Chronicle B2
Neediest Cases B3


A Newcomer In the Realm Of Artists And Models
ONE afternoon late last summer, I opened the mailbox and found an announcement of studio courses at the Pratt Institute of Art.
I couldn't have been more surprised if it had been a catalogue from a college of conjurers.
I don't make art; I don't so much as doodle.
From early on, my sense of identity has derived from a few universally acknowledged facts of life, one of them being that I cannot draw.
Indeed, it was this very fact that freed me to peruse the brochure.
That's how I happened to trip across a paragraph for a Saturday morning course called "Basic Drawing." Basic drawing?
Whom were they kidding?
Pratt is a professional art school.
I picked up the phone to call its bluff.
The operator put me right through to the office of the registrar.
Our exchange went along these lines:


These Days, Spikes Gets All the Attention
Dressing several stalls from him in the Miami Dolphins' locker room this season, Irving Spikes discovered that he and Bernie Parmalee have a lot in common.
Both went undrafted.
Both are running backs.
And both are distinguishing themselves this season.
They are 1-2 in rushing for Miami as the Dolphins enter the American Football Conference semifinal game Sunday against San Diego.


Power to Protect Species May Hang on a Word
When the Government declared the northern spotted owl a threatened species in 1990, it also said that saving the bird meant curtailing logging on tens of millions of acres of public and privately owned forest in the Pacific Northwest.
But as environmentalists celebrated this expansive use of the Endangered Species Act to protect a nearly extinct animal, the timber industry initiated a lawsuit intended to turn the Government's action into the single stroke that could strip the law of much of its power.


2 Young Inventions In Flight Together
The astonishing photographs taken by Jacques-Henri Lartigue at the turn of the century have an undeniable charm.
Given a camera at the age of 7 by his father, a well-to-do businessman, the young Lartigue made candid images of people strolling along the beach or promenading on Parisian boulevards, unaware of the young photographer aiming his camera at them; free of artificial posing and stylistic overlays, these well-known images appear utterly transparent, slices of a world that disappeared long ago.
Lartigue (1894-1986) was also passionately devoted to the world of speed ushered in with the new century, and it is this side of his precocious vision that is presented in "Flights of Fancy," the delightful exhibition at the French Cultural Services.
Lartigue followed with intense interest the many attempts, some serious and some silly, to conquer flight in the wake of the Wright brothers' first successful efforts in 1903; between 1904 and 1922 he recorded many early fliers and their rickety machines, as well as experimental models that he and other members of his remarkable family produced.


Mr. Smith Goes to Cyberspace
Think of it as the political equivalent of 500 television channels devoted to old reruns: hundreds of pages of speech-making a day, dumped onto the Internet computer network, where they can be endlessly duplicated and relayed as electronic mail to millions of people at the click of a mouse button.
Having mastered the wonders of C-Span, the cable network that broadcasts Congressional speeches around the clock, the newly ascendant Republican House leaders will soon be flooding the global computer network with every bill they introduce and every pontification on the House floor.


Corrections
A chart yesterday showing who fills the committee chairs in the Senate and the House omitted the Senate Special Committee on Aging.
It is headed by Senator William S. Cohen, Republican of Maine.
The chart also referred incorrectly to the Veterans' Affairs Committee.
Its chairmanship has indeed been filled, by Senator Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming.
In some editions, a picture in the chart -- identified as that of Representative Pat Roberts, Republican of Kansas, chairman of the House Agriculture Committee -- was published in error.
The man shown, in eyeglasses, was Pat Roberts, president of the Florida Association of Broadcasters.


Yanks Rehire 5 Coaches
The Yankees renewed the contracts of five coaches yesterday and removed one coaching position.
Rehired for 1995 were WILLIE RANDOLPH, the third-base coach; BRIAN BUTTERFIELD, first-base coach; BILLY CONNORS, pitching coach; RICK DOWN, batting coach, and TONY CLONINGER, bullpen coach.
The team's bench coach, CLETE BOYER, was reassigned as a roving minor league instructor when his job was eliminated.


JAPAN KEEPS PACE IN U.S. CAR MARKET
American auto makers are celebrating a banner 1994, a year of ready customers and soaring profits.
But one stubborn fact emerged today: The Japanese auto makers, despite offering higher-priced cars against American vehicles of improved quality, did not lose any of their share of the nation's car and truck market last year.
In fact, they gained share, and the Big Three auto makers lost some.


Sports of The Times; The Day Hess Was 'The Boss'
THE richest moment of what forever will be remembered as Leon Hess Media Day came after someone asked Rich Kotite to reveal the length of his new deal.
Kotite, who is now coach and de facto high chieftain of the New York Jets, stammered a bit and tried to do the right football organizational thing, which is to say, and we're paraphrasing, "None of your business."
Suddenly, from the left side of the podium, came a creaky voice and the surest sign that, as of yesterday, and perhaps only for yesterday, it was no longer business-as-usual for the woebegone Jets.


TRUCE ANNOUNCED BY G.O.P. LEADERS AND WHITE HOUSE
President Clinton and the new Republican leaders of Congress, just two months ago the gray and blue commanders of an increasingly uncivil war in politics, emerged from a first meeting at the White House today to declare a firm truce in their two-year legislative conflict.
At least, for now.
In an 80-minute talk in the Cabinet Room over coffee, Mr.
Clinton, House Speaker Newt Gingrich and the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, agreed to pursue what they later called a sincere search for compromise on virtually every plank of the Republican Congressional agenda.


Budget Director Quits
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's budget director resigned, forcing the Mayor to juggle his senior fiscal staff as the city faces mounting financial problems this fiscal year and a $2 billion deficit next year.


L.I.R.R.-Shooting Suspect Loses Bid for Jail Release
Flanked by five lawyers, Colin Ferguson asked to be released from jail today to prepare his defense against charges that he killed six people on a Long Island Rail Road train a year ago.
Judge Donald E. Belfi of Nassau County Court quickly rejected the motion, but he approved a new team of legal advisers to help Mr.
Ferguson, who is representing himself.


Molinari Declines Port Authority Job
The Staten Island Borough President, Guy V. Molinari, yesterday turned down the job of running the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
He said he told Gov.
George E.  Pataki this morning that he would not take the $170,000-a-year executive director's job, but that he had strongly considered it and was honored by the offer.


Fast, but No Record
SANDRA VOELKER didn't set a world record after all.
The German swimmer was credited with setting a world-best record of 27.86 seconds in the 50-meter backstroke on Tuesday at a World Cup short-course swimming competition in Hong Kong.


Prices of Treasuries Rise Despite Job Gains
Treasury bond prices rose yesterday, recouping from losses in early trading after the Government reported robust job growth in December.
While the employment report at first indicated an economy still picking up speed despite higher interest rates, it also suggested that job growth would soon be due for a slowdown.
The report reinforced expectations that the Federal Reserve would raise short-term interest rates for a seventh time since February.


Defending Public Radio
To the Editor:
The defense of public broadcasting against threats by the new Republican leadership in Congress to slash the broadcast budget has emphasized public television and ignored radio.


Apple Shares Up on Rumor Of Takeover
Shares in Apple Computer Inc. rose sharply today on the latest speculation that the company could be the target of a takeover bid.
Apple's stock jumped $3.125, to $42, in Nasdaq trading, and it was the most actively traded issue today, with more than nine million shares changing hands, almost five times its recent daily trading average.


DANCE
Flamenco Is Flamenco When Passion Infuses It  La Conja Mimbre y Vareta Pace Downtown Theater


Spoon-to-Spoon Combat Overseas
The great American breakfast cereal wars have gone global.
For decades, the Kellogg Company has been introducing American-style cereals in countries where people traditionally break the nighttime fast with little more than coffee and a newspaper.


Double-Trouble Killers
If you are a New Yorker the fear is there, somewhere, maybe buried deep beneath the surface of consciousness, or maybe right out there in the open, as loud and evident and nerve-racking as the screaming jackhammers, the endless emergency sirens and the careening, horn-blowing, red-light-running vehicles that are staples of New York's daily existence.
The fear is that from out of the chaos some maniac will emerge to pointlessly, stupidly, inexplicably hurl you, blast you, cast you into oblivion.


Ben Rich, 69, 'Stealth' Jet Project Chief, Dies
Ben R. Rich, a Lockheed Aircraft Corporation engineer and manager who helped develop some of the most successful and advanced military aircraft ever produced in the United States, died on Thursday in Community Memorial Hospital in Ventura, Calif.
He was 69 and lived in Oxnard.
The cause was cancer of the esophagus, a Lockheed spokesman said.


Elevator Kills City Worker In the Bronx
An elevator that workers said had repeatedly malfunctioned in the last two months killed a man yesterday in a Bronx welfare center, on the same day that a mechanic came to repair the elevator, the police said.
The man, James Godfrey Chenault, was decapitated about 9 A.M. when the elevator in the Kingsbridge Center in the Bronx, at 261 East 161st Street, suddenly shot up while he was straddling its open doorway.


Firefighter Laid to Rest In Queens
Five-year-old Joseph Wylie wore a firefighter's uniform cap on his way in and out of church yesterday.
It had belonged to his father, Thomas A. Wylie.
Classmates of his father's from the Fire Academy were there, too, dressed in windbreakers; still probationary firefighters, they do not yet have dress uniforms.
They were among 6,000 or so firefighters from throughout the region who lined the streets around St.
Luke's Roman Catholic Church in Whitestone, Queens, for the funeral.


Joe Slovo, Anti-Apartheid Stalinist, Dies at 68
Joe Slovo, the Communist intellectual widely credited with being a mastermind of South Africa's national reconciliation, died yesterday after a long battle with cancer of the bone marrow.
He was 68.
Mr.
Slovo, who was active in the South African Communist Party for half a century, was a folk hero to many blacks, the first white admitted into the leadership of the African National Congress, a member of the team that negotiated the end of white rule, and Minister of Housing in the first freely elected Government.


Their Heroes Are on Strike, And So Are Card Collectors
Tony Doyon used to routinely spend $300 a month to indulge his passion for baseball and other sports cards.
But not now.
Call it the revenge of the fans.
Angered by baseball and hockey's labor disputes, and resenting the 1990's flood of heavily promoted, gimmicky cards, legions of children and adults are striking back.


Setting Up a Fund in Honor of a Loved One
When Heidi Paoli died in 1987, her husband wanted to donate her life insurance benefit to a charity that would help needy cancer patients and those who care for them.
After considering the options, her husband, Dennis, established a fund in her name at the New York Community Trust, a public foundation that funnels dollars to approved charities while keeping administrative costs low.
He decided to make annual contributions and brought others into the program.
Although tax deductions were not his driving force, Mr.
Paoli is glad to have them, since they allow him to make larger contributions.
"I wanted to do something for people who don't have support or a safety net of friends and family and are going through cancer alone," Mr.
Paoli said.


Fear Beneath the Calm Routine as a Brookline Clinic Prepares to Reopen
At Preterm Health Services, where a receptionist was killed last Friday and two other people were wounded in gunfire, a counselor was on the telephone today scheduling an abortion.
"You'll need to bring in a sample of your morning's first urine," said the counselor, a 26-year-old woman with curly red hair.
"Drink clear liquids only. It's O.K. to have decaffeinated tea or coffee but no orange juice or heavy liquids."


To the Highest Bidder, From Nureyev's Life
When the doors to Christie's opened at 10 yesterday morning, the Park Avenue auction house was flooded with fans and friends, dancers and decorators and the just plain curious, who came to glimpse the contents of Rudolf Nureyev's Manhattan apartment, which were on view to the public for the first time.
The contents will go on sale beginning Thursday evening, and Christie's estimates that the sale will bring $3 million to $4.5 million.
It was a day of voyeurism and for some a day of sadness.
Yesterday was the second anniversary of the dancer's death at the age of 54.
"It's like being at a wake," said Marilyn L. Lavine, a fan who said she had watched Nureyev dance all over the world.


Pinkney to Turn Pro
The Texas wide receiver LOVELL PINKNEY, a junior who holds the Longhorn record for career touchdown catches, is heading for the National Football League.
At a news conference yesterday in his hometown of Washington, Pinkney confirmed that he would pass up his final year of eligibility to enter the April draft.
"Not to sound cocky or anything, I'm ready for the next level," Pinkney said.
"There's nothing left that I can prove on the collegiate level."


Helicopter Pilot Unlikely to Be Punished for Statement
The Army pilot whose helicopter was shot down over North Korea last month did not violate the military's Code of Conduct when, before his release, he signed a statement saying he had committed an "intolerable crime" when his aircraft "illegally intruded" into North Korean territory, Pentagon officials said today.
Military officials say the statement by the pilot, Chief Warrant Officer Bobby Hall, merely recounted that he and his co-pilot, Chief Warrant Officer David Hilemon, became lost on a routine training flight and strayed into North Korea on Dec. 17.
Mr.
Hilemon was killed when the copter was shot down.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Title Character Changes For Final 'Peter Grimes'  Metropolitan Opera


Irish to Keep Mayes
Receiver DERRICK MAYES, who holds the Notre Dame single-season record for touchdown receptions, said yesterday he would return for his senior season, a fitting present for Coach LOU HOLTZ, who turned 58 yesterday.


Made in the U.S.A.: Steelers vs. Browns
There is something of a sibling rivalry between the cities of Cleveland and Pittsburgh, dating to their days as toddling industrial giants.
The area's steel manufacturing may be gone now, but the real residue of those years -- competitiveness -- remains as strong as ever.
Now it's played out on a football field.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the retirement of Bruce Wright, a New York State Supreme Court Justice, misstated the position of former Mayor Edward I. Koch on reappointing Judge Wright to the Criminal Court.
Judge Wright left the Criminal Court bench after being elected to Civil Court in 1979; although Mayor Koch had criticized the judge's practice of setting low bail, he says he never decided against reappointing him to the Criminal Court bench.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the departure of Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan from the Senate Foreign Relations Committee referred incorrectly in some copies to the party that asked him to step aside.
It was his own party, the Democrats, not the Republicans.


High Court to Decide Gay Marchers' Case
The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether the organizers of Boston's St.
Patrick's Day parade have a constitutional right to exclude marchers who seek to identify themselves as gay, lesbian, or bisexual Irish-Americans.
The issue of openly gay participation in the most public of Irish-American street festivals has been a contentious one for the last several years in both New York and Boston, where courts have issued contradictory rulings.


A Case for Sweet and Simple
To call Nancy LaMott the leading ingenue of cabaret singing is not to imply that she exudes the simpering naivete often associated with blond leading ladies.
It is to say that Ms.
LaMott, who is appearing at the Oak Room at the Algonquin Hotel (59 West 44th Street, Manhattan) through Feb. 4, is a guileless interpreter who makes a compelling case for playing it sweet and simple.
While her performances are scrupulously respectful of a songwriter's intentions, her fluid phrasing, throbbing timbre and air of utter naturalness elevate her interpretations far above the level of rote readings.
The songs in Ms.
LaMott's new show, "Girl Talk," explore a wide range of female personalities found in traditional pop songs.
These include a world-conquering protofeminist (in Richard Whiting and Johnny Mercer's "Have You Got Any Castles, Baby?") and a murderess who would rather kill her husbands than divorce them (in Rodgers and Hart's "To Keep My Love Alive)" and a cheerfully self-deprecating loser (in Cy Coleman and David Zippel's "You Can Always Count On Me").


U.S. CLOSED YEAR WITH EMPLOYMENT GROWING SHARPLY
A surprisingly robust American economy ended the year by generating more than a quarter-million new jobs in December, making the 1994 gain in employment the greatest in a decade, the Government reported today.
The unemployment rate slipped to 5.4 percent last month, the lowest level since July 1990 and comparable with levels not widely experienced at any other time since the early 1970's.


Auerbach Mark Up in Smoke
The flamboyant Red Auerbach, who retired in 1966 after coaching the Boston Celtics to 9 championships in 20 years, is impressed with Lenny Wilkens.
"Records are made to be broken, but this one lasted 28 years, which is an indication that breaking it was not an easy thing to do," the 77-year-old Auerbach said recently.
"If anybody had to do it, I'm glad Lenny did it."


Baby Sitter Charged in Death


Trade Panel Stepping Up PGA Inquiry
Officials of the PGA Tour were notified today that the Federal Trade Commission, which has been investigating possible restraint of trade practices by the golf organization since 1990, has decided to seek a complaint against the tour.
The case has moved from the staff level to the full commission level.
It is another step in what promises to be a lengthy legal process that could take up to five years to resolve.
The PGA tour commissioner, Tim Finchem, said today that the tour is confident that its rules are not restrictive and that it will fight the process at the commission level and in the courts.
If necessary, Finchem said, the tour would seek relief from the Congress.


Mexican Workers Will Bear Brunt of Peso's Fall; The Latin Markets
To the Editor:
I could not help smiling when I read "KFC Tries for a Turnaround in Chile" (Business Day, Dec. 27) on the problems Pepsico has faced with its Kentucky Fried Chicken franchise operations in Chile.
Pepsico, having racked up huge losses when it entrusted its Chilean KFC franchises to a group of Peruvian investors, has now turned to new Chilean owners, who are former competitors and presumably know the local market better.


Will Computer Stocks Stay Fired Up in 1995?
COMPUTER stocks soared to dazzling heights in 1994 while the market drifted.
Whether they will stay aloft this year depends on several variables, most notably consumer demand.
"The big story is that the personal computer industry, after a very good 1993, raged on in 1994," said Drew D. Peck, a Cowen &amp; Company analyst.


Bridge
The best performer in Greater New York Bridge Association tournaments in 1994 was Glenn Milgrim of Forest Hills, Queens.
He just nosed out his regular partner, Jared Lilienstein of Manhattan, for Player of the Year and Team Player of the Year, and they were far ahead of all rivals in both races.
Although they did not win any major titles, they were admirably consistent, finishing second on five occasions.
On the diagramed deal from the Von Zedtwitz Knockout Teams, both North-Souths reached four hearts.
Both West players, one of them Milgrim, led a top diamond and East signalled with the queen.
Consider whether South can and should win if West cashes a second diamond.


Supreme Court Roundup; Supreme Court to Rule on Right of Homosexuals to March in St. Patrick's Day Parade
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the organizers of Boston's venerable St.
Patrick's Day parade have a constitutional right to exclude marchers who seek to identify themselves as gay, lesbian, and bisexual Irish-Americans.
The issue of openly gay participation in the most public of Irish-American street festivals has been a contentious one for the last several years in both New York and Boston, where courts have issued contradictory rulings.


Amateur Hour at Mental Health
Every mental health professional knows that some schizophrenics can be dangerous, to themselves and to others.
Drug addiction only makes it worse.
Add to that a history of previous violence and a psychiatric judgment that he was homicidal, and it is difficult to understand how anyone in the mental health system could conclude that Reuben Harris should have been trusted with the freedom he enjoyed at Manhattan Psychiatric Center.
He was able to walk away easily on Christmas Eve and remained free until he pushed Soon Sin in front of a moving subway train on Wednesday.
Dr.
Bruce Feig, who was dismissed yesterday as New York State's top mental health official in connection with the incident, has acknowledged that Mr.
Harris's case was bungled.
Officials have promised to tighten security and conduct an investigation, which may shed some light on why so many people messed up at so many levels.
The inquiry should also answer some very troubling questions about the many other escapes from New York psychiatric hospitals, the methods used for assessing whether a patient is to be presumed dangerous, and a mental health system that badly underserves the poor and the indigent.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.44
5.72
2.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.72
5.71
3.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.29
6.30
3.14
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.85
7.85
5.64
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.86
7.88
6.22
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.72
8.74
7.20
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.90
6.92
5.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Mexican Workers Will Bear Brunt of Peso's Fall
To the Editor:
Mexico's currency has fallen 30 percent in two weeks (front page, Jan. 4).
Will this eliminate the trade deficit that caused the free fall?
Conventional economics tells us it will.
But in "Mexican Trade Won't Gain From Devaluation" (letter, Dec. 30) Jude Wanniski argues that except for short-term effects, it will not.
Conventional economics has been notoriously unable to explain the persistence of trade imbalances in the face of large movements in exchange rates.
Yet Mr.
Wanniski is wrong to go to the opposite extreme, for devaluations do occasionally improve trade balances.


Stock Prices Advance Despite Report on Jobs
The stock market rose modestly in heavy trading yesterday, despite negative developments in the bond market and a plunge in AT&amp;T, the nation's most widely held stock.
The gain came even after the Labor Department reported the lowest unemployment rate in four years and strong numbers for job creation in December -- inflationary pressures that ought to have sent bond and stock prices tumbling.
But traders said the job-creation figure of 256,000 was less than the 277,000 that some private economists had been expecting.


Giving 'The Mikado' A Steve Allen Treatment
Leonard Bernstein distancing himself from an interpretation by Glenn Gould onstage with the New York Philharmonic it is not.
But an acknowledgment in the program for the New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players' revival of "The Mikado" at Symphony Space, with the comedian Steve Allen in the brief title role, begins to sound like a disclaimer.
"We would like to acknowledge Mr. Allen for his rewriting of the scenes in which he appears," it reads.
"We hope our audience will agree that the opportunity to present a talent of Mr. Allen's magnitude more than justifies this liberty."


Stringer Stepping Out
Ohio State offensive tackle KOREY STRINGER said yesterday he will skip his senior year and make himself available for the National Football League's April draft.
Stringer, 20, a two-time all-American, said at a news conference that he made the decision after discussing it with his parents and coaches.
Coach JOHN COOPER, however, said he disagreed with the 6-5, 230-pound junior's decision, but predicted he will be picked in the first round. (AP)


CHRONICLE
JOHN WALLACH, the foreign editor for the Hearst newspapers and an author, has been named the executive director of the Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity.
Mr.
Wiesel established the foundation to organize international forums on issues of ethics and understanding after he received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1986.
The foundation also runs projects for children and is establishing youth centers for young Ethiopian Jews in Israel.
The match was made when Mr.
Wiesel addressed a group of teen-agers who were in the United States last summer with Seeds of Peace, a program established by Mr.
Wallach to bring young Israelis and Arabs together.


Administration Sees No Choice but to Support Yeltsin
Despite evidence that President Boris N. Yeltsin is losing control of the Russian military, the Clinton Administration has decided that it has little choice but to support him.
"This is a time for the United States to be steady and cautious," Secretary of State Warren Christopher said in an interview today.
"We need to not rush to judgment or rush to conclusions. It is worth remembering that he is the first elected President of Russia. He has been the exponent of reform, and we are in favor of reform."


U.S. Starts the Return of Haitians From Guantanamo
Rejecting appeals from human rights groups, the United States began the forced repatriation today of nearly 4,000 Haitian refugees who were granted "safe haven" last year at the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba.
A Coast Guard vessel docked at the main port here this afternoon carrying 54 Haitians who had been seeking political asylum in the United States.
Appearing somber and somewhat disoriented, they were each given $15 and a tote bag containing soap and toothpaste, then loaded into yellow school buses and driven to a nearby bus station.


After Three Attempts, Wilkens Gets His Cigar
Hawks 112, Bullets 90
The chase finally ended for Lenny Wilkens.
Wilkens became the winningest coach in National Basketball Association history last night with No. 939 when his Atlanta Hawks beat the visiting Washington Bullets, 112-90, moving him past Red Auerbach on his fourth attempt.


INSIDE
Censures in F.B.I. Standoff
The F.B.I.
Director reprimanded 12 employees, including his acting deputy, over the botched 1992 stand-off with a white separatist.
Page 10.
Race an Issue in Conviction
A court has struck down the conviction of a black man by an all-white jury for the 1974 kidnapping of a Long Island executive.
Page 25.
Give That Man a Cigar
Atlanta Hawks Coach Lenny Wilkens won his 939th game, passing Red Auerbach of the Boston Celtics for most N.B.A. victories.
Page 33.
Long-Distance Price War
The price war widened in the long-distance telephone industry as Sprint offered flat rates.
Page 39.


Roseanne Plans to Produce U.S. Version of British Sitcom
An American version of "Absolutely Fabulous," the politically incorrect British television comedy that has won fans on both sides of the Atlantic, is to be produced by the actress and comedian Roseanne.
Format rights to the BBC series -- about a pair of narcissistic, substance-abusing middle-aged London women -- were bought from the show's creator and lead actress, Jennifer Saunders.


A Cougar in Town


Family Paints Tender Portrait of Man Who Died in Custody
Elizabeth Baez knew that her barrel-chested brother Anthony could look intimidating.
But she always thought of him as a big bear who drew his strength from his morality and not his muscles.
"He wouldn't say you're wrong," she said.
"Just that you're unfair. He would listen to what you said, but then say, 'I think it's unfair.' He wouldn't use strict words."


Ralston Selling Continental Baking to Interstate
The Ralston Purina Company said yesterday that it had agreed to sell the Continental Baking Company, the maker of Wonder bread and Hostess Twinkies, to the Interstate Bakeries Corporation in a deal valued at $550 million to $560 million.
The acquisition would make No. 3- ranked Interstate the largest bakery company in the nation and would get Ralston out of the food business.


DANCE
Flamenco Is Flamenco When Passion Infuses It  La Conja Mimbre y Vareta Pace Downtown Theater


Shore Towns Evict Poor On Welfare From Hotels
After summer sun and crowds recede from the Jersey Shore, many struggling hotels try to survive by taking in welfare recipients under contracts with county social service agencies.
While hotel owners welcome the extra money, the officials of the beachfront towns say the off-season population hurts their budgets, requiring added costs for schools, police and other services.
The towns fought back with stricter housing codes, threatening to evict some of the families who pay for their rent with the help of welfare.


F.B.I. Chief Reprimands Officials on Their Role in a 1992 Idaho Raid
The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Louis J. Freeh, today reprimanded a dozen employees, including his acting deputy and several middle managers over a botched and bloody 1992 standoff with the white separatist Randall C. Weaver.
None of the officials was dismissed or given more than reassignment or a short suspension from duties, and Mr.
Freeh said that the highest official to be recommended for a reprimand, Larry A. Potts, whom Mr.
Freeh has temporarily promoted to the No. 2 job in the agency, remains his choice to permanently fill the position of deputy director.


Executive Changes
ATLAS CORP., Denver, appointed Michael B. Richings president and chief operating officer.
MTV NETWORKS, New York, a division of Viacom Inc., promoted Harvey Ganot, executive vice president for MTV Networks advertising and promotional sales, to president; John Popkowski, senior vice president for MTV Networks advertising sales, to executive vice president, and Doug Rohrer, vice president for Eastern region ad sales for MTV, to senior vice president for ad sales for MTV and VH-1.


Observer; And Only A Pittance, Too
After tolerating all those callers who phoned C-Span during Wednesday's Newtonian rites to say they were Americans and Republicans, I feel entitled to say I'm American and a crank.
For instance, I think Gingrich sold out democracy when he let the Nice Nellies make him give up his $4.5 million book advance.
Given a chance to strike a blow for democracy's cranky glory, he let a bunch of moralizers talk him out of it.


Remembering the Gifts of the Magi


Russia Commits War Crimes in Chechnya
To the Editor:
In "Miscalculation in Chechnya" (editorial, Dec. 28), you compound the horror of Russia's deliberate killing of civilians in the breakaway republic by your choice of words.
"The indiscriminate bombing of Grozny, Chechnya's capital" was not merely a "mistake." It was a violation of the most fundamental law of war, enshrined in numerous treaties and conventions, which prohibits deliberate attacks on civilian targets.


Energy Department Abides by Its Own Rules
To the Editor:
It is true, as you state in your article on the Energy Department's decision to ask Congress to rewrite rules on the cleanup of nuclear-arms factories (Dec. 21), that changes may be needed to accommodate the budget reductions announced for the department's nuclear-weapons cleanup program.


Market Quiet On Possible Cable Deal
Wall Street showed little reaction yesterday to reports that Time Warner Inc. was looking to acquire Cablevision Industries, a cable television company with 1.3 million subscribers.
Time Warner stock fell 25 cents yesterday, closing at $34.625 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Cablevision is closely held and its stock is not traded.


The Dole Challenge
Congressional Republicans may be talking truce with the White House on key domestic issues.
But on foreign policy, Senator Bob Dole has already declared war, submitting one bill this week that would allow U.S. arms sales to Bosnia in defiance of the U.N. embargo and another that would restrict U.S. participation in U.N. peacekeeping.
He also promised early hearings aimed at unraveling the Administration's nuclear deal with North Korea.
There is some merit in the Bosnia proposal, not much in the U.N. measure and a capacity for major mischief on Korea.
Like it or not, Mr.
Dole now leads the majority party in the Senate, and his policy challenges need to be taken more seriously by the White House than they have so far.


When It Makes Sense To Trade In Adjustables
PEOPLE with adjustable-rate mortgages are feeling the pinch as rising interest rates push their monthly payments higher.
And oddly enough, some of these homeowners are coping by refinancing into another adjustable-rate loan, well aware that their rates could rise again.
The prime candidates are people who want to take out a larger mortgage to pay for education, home improvements or other big-ticket items and those who want to consolidate existing debt like a home equity loan.


Courts Have to Weigh The Evidence Better
To the Editor:
"Surely We Can Improve on Trial by Jury" (letter, Dec. 31), about trial by judge versus trial by jury, ignores the issue of accuracy of evidence assessment that is crucial to judicial quality.
As long as witness credibility is central to judicial decision, and is gauged by demeanor, as in almost all court proceedings today, it will make no difference if the evidence is weighed by judge or jury.


The Lesson: Diversify, Diversify, Diversify
Call 1994 the year of reversed expectations.
Given the dismal market performances, one would not have expected such volatile stocks as technology and health care to lead the pack.
Investors who feared the worst at the beginning of the year might have sought shelter in traditionally defensive areas like utilities or income funds, both of which turned out to be poor choices.


Democrats Strongly Attack G.O.P. Budget Plan
Democrats abandoned their opening-week niceties today and took up the stoop labor of a true Congressional minority, charging that a Republican balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution might just be a ploy to gut Medicare and other popular benefit programs.
Republicans scoffed at that.
But they also allowed, as Speaker Newt Gingrich of Georgia did on Thursday, that Medicare and other big programs may have to undergo "systemic" changes if the $4.7 trillion Federal debt is ever to stop growing, much less shrink.


Assistants Under Kotite Might Look Familiar
Rich Kotite said yesterday that he would bring some new people on the staff, but the Jets' new head coach will give all the current assistants the courtesy of interviewing them next week.
Kotite indicated that Zeke Bratkowski, his longtime associate dating to their days with the Jets, will be coming with him from the Philadelphia Eagles.
Bratkowski had been the offensive coordinator and quarterback coach at Philadelphia.


Packers Focused To Stop The Run
When you look back to their last games, you wonder whether the Dallas Cowboys will actually handle the Green Bay Packers, as almost everyone expects, or whether the winners of the last two Super Bowls are running into a buzz saw.
The Cowboys, who finished the National Football League's regular season 12-4 and won their division title, earned last weekend off.
The Packers, who finished 9-7, had to play a wild-card playoff game.
They played it with style, dispatching the Detroit Lions, 16-12, to earn a shot at the Cowboys here Sunday.


Gaza Rally Supports Suicide Bomber


Sports of The Times; A Wounded Warrior Hunts Bears
RICHARD DENT stood in front of his cubicle at the 49ers' training camp, half listening to William Floyd, the 23-year-old fullback, react to Floyd's being named to the "all-Madden" team.
The team is a collection of rough and tumble players selected each year by John Madden, the former Raiders coach and popular sportscaster.
"I'm a throwback," Floyd was saying.
"I have all the ingredients: part Larry Csonka, a little Earl Campbell, a little Franco Harris."


As Egon Schiele Observes Himself Observing Himself
In the opening sequences of "Pass the Blutwurst, Bitte," John Kelly's captivating homage to the Viennese artist Egon Schiele, Mr.
Kelly contemplates a blank canvas with the naive self-infatuation of Narcissus finding his reflection in a pool.
The scene, which is preceded by the sound of an infant's wail, translates the primal act of a child discovering his body into the tense, angular postures of Schiele's brooding expressionist self-portraits, with Mr.
Kelly assuming the familiar skewed head, the sharply bent arms, the rigidly extended fingers.
Though the performer has already been made up into an uncanny facsimile of images of the painter, it is this singular anatomy lesson that brings Schiele to full life, as the artist seems to sculpture himself into being.


Yeltsin on a Limb, Alone
It is nearly a month since Boris N. Yeltsin ordered Russian troops to put down a secessionist movement in Chechnya.
In that time, nothing has seemed to go as planned for the embattled Russian President.
Not only has the military failed to crush the ragtag Chechen forces, but Mr.
Yeltsin has found himself the subject of the most searing domestic criticism ever leveled against a Kremlin leader.
Mr.
Yeltsin is in trouble, and the Chechnya fiasco has provided a good club with which to hammer him.
Even his friends in the West have joined in the carping.


Corrections
A chart on Tuesday in the special Outlook '95 section of Business Day about investment strategies by seven stock market analysts misstated a prediction by one analyst.
David Holt, a portfolio strategist at Wedbush Morgan Securities, expects the Dow Jones industrial average to rise as high as 3,900 this year, not 3,700.


Moscow Vows to Press Assault On Rebel City Despite Criticism
Making clear its intention to continue an offensive in Chechnya despite domestic and foreign criticism, Russia's National Security Council met here today as the army unleashed its most powerful artillery barrage yet on the capital of the secessionist southern region.
As Russian forces pummeled the rebel capital, Grozny, with shells from artillery positioned in several nearby villages, President Boris N. Yeltsin vowed yet again to rein in the furious attack.


With Season at the Brink, Compromise Is Still Absent
Pat Quinn, a former player and coach in the National Hockey League, is the president and general manager of the Vancouver Canucks.
He has a law degree and three decades of experience in professional hockey.
But he has never experienced anything quite like this lockout, which is in its 99th day.
Quinn will attend the Board of Governors meeting today in New York in which the latest collective bargaining proposal from the Players Association is expected to be rejected.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the school at the Adolescent Reception Detention Center on Rikers Island misstated the given name of the teacher who runs the auto shop.
He is Martin Torres, not Joe.


Pataki's Politics; Everyone's Port Authority
For seven decades, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has provided not only the building blocks but sometimes even the leadership that helped shape the economic destiny of two states and the nation's largest city.
Its strength comes from a solid financial reputation, a willingness to plan for the long run, a capacity to build big projects -- and, not least, a tradition of nonpartisan professional competence.
Today, that tradition is in serious jeopardy.
Stanley Brezenoff, the latest in a long line of accomplished administrators to serve as executive director of the Port Authority, is to resign on Feb. 2.
This week, people close to Gov.
George E. Pataki said the job would be offered to Borough President Guy V. Molinari of Staten Island -- who, as it happens, was the leading Republican politician from New York City to support Mr.
Pataki in the fall campaign.


Five Portfolios Lose But Hold to Course
Time to close the book on 1994, the worst year ever for bond funds and a losing one for stock funds as well.
Statements will soon arrive telling individual investors of the carnage, undoubtedly causing many people to consider a leap out of mutual funds into safe investments like short-term Treasuries and bank deposits, whose yields are much more attractive than a year ago.


Walter Rand, 75, New Jersey Senator And Transit Expert
State Senator Walter Rand, a specialist on transportation issues during his 20 years in both houses of the New Jersey Legislature, died today at Our Lady of Lourdes Medical Center here.
A resident of Bellmawr, a Camden suburb, he was 75.
The Senator had been in failing health for several months with circulatory problems, his colleagues in the Legislature said.


Seattle in Mourning for Four Firefighters
Choking back tears, Mayor Norm Rice declared Seattle in mourning today, after the deadliest accident in the history of the Fire Department took the lives of four firefighters.
The firemen, two of whom were veterans with more than 20 years' experience each, were trapped inside an old warehouse in the city's Chinatown on Thursday night while trying to put out what appeared to be a routine fire.
Then there was an explosion in the smoky building and the floor beneath them collapsed.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Telephone Price War Heats Up
The Sprint Corporation raised fears on Wall Street yesterday that it was setting off a bigger price war in the long-distance telephone industry by offering flat prices to replace the highly complex discount programs that have long been the staple of the industry's big companies.
The seemingly simple move -- announcing a flat price of 10 cents a minute for nighttime and weekend calls and 22 cents on weekdays -- offers only a modest reduction in the average prices charged by AT&amp;T and MCI Communications.


Remember Tortoise And Hare, Bears Say
The Chicago Bears are a stagecoach; the San Francisco 49ers are a Lear jet.
There is a generation gap between their offenses, although it is nothing a Candlestick Park quagmire can't equalize.
The forecast for Saturday's playoff game here is mud, wind and a 75 percent chance of a 49ers rout.
But, as the visiting team enthusiastically points out, there is also the Bear factor.
Chicago is a team that gets its school clothes filthy, that draws up plays in the dirt, that arrives in a broken-down bus.


Congressional Developments
HOUSE Democrats went on the offensive, charging that a Republican balanced-budget proposal would force big cuts in Medicare and other popular benefit programs.
Republicans rejected the charge but conceded that significant budget cuts would require these programs to undergo a "systematic"' review.
SENATE The Senate continued to debate a measure to make work rules and other laws that Congress imposes on others apply to itself.
The House passed the measure at the end of Wednesday's opening session.


Brooks Stevens, 83, Giant in Industrial Design
Brooks Stevens, an industrial designer whose works ranged from corporate logos and clothes dryers to the Oscar Mayer Weinermobile, died on Wednesday in Milwaukee at 83.
The cause was heart failure, said his son William.


An Agency's Volunteers Navigate Foster Care System
When she is not in Family Court, Naomi Karp is poring through documents, typing reports and spending hours on the phone with city welfare agencies.
She does not earn a salary, and at 68, she is entitled to a less frenetic schedule.
But with each passing year, her sense of obligation toward the city she calls home has grown.
Mrs.
Karp belongs to a volunteer program run by the Community Service Society of New York, a charity supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Since 1971, the society's Retired Senior Volunteer Program has supplied hundreds of public and private agencies with trained volunteers to do jobs as various as delivering food to the homeless and doing research at universities.
At a time when the city government is eliminating positions and programs at social-service agencies, Mrs.
Karp's work is invaluable.
She is a court-appointed advocate for children in the city's vast foster care system.
Above all, she tries to insure that foster children are happy and secure.
"Trying to make the system function well can be maddening," said Mrs.
Karp, a former freelance journalist.
"But I'm a good nagger, so occasionally I succeed."
Mrs.
Karp's organization, Court Appointed Special Advocates, depends largely on its 94 volunteers to monitor about 750 cases involving 1,200 children.
Since Mrs.
Karp started volunteering in 1988, the number of children in the city's foster care system has grown to 45,000, and the need for supervision is greater than ever.
Often, Mrs.
Karp and her colleagues find children who are neglected by a system that is supposed to protect them, usually because caseworkers are overworked and undertrained.
Mrs.
Karp works with children whose parents placed them in foster care voluntarily.
Often, the parents did so because they were homeless, drug addicted or incarcerated.
Most of the children eventually return to their parents, but in a few cases, Mrs.
Karp's efforts have led to foster families adopting children.
Her most recent victory involved a troubled teen-aged girl who had been abandoned on the street as an infant.
Her foster mother could not care for her any longer, so Mrs.
Karp did some research and found the girl's baby sister, who was in another foster home.
The girl now lives with her sister, and their foster family is considering adopting them.
"She was so taken with the idea of being a good role model for the baby that she got serious about her life," Mrs.
Karp said.
"It's rare to see a situation turn out so well, so I felt especially good about it."
But the most common feeling is frustration.
She goes to Family Court several times a month, and she often spends hours waiting for her case to be called.
Letters to parents detailing their options frequently go unanswered.
The most maddening aspect of the job, she said, is dealing with the city bureaucracy.
"They don't always return my calls, and sometimes they don't even answer their phones," she said.
"They do things by rote, and it's very hard to push them in a new direction."
But Lee Pardee, the case and research coordinator for the advocate program, said volunteers are more likely than anyone to succeed in changing the system.
"People like Naomi come in with fresh ideas and a can-do attitude that is crucial for this kind of work," Ms.
Pardee said.
"They are here because they want to be, and they are more committed than anyone to helping these kids."
The experience has also helped Mrs.
Karp cultivate self-confidence.
She is finishing a novel about the foster-care system, based on her own experiences.
And she plans to continue volunteering for as long as she is able.
"I feel I have to use my time productively," she said.
"I have loved living in this city, and this is an excellent way to give something back."  Previously Recorded $2,963,874.95 Recorded Yesterday 103,132.20 Total$3,067,007.15


Huston Has Fine Time As Stadler Is Late
The course was soft and soggy, but John Huston's game was as crisp today as it was last March, when he won the tournament that got him into this exclusive winner's only field at La Costa.
Huston shot rounds of 67 and 66 today for a 133 in the rain-delayed, 36-hole opener of the Mercedes Championships, and he roared into a two-stroke lead over Lee Janzen, who shot 72-63, and a three-stroke lead over Craig Stadler.


Irene S. Forrest, 86; Helped Create Test Aiding Psychiatry
Irene S. Forrest, a biochemist who helped develop tests to trace whether psychiatric patients were taking their medication, died on Dec. 22 in her home in Menlo Park, Calif.
She was 86.
The cause was complications from diabetes, said her daughter, Joan H. Armer of Menlo Park.


Public Ritual, Private Rebels
George Balanchine's "Bugaku" is a reminder that whereas social codes can dictate public behavior, people can reinvent themselves in private.
The score for this depiction of a wedding ceremony is by the Japanese composer Toshiro Mayuzumi and Karinska's costumes are based on Japanese court dress.
Yet the choreographic contrasts between a formal marriage ritual and an erotic pas de deux for the newlyweds help make "Bugaku" relevant to the customs of many countries.
When the New York City Ballet presented it on Thursday night at the New York State Theater, the leading roles were danced by Heather Watts and Jock Soto.
Their performance was a prelude to a farewell, for Ms.
Watts will star in "Bugaku" on Jan. 15 when she makes her final appearance with the company, which she joined in 1970.


No Headline
"If the baseball strike continues, this business is over with." -- BOB DURVIN, a baseball card dealer.  [ 1:6. ]


THE 104TH CONGRESS: ISSUES AND AGENDAS -- Liberal Anger, States' Hope And a Technology Debate; Science: Agencies Defend Their Records
While the spotlight was focused on a bit of immediate fencing between Republican and Democratic Congressional leaders, there were also a number of gatherings in Washington yesterday that foreshadowed the shape of some of the policy making -- and policy battles -- to come during the next two years.
The chiefs of a number of the Government's science and technology agencies came calling on Capitol Hill today, pledging cooperation with the new Congress and suggesting that they were already doing much of what the Republican leaders say they want.


THE 104TH CONGRESS: ISSUES AND AGENDAS -- Liberal Anger, States' Hope And a Technology Debate; Liberals: Bitter Attacks On the President
While the spotlight was focused on a bit of immediate fencing between Republican and Democratic Congressional leaders, there were also a number of gatherings in Washington yesterday that foreshadowed the shape of some of the policy making -- and policy battles -- to come during the next two years.
Dazed and angry, the remnants of the political left gathered here today to serve notice on President Clinton that they would not stand by silently while he sought accommodation with Speaker Newt Gingrich and other Republican Congressional leaders.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the security chief for President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia referred incorrectly to the aide's military status, and because of an editing error the reference was repeated in some editions yesterday in an article about the Russian Government's lifting of price controls on oil.
The official, Aleksandr V. Korzhakov, has the rank of major general and is not a retired major.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Ambiance of a Musicale, Though Not in a Drawing Room  Tana Bawden, pianist; Leigh Harrison, soprano, and Lorenz Maycher, organist St.
Bartholomew's Church


Avent Changes Story
Orlando Magic forward ANTHONY AVENT yesterday recanted his statement to police about a New Year's Eve knife attack, saying he was stabbed by a friend at home and not by three men who confronted him on a downtown street.
Avent said he was trying to protect the friend, who he would not identify to reporters, from prosecution.
He added that he didn't regret misleading the police.


New York Region Lags
Unemployment fell in New York and New Jersey, but experts said that the gain did not signal a turnaround in the region's economy.
Job growth in New York City was still flat.
Business Day, page 39.


Starks's Second-Half Show a Winning Performance
When John Starks became unstoppable tonight, so did the Knicks.
Sparked by Starks's 16-point barrage in the third quarter, the Knicks took off and outlasted the Cleveland Cavaliers, 103-93, before a sellout crowd of 20,562 at Gund Arena.
The victory extended New York's season-high winning streak to five games.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ELI LILLY &amp; CO., Indianapolis, completed the sales of its medical-testing unit, Pacific Biotech Inc., to Quidel Corp. for $3.95 million and Ivac Corp., a maker of medical devices, to River Medical Inc. for undisclosed terms.
ITEL CORP., Santa Clara, Calif., which supplies cabling systems and networking products, said its board had authorized the repurchase of as many as one million common shares.


Airplane Crash Kills Iran Air Force Chief And 11 Top Officers
The commander of the Iranian Air Force, Brig.
Gen.
Mansour Satari, has died in a plane crash with 11 other officers, including four other generals, military officials said today.
The Teheran radio said a plane carrying General Satari, the architect of an intensive military buildup in the Iranian Air Force since 1988, crashed shortly after takeoff late Thursday night.


RESULTS PLUS
MEN'S BASKETBALL  Penn Wins 30th Straight Ivy League Game  Eric Moore scored 20 points and No. 25 Penn tied an Ivy League record with its 30th consecutive conference victory last night, beating Harvard, 90-63, at Cambridge, Mass.
The Quakers (7-1, 1-0) have not lost a conference game since March 6, 1992, matching the record set by the school from 1969-71.
Penn could break the record with a victory over Dartmouth tonight, but Coach Fran Dunphy said all he cares about is the victory.
"We never talk about the record," he said.
"Twenty years from now, it will be a good accomplishment. But right now, we're 1-0 in the league, and that's what we're focused on." (AP) Dartmouth 64, Princeton 56: Guards Kenny Mitchell and Seamus Lonergan scored 14 points each in leading Dartmouth over Princeton in Hanover, N.H.
Dartmouth (4-7, 1-1 Ivy League) put the game out of reach in the second half during a 13-4 run that put the Big Green on top by 55-43 with 3 minutes 38 seconds remaining.
Princeton fell to 5-7, 0-1. (AP) WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  No. 8 Penn State Is Upset by Minnesota  Three consecutive baskets by Lori Lawler sparked a 10-2 run early in the second half and host Minnesota went on to stun No. 8 Penn State, 71-56, last night.
The spurt shortly after intermission gave the Gophers (7-5, 2-0 Big Ten) a 43-36 lead and Penn State (9-3, 1-2) was never able to recover against an aggressive Minnesota defense, falling for the second time in its last three games.
Lawler finished with 19 points. (AP) Indiana 68, Ohio State 58: Shirley Bryant's 27 points and 13 rebounds sparked host Indiana to its Big Ten victory over No. 22 Ohio State (8-4, 2-1).
The Hoosiers (11-1, 1-1) won despite playing without Lisa Furlin, their usual leading scorer. (AP) Tulane 74, Southern Mississippi 71: Kim Bryant scored a season-high 21 points to lead host Tulane over No. 23 Southern Mississippi in the Metro Conference opener for both teams.
The Green Wave (7-5, 1-0) defeated a Top 25 team for the first time in its history.
Southern Mississippi fell to 8-2. (AP) SKIING  Tomba Triumphs in World Cup Slalom  Alberto Tomba earned his sixth World Cup victory of the season in a giant slalom race yesterday at Kranjska Gora, Slovenia.
The Italian skiing star won in 2 minutes 12.01 seconds, defeating Mitja Kunc of Slovenia and Harald Strand Nilsen of Norway, who tied for second place at 2:12.95.
Tomba increased his overall World Cup point total to 650, 334 ahead of Michael Von Grunigen of Switzerland, who finished 12th yesterday. (AP)


Pataki Picks New Labor and Utility Chiefs
Gov.
George E. Pataki is expected to name John E. Sweeney, the executive director and counsel to the Republican State Committee, to be State Labor Commissioner, aides to Mr.
Pataki said today.
In addition, Mr.
Pataki said today that he had named Harold A. Jerry Jr. as interim chairman of the state Public Service Commission, the state agency that regulates utilities.
Mr.
Jerry, a former Republican State Senator who has been a commissioner for 22 years, said he would remain in the top post only until Mr.
Pataki finds a permanent chairman.


Asuncion Journal; A Few Potholes on the Road to Democracy
Paraguay's army commander clearly expected the political ground to tremble when he bellowed recently to a group of peasants, "We don't know if the man has been born yet who can sew up the mouths of the military."
But the next day, a Senator suggested that the commander, Gen.
Lino Cesar Oviedo, retire.
Another member of Congress accused him of violating a new law banning military involvement in politics.


Governor Proposes Tax Cut in California
Gov.
Pete Wilson said today that he would ask the State Legislature to cut personal and business income taxes by 15 percent over three years.
The Republican Governor, beginning his second four-year term, said he would seek the tax cuts recommended to him last month by a group of economic advisers.


State Called Patient Violent, Then Let Him Roam
A mentally ill man accused of pushing a woman to her death under a subway train Wednesday had been classified as violent or even homicidal by state psychiatrists less than a year ago and committed to a state hospital.
But once he was there, state doctors repeatedly gave him the freedom to walk the large campus despite four escapes, officials said.
Reuben Harris's case did not fall through the cracks of fragmented medical, social-service and criminal justice bureaucracies.
To the contrary, he had been under the watchful eye of a state program specifically established to prevent dangerous mental patients from killing innocent people -- and placed in a state institution, Manhattan Psychiatric Center, that had full knowledge of his diagnosis.


Religion Journal; For Cardinal and Accuser, A Profound Reconciliation
The idea of reconciliation is a recurrent theme in Scripture.
In Matthew's Gospel, Jesus declares that an individual must "first be reconciled to thy brother" before making an offering to God.
When it is put into practice, it can be almost breathtaking, as when Pope John Paul II went to an Italian jail cell to meet with Mehmet Ali Agca, the man who had shot him and who was publicly forgiven by him.


Jobless Rates Decline For New York Region
Jobless rates in New York and New Jersey tumbled in December, falling to the lowest levels in several years in both New York City and New York State.
But experts said the improved unemployment rates, while giving some cause for optimism in a region where the economy has lagged behind the healthy recovery experienced in most other parts of the nation, did not reflect a turnaround in the region's relatively poor performance recently.
The December data may have been distorted by Christmas sales jobs and other temporary employment related to the holidays.


Any Death Penalty Law Must Pass Fairness Test
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 31 article about the letter of New Yorkers for Fairness in Capital Punishment to Gov.
George E. Pataki and legislative leaders missed the letter's true significance.


Approaching a Digital Milestone
Call it the rumpus-room revolution.
American consumers are now shelling out nearly as much for personal computers as for television sets, the consumer electronics industry announced today at its annual winter trade show.
In fact, based on the new and future gadgets on display here, the TV set itself is rapidly becoming a computer.


Injured Graf Pulls Out Of Australian Open
Steffi Graf, with her No. 1 ranking in danger and her health a continuing question mark, announced yesterday that she would be unable to defend her 1994 Australian Open title in Melbourne later this month because of a pulled calf muscle.
The 25-year-old Graf, speaking from her home in Boca Raton, Fla., said she suffered her latest injury by making an overzealous sprint for a shot during a Florida practice session two weeks ago.


States Reach Settlement Of a Dispute On Dividends
New York, Delaware and Massachusetts have agreed to share about $182 million with the other states to settle a complicated and troublesome dispute over unclaimed dividend and interest payments on securities.
The settlement, announced yesterday, calls for the money to be paid over 10 years.
New York will pay $100 million, Delaware $75 million and Massachusetts $7 million.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief article by Reuters on Monday about the new membership of the United Nations Security Council misstated the date that five new members were elected.
The five -- Germany, Italy, Botswana, Indonesia and Honduras -- took nonpermanent seats on Jan. 1.
They were elected in October.


Bosnian Rivals Trade Charges Over Truce; New Diplomacy Planned
The United States and four other nations trying to broker a peace settlement in Bosnia will soon open a new round of shuttle diplomacy among the warring parties, a senior official of the group said today.
Officials of the five-nation "contact group" met here Thursday night and said they would convene again in Paris on Tuesday.
One participant said they hoped to have agreed by then on a plan to turn the four-month cease-fire pact into a peace accord.


Replacement Plan Near
Major league clubs could have a plan for the recruitment of replacement players by the end of next week.
John Harrington of the Boston Red Sox, chairman of the committee charged with developing the plan, said yesterday the committee needed to have more conference calls to discuss replacement players and related matters, but hoped to have a plan to recommend to the executive council within a week.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  RUSSIANS BATTER REBEL CAPITAL
Russia's National Security Council made clear that it intended to continue its assault on Chechnya as the the army unleashed its most powerful barrage yet on the secessionist region's capital. 1


THE 104TH CONGRESS: ISSUES AND AGENDAS -- Liberal Anger, States' Hope And a Technology Debate; Welfare: G.O.P. Governors Make Their Pitch
While the spotlight was focused on a bit of immediate fencing between Republican and Democratic Congressional leaders, there were also a number of gatherings in Washington yesterday that foreshadowed the shape of some of the policy making -- and policy battles -- to come during the next two years.
Republican governors today asked Mr.
Gingrich and the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, for major changes in Federal welfare laws so that the states could reduce their costs.


Intimacy Turns Out To Be Very Hard Work
Whereas it's easy, and sometimes fun, to be nasty, showing affection can be difficult.
Upon that sad fact of life, David Dorfman built the choreographically wry and poignant works that David Dorfman Dance offered on Wednesday night as part of the Altogether Different series at the Joyce Theater.
Whenever dancers neared one other in "Approaching No Calm Counting Laughter," they appeared ready to flee.
Each of this premiere's two parts had its own enigmatic title.
Lisa Race and Mr.
Dorfman moved as if burdened by invisible weights, in "Approaching No Calm," to music by Amy Denio.
An attempt at kissing became hard labor; intimacy proved intimidating.


U.S. Starts Forcing Haitians to Leave 'Safe Haven' at Guantanamo Base


On the Electron River, Young Are Best Guides
HERE is what happened along a stretch of the great communication highway.
Some drifters were hanging around near an entry ramp where a sign points the way to the Sony Wonder Technology Lab at 550 Madison Avenue, near 53d Street.
Even though admission is free, the drifters shun this pathway to the future.
They seem to have enough trouble coping with the here and now.
Mostly, they sit at tables in the plaza, keeping warm and listening to the piano player in the Christmas exhibit.
The other day, as adult tourists and schoolchildren waited for elevators to the Wonder Lab, one of the unrooted approached the uniformed stewards manning the cord barriers to complain that a colleague had stolen his gloves.


THE 104TH CONGRESS: Political Memo; Democrats Try to Cope With Their New Role
His famous line is from 1933, but Will Rogers might well have been commenting on the capital this week when he said, "I don't belong to any organized political faith -- I am a Democrat."
While Republicans have moved in unison, capitalizing on their new power, the Democrats have been almost paralyzed, often not knowing quite how or when to act or even react.


A Dream for Hot Weather


N.B.A. TV Limits Ruled Illegal
A United States District Court judge in Chicago ruled an effective draw yesterday in the four-year legal battle between the Bulls and the National Basketball Association over nationwide telecasts of the team's games on the WGN-TV superstation.
The Bulls and WGN have fought the N.B.A.'s efforts to curtail WGN's broadcasts since October 1990 and disputed the league's argument that WGN's telecasts harmed the quality of the league's product in the national market.


Defendant Pleads Not Guilty in Clinic Attacks
Exactly a week after the authorities say he shot his way through two abortion clinics, John C. Salvi 3d appeared in Federal District Court here today and pleaded not guilty to two weapons charges stemming from the attacks in suburban Brookline.
Mr.
Salvi was then turned over to the Massachusetts authorities, who have charged him with killing two clinic receptionists and wounding five other people in the Dec. 30 shootings.
Mr.
Salvi is scheduled to be arraigned on the state charges on Monday morning in Brookline District Court.


Ford Foundation Nurtures New Work in Arts
To the Editor:
Robert Brustein's "Culture by Coercion" (Op-Ed, Nov. 29) described the work of several foundations, including the Ford Foundation.
We have a different perspective on the matters he discusses.
The foundation spends $7 million a year in the United States and overseas for the arts.
This reflects our belief that artistic and cultural expression is part of human experience.
It can give pleasure, express visions and hopes, and illuminate important questions.
Our grants, a mixture of general and project funding, are intended to:


Rate Rises To Cost PNC $190 Million
The PNC Bank Corporation said yesterday that it would cost about $190 million before taxes to bail out some of its huge money-losing bets on interest rates that it made in recent years.
It will lose $121 million from the sale of $1.8 billion of bonds on which prices have declined, resulting in an after-tax charge in the fourth quarter of $79 million.
It will also spend $70 million this year to buy financial instruments known as derivatives that will increase in value if interest rates rise.
The bank, based in Pittsburgh, hopes that these hedges will help offset the further losses it faces from rising interest rates.


A National Reward for Good Teachers
Ever since the mid-1980's, when a series of landmark studies called for drastic changes in the nation's schools, American educators have been seeking ways to raise teaching standards.
That effort bore its first fruit this week when 81 gifted teachers were awarded national teaching certification at a ceremony in Washington.
The ceremony may turn out to be a pivotal moment in the history of American education.
Many educators hope that the 81 recipients will be the first small vanguard of a new generation of highly qualified teachers who, in turn, will nourish better schools and better students.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  Job growth surged in December as a robust economy continued to churn out new jobs.
The gains extended across the nation, and the unemployment rate fell to 5.4 percent, the lowest since July 1990.
Another sign of strength was a broadly based 54,000 jump in manufacturing jobs.  [ Page 1. ] In New York and New Jersey, the job market also improved But experts said the improvement did not reflect a turnaround in the region's economy.  [ 50. ] The computer is on the verge of overtaking the television set as the chief electronics product in the home.
Indeed, based on the products shown at an industry trade show, the TV set is rapidly becoming a computer as digital technology is used in televisions and video recorders and combination TV-telephones.  [ 39. ] Companies  Fears that the price war in long-distance telephone services would escalate roiled the shares of AT&amp;T and MCI.
Wall Street's fears were prompted by a move by Sprint to offer a flat price, which was seen as a radical departure from pricing cloaked behind complex, heavily promoted discount schemes.
Sprint's shares rose.  [ 39. ] PNC Bank will take a $79 million charge as part of an effort to get out of some money-losing bonds.
The company will also spend $70 million to invest in derivatives that it hopes will help offset further losses it faces from rising interest rates.  [ 39. ] A battle for the breakfast tables of Europe is being waged by Kellogg and General Mills.
Despite their rivalry, the two cereal companies welcome the growth overseas as a respite from cut-throat price wars and lackluster gains at home.  [ 39. ] Ralston Purina will sell the maker of Wonder bread and Hostess Twinkies to Interstate Bakeries in a deal valued as much as $560 million.
The sale of Continental Baking would make Interstate the largest bakery company in the nation.  [ 41. ] Shares of Apple Computer jumped in very heavy trading on a report that said Oracle, Matsushita and Philips had discussed acquiring Apple.


Butterflies and Bravado At Debate Competition
It does not matter that they are all great debaters in their own countries.
The competition here this week at the 15th World Universities Debating Championship at Princeton University featuring the best student speakers from 27 nations has them all a little nervous.
"In Canada, we get a lot of respect," said Paul Ciufo, 24, a creative writing student at York University in Canada.
"But it's hard to compete with teams like Oxford who have reputations on the international circuit." He complained that the judges were too quick to be impressed with any idea delivered with a British accent.
"The Irish go more for style than facts," said Dermot Conway, a member of the University of Cork team, which will be the host of the 1996 championship.
"It's like sitting down and having a good argument with a friend."
Nick McGrath, a kilted debater from the University of Glasgow, fretted that Americans who judge the debates were having difficulty understanding his accent and his humor.
Enthusiasm ran high all week as 244 two-member teams from more than 100 schools paired off in a series of preliminary rounds to decide the 32 top teams that will square off this weekend to battle for the world championship.
There will have been up to 1,130 separate debates by Sunday's championship finals.
In an age when television and other electronic devices have elevated sound and diminished conversation, it is consoling to some to know that a premium on the art of persuasion and logical discourse is still embraced by young people who can go for the jugular one moment and then go out for a drink together.
"The quality of political speeches is so poor in the United States today that it is marvelous to see students who may eventually enter public service get up on their feet and construct complete sentences and sometimes do it with a degree of spontaneous wit," said Dr.
John Fleming, a Princeton professor of English and comparative literature who is master of Wilson College on campus.
Ross Harper, 21, from the University of Glasgow, said, "I think it's a safe bet to say that many of the debaters here are going to be in the top levels of power in their countries in 10 or 20 years."
Most of the 488 debaters will go on to careers in law and politics, said Chris Paolella, a Princeton junior who is serving as tournament director.
It was the fate of Mr.
Ciufo and his partner, Lawrence Rabie, to meet the Oxford team in the one "humorous" debate of the tournament assigned to all of the 244 teams.
Representing Oxford was the star-quality team of Rufus Black, an Australian, and Rod Clayton.
It was their duty, one they took up with alacrity, to defend the proposition "American Culture Is an Oxymoron." The Canadians, by the draw announced only 20 minutes before the start, were on the attack.
Mr.
Clayton ripped into American culture, tossing off several lines of verse in Latin in an exhibition of what he championed as real culture as compared to the "low culture" exported by Americans.
In rebuttal, Mr. Rabie spun out a bit of verse himself.
"Bye, bye Miss American Pie.
"Took my Chevy to the levee but the levee was dry."
Not to be outdone, Mr.
Black, a finalist in last year's championship, relied on an old four-letter Anglo-Saxon word to characterize his sentiments about the quality of American culture, an angle of attack that likely cost him points with the judge, Steven Johnson, 26, a lecturer in rhetoric from Creighton College in Kansas.
"Rufus is one of the best debaters in the world on a serious subject but to see him dancing around the room speaking profanities goes beyond the substance of argumentation," Mr.
Johnson said.
Oxford was awarded the match but both teams, by the end of the preliminary rounds, were among the 32 teams chosen for the semifinals, as was the Glasgow team of Mr.
Harper and Mr.
McGrath.
Daily results and rankings are supposed to be a closely guarded secret but team members seemed to spend most of their time between debates trying to breach the security of the tabulation committee operated by Princeton's venerable American Whig-Cliosophic Society (charter members were James Madison and Aaron Burr), which as host for the tournament did not enter its own teams in the debates.
"I wish there was a trophy for tab room leaks," said Mr.
Rabie, the Canadian.
"I'd walk away with it. My secret is to tell a judge who scored my debate that I heard I had won it and watch his reaction before he runs away from me."
During a break in the competition, an Irish student got on the public address system and listed the charms that awaited them in Cork next year.
"The judging will be appalling but the tab room will leak like a sieve," he said to cheers.


Executive Appointments Announced by The Times
The New York Times announced a series of appointments yesterday in a management realignment affecting the newspaper's advertising, circulation, operations and human resources departments.
The appointments were announced by Russell T. Lewis, president and general manager of the newspaper.


Injured Graf Pulls Out Of Australian Open
Steffi Graf, with her No. 1 ranking in danger and her health a continuing question mark, announced yesterday that she would be unable to defend her 1994 Australian Open title in Melbourne later this month because of a pulled calf muscle.
The 25-year-old Graf, speaking from her home in Boca Raton, Fla., said she suffered her latest injury by making an overzealous sprint for a shot during a Florida practice session two weeks ago.


METRO DIGEST
SUSPECT HAD BEEN CLASSIFIED VIOLENT A mentally ill man accused of pushing a woman to her death under a subway train on Wednesday was classified as violent or even homicidal by state psychiatrists less than a year ago and committed to a state hospital.
But once there, he was given the freedom to walk the large campus despite four escapes, officials said.
Page 1.
New York State's top mental health official was dismissed.
Page 26.
NEW YORK CITY  FIREFIGHTER IS LAID TO REST IN QUEENS Five-year-old Joseph Wylie wore a firefighter's uniform cap on his way in and out of church.
It had belonged to his father, Thomas A. Wylie.
Classmates of his father's from the Fire Academy were there, too, among the 6,000 or so firefighters from throughout the region who lined the streets around St.
Luke's Roman Catholic Church in Whitestone, Queens, for the funeral.
Page 27.
TAKING A TRIP ON THE ELECTRON RIVER Upstairs at the Sony Wonder Technology Lab, a recorded voice clearly directed visitors to log in by sliding plastic cards that they were issued through a sensor.
As their photos were automatically taken, the visitors were asked to speak so their log-ins could be personalized with a voice print, as the voice explained.
"What would you do if you won a million dollars in the lottery?" the machine said.
About New York, page 27.
REGION  SHORE TOWNS EVICT POOR After summer sun and crowds recede from the Jersey Shore, many hotels try to survive by taking in welfare recipients under contracts with county social service agencies.
But town officials say the off-season population requires additional spending for schools, police and other services.
In Seaside Park, officials succeeded in having six families evicted from a hotel across from the boardwalk.
Page 28.
STORE THAT HELPED DEFINE ERA IS CLOSING When it was announced this week that the John Wanamaker store at the Cross County Shopping Center in Yonkers would close after 41 years of dignified retailing, many customers feared that civilization had dropped yet another notch.
Page 28.
BUTTERFLIES AT DEBATE COMPETITION It does not matter that they are all great debaters in their own countries.
The competition this week at the 15th World Universities Debating Championship at Princeton University featuring the best student speakers from 27 nations has them all a little nervous.
Page 28.
PATAKI PICKS LABOR AND UTILITY CHIEFS Governor Pataki is expected to name John E. Sweeney, the executive director and counsel to the Republican State Committee, as Labor Commissioner, aides to Mr.
Pataki said.
In addition, he has named Harold A. Jerry Jr., a former State Senator, as interim chairman of the Public Service Commission.
Page 29.
New York, Delaware and Massachusetts will share about $182 million with the other states to settle a dispute over unclaimed dividend and interest payments on securities.
Page 26.
Unemployment fell in New York and New Jersey, but experts said the gain did not signal a turnaround for the region's economy.
Business Day, page 39.
Neediest Cases....27


CHRONICLE
With the 30th anniversary of the death of Lorraine Hansberry approaching, plans are under way for productions and panels around the country to commemorate the playwright and writer who was the first African-American woman to have a play on Broadway and became a powerful voice for black Americans.
Two neighboring theaters in New Brunswick, N.J., head the list with plays this month.
Previews of "A Raisin in the Sun," which opened on Broadway in 1959, begin at the George Street Playhouse tonight, with the opening scheduled for Friday.
Next door, the Crossroads Theater Company is producing a 1969 play adapted from Ms.
Hansberry's writings, "To Be Young, Gifted and Black," which opens Jan. 21.
That production moves to Ford's Theater in Washington on Feb. 10.


Mexico Asks I.M.F. for Loan Of $2.5 Billion as Peso Falls
As the Mexican peso fell to a new low, the nation's Finance Minister, Guillermo Ortiz, asked the International Monetary Fund yesterday for a new loan that would effectively add $2.5 billion to $3.5 billion to the country's monetary reserves in an effort to revive confidence in the Mexican economy and stabilize the peso.
A brief statement issued after Mr.
Ortiz met in Washington with the I.M.F.'s managing director, Michel Camdessus, said discussions on the loan would start next week in Mexico City.
The loan would be available on a standby basis, allowing Mexico to draw it down as needed.


Corrections
An editorial yesterday misidentified the committee headed by Senator Alfonse D'Amato of New York.
It is the Banking Committee.


20 Years Later, a Loophole Is Found; Odd Set of Events Overturns Verdict in a Kidnapping Case
It was a sensational kidnapping case with racial overtones 20 years ago -- a white business executive abducted from the driveway of his Long Island estate by black men who denounced him as an imperialist enemy of the poor and chained him in a dark closet for a week until his family paid a $750,000 ransom.
The victim, Jack J. Teich, was released unharmed after the kidnappers took the ransom from a locker at Pennsylvania Station and slipped a police dragnet.
But a trail of currency serial numbers led investigators to California, and the only suspect ever found in the case was arrested two years after the crime.


Golf Course Cancels Goose Shoot
Yielding to protests from animal rights groups and traditional hunters, a northern Alabama golf course overrun with Canada geese has called off a hunt that was set for next week.
Directors of the Goosepond Colony golf course in Scottsboro, Ala., canceled the hunt on Thursday evening.
The hunt, which was to begin at dawn Monday, was supposed to chase away more than 500 geese that were eating the greens and fouling the fairways with their waste.


French Talk to Iraqis, Angering Allies
Drawing sharp criticism from the United States and Britain, France received a senior Iraqi official today for the first time since the Persian Gulf war of 1991 and agreed to open a diplomatic office in Baghdad soon.
In separate statements, the United States and Britain said that they had not been consulted about the French moves and that the moment was not ripe for easing international pressure on Iraq to comply fully with Security Council resolutions.


Top Mental Health Official In State Dismissed by Pataki
New York State's top mental health official was dismissed yesterday, even as his agency struggled to seize control over lax procedures at Manhattan Psychiatric Center after the escape of a patient who the police say then killed a woman in a subway station.
The official, Dr.
Bruce E. Feig, was dismissed by Gov.
George E. Pataki for issuing a news release about changes at the psychiatric center on Wards Island without clearing it with his superiors in the administration, officials said.
He was replaced by William Morris, who has worked for the Office of Mental Health since 1978, and who immediately called for a complete review of hospital procedures.


As Deng's Health Flags, So Does Patience for Dissent
Communist Party leaders in recent weeks have been sending a stream of blunt messages to China's political dissidents telling them to keep a low profile or stay overseas as the country prepares for the political transition that will follow the death of an ailing Deng Xiaoping.
Western diplomats here say the campaign is intended to chasten anyone who threatens to wrinkle the brittle political fabric of the capital this winter.
"This regime fundamentally lacks legitimacy," a Western diplomat said, "and so the security apparatus is all that stands between the leadership and those who want change, or revolution or just revenge after Deng dies."


A Misfire By Childs Is Costly For the Nets
Whether it was cocksureness or a rookie mistake, Chris Childs was not saying.
He had the shot with the game in the balance, but he also had enough time on the shot clock to post up Derrick Coleman, to lob it inside to Benoit Benjamin, to. . . .
"He got a good look; that's all you can ask for," Coach Butch Beard of New Jersey said after Childs missed and the Charlotte Hornets escaped with an 89-88 victory over the Nets tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Firefighter Is Laid to Rest


Leigh Bowery, 33, Artist and Model
Leigh Bowery, an Australian performance artist and designer in London who was perhaps best known as a model for the English painter Lucien Freud, died on Dec. 30 in Middlesex Hospital near London.
He was 33 and lived in London.
The cause was AIDS, said his wife, Nicola Bowery.


A. Earl Walker, 87, a Professor And Researcher in Neurosurgery
Dr.
A.
Earl Walker, former chairman of neurosurgery at the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in Baltimore, died on Sunday while traveling near Tucson, Ariz.
He was 87 and lived in Albuquerque, N.M.
He apparently suffered a heart attack, a spokesman for Johns Hopkins said.


Duva, King Duel Anew
LIONEL BUTLER, who sparred with LENNOX LEWIS in 1991, says he will fight the former World Boxing Council heavyweight champion in March for the promoter DAN DUVA, not DON KING.
"Right now, I'm signed with Main Events and I'm fighting Lennox Lewis on March 18," Butler said in a conference call yesterday.
On Thursday, King had said he had a contract with Butler and wanted to put a Butler-Lewis fight underneath OLIVER MCCALL's W.B.C. title defense against LARRY HOLMES on April 8 at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev.
"I've got the fighter and possession is nine-tenths of the law," King said.
Butler, 22-10-1 with 17 knockouts, has won 16 straight.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Russian Cio-Cio San Plays Down Vulnerability  Galina Gorchakova, Soprano Metropolitan Opera


Home Swapping: Where to Look
FOR some, these dark nights are the time to read seed catalogues.
For prospective home-exchangers, it's the time to read swap catalogues, with their cryptic entries, optimistically seeking a vine-covered cottage by the Avon in England to be exchanged for a split-level on Long Island.
Some searchers may hunch over the electronic fireside: A computer bulletin board for exchangers and renters, begun in November 1993, is so new it has only 200 or so listings, all but a handful in the United States.
But access is free except for a toll call to Florida, which can be made at midnight, so there is little to lose.
Targeting Teachers
Teacher Swap, now entering its ninth year, will publish its 1995 catalogue in March, plus two supplements after that.
The proprietors, Ron and Ellie Frevola of Long Island, have a loose definition of teacher, encompassing active and retired, volunteer and paid, Sunday school and adult-education teachers.
Mr.
Frevola said the most important qualification is a long vacation making settling-in worthwhile, although some swappers offer long weekends.
People sending information who want the listing to appear in the directory that is distributed overseas should postmark the entry form by Jan. 20.
If only a domestic exchange is sought, the deadline is Feb. 15.
At the present pace of submissions, Mr.
Frevola expects to have 700 listings in the year.
Last year the main book had 34 pages with 538 entries: 225 from 32 states, 34 from Canada and 279 from 28 foreign countries, mostly in Europe.
The catalogue, which has telegraphic entries and no pictures, urges subscribers to try early and not give up the first year if they particularly want a house.
Mr.
Frevola, asked about the possibility that people might come home to a damaged house, said that he had not heard of this from any exchangers among his 2,000 to 3,000 subscribers over eight years.
A half-dozen complaints, none serious, had been received, he said.
Like the other publishers, Mr.
Frevola said he got complaints about dirty dishes in the cupboard or car trunks that did not lock.
The worst problem, he said, was created by three young teachers from France who loved their exchange with a Westchester teacher but left behind a $400 phone bill for calls to France.
Mr.
Frevola said his associate in France, Michel Barrere, called the three teachers and the bill was paid.
Typically, the Frevolas' catalogue disclaims "all responsibility for a successful exchange of homes." It also says: "All subscribers agree to indemnity and save harmless Teacher Swap Inc. of and from any and all liability for damages and injury to the person or property of another and against and from all suits and actions and all costs and damages resulting from the exchange of homes."
Those who want to be listed in the catalogue pay $42; those who want to browse but not be listed pay $50.
Teacher Swap, Box 454, Oakdale, L.I. 11769; (516) 244-2845. 7,000 Entries With Pictures
The Vacation Exchange Club, which began in 1960, published its 394-page January 1995 book last month.
Karl Costabel, who bought the enterprise in 1991 from its founders, David and Mary Ostroff, says there are 7,000 entries, half with pictures.
Two-thirds are in Europe; the rest are in North America, Mexico and Hawaii.
A listing, plus the five books for 1995, costs $65; it's $15 more to include a horizontal photo and $20 for a vertical.
Listings for a second home cost $10 more.
Information submitted by Jan. 14 will appear in the February book.
Those subscribing now will get the January book.
The catalogue pictures are not captioned, and unless one knows what sort of house to expect, it is not always clear whether the illustration goes with the entry above or below.
Paul G. Foldes, a lawyer in Arlington, Va., has subscribed since 1987.
That year, Mr.
Foldes said, he swapped his "exec home minutes to DC tourist attactions by car, subway, ae, ac, apl, sa, tv, vcr, rr, bc, bi," meaning an auto exchange is possible and the house is air-conditioned, has all domestic appliances, sauna/Jacuzzi/hot tub, television, videocassette recorder, family room, balcony/deck/porch, and a bicycle.
In return he got a house in upstate New York, which he and his companion and their children used as a base to see Niagara Falls, Toronto and other places.
The next exchange, he said, came in 1992, when he swapped for three weeks with a couple from Hawaii.
He said that he was warned that Hawaii was in such demand he would not get anything for years.
"But we hit it right away," he said in an interview.
"A house on the beach at Waikiki." He is trying again, hoping for something in the San Francisco area.
Vacation Exchange Club, Box 650, Key West, Fla. 33041; (800) 638-3841.
Link to 12 Groups
The Invented City, in business since 1991, publishes in March, June and November.
In 1993 it linked up with 12 other exchange groups under the name International Home Exchange Association.
The proprietor, Glenn London, said the active membership is 2,000, and the November supplement included 700 new listings.
The deadline for getting into the March edition is Feb. 1.
The fee for listing, or subscribing without listing, is $50.
This catalogue, which has no pictures, is easier to read than most: The entries are arrayed across the page instead of appearing in dense columns.
The Invented City, 41 Sutter Street, San Francisco, Calif. 94104; (415) 673-0347.
A Florida Sideline
The new one on the block is Home Exchange Network, a computer bulletin board service being operated as a sideline by a couple in Florida.
This has been running a year.
Because they do not yet have much to sell, the vendors, Daniel J. Rubin and his wife, Linda J. Allen, do not charge for membership.
Any computer user with a modem can dial (407) 869-5956 and follow the instructions to sign on for a six-month free membership.
The listings, one screen each, can be read immediately, and the instructions are easy, even for a bulletin board novice.
Mr.
Rubin said most subscribers requested a form to list a house on the bulletin board rather than entering it directly into the computer.
The entries may duplicate those in books; Mr.
Foldes of Arlington has his house listed on this service, too.
Home Exchange Network, Box 951253, Longwood, Fla. 32791; (407) 862-7211.
The oldest of the groups, Intervac, was founded in 1951 and, with 9,400 subscribers worldwide, says it is the biggest.
For a $65 fee, members receive three catalogues a year, published on Dec. 1, March 1 and May 1.
Another catalogue is put out in June and is available for an extra $19.
There is an $11 charge for including a photo of the property.
Houses in 36 countries are listed, including North and Central America, western Europe, and Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic.
The United States branch is run from San Francisco by Paula Jaffe and Lori Horne, who bought the business eight years ago.
Intervac, Box 590504, San Francisco, Calif. 94159; (415) 435-3497 or (800) 756-4663.


Earthquake Strikes Northern Japan


When Beauty Must Act the Beast
IF IT WAS A NOVEL experience, it was one that Virna Lisi appeared to savor.
At 58, her fine-cut features and smooth skin would still draw paparazzi or make the cafe habitues of the Via Veneto stare, yet when Patrice Chereau came to Rome seeking to cast an Italian actress in "Queen Margot," his epic tale of Reformation France, beauty was an obstacle.
In the film, which opened last month to mixed reviews, Miss Lisi plays the schemingly evil Catherine de' Medici, whose manipulations of the French political scene in the 1570's included the betrayal of her daughter Marguerite de Valois (played by Isabelle Adjani), called Margot, and whose personal indiscretions included murder and incest.


The Pentium: What Next?
The Intel Pentium computer chip, with its tendency to flub certain long-division calculations, has so far caused only infinitesimal havoc to users.
But the following, as-yet-unpublicized incidents seem to indicate that further chaos awaits.
A mathematician at (well, near) U.C.
Berkeley claims that after 200 digits of pi, the Pentium adds "Hi, Mom" before resuming calculations, and that it obstinately refuses to factor the number 13 in any form.
The chip has been said to transfer funds to the Whitewater Development Corporation when used with accounting software.
And certain computer users report that all their E-mail ends up at Arthur C. Clarke's house in Sri Lanka.
Rumor has it that Jackie Collins, the author, maintains that the chip has doggedly replaced the words "Mercedes," "Tourneau" and "Veuve Clicquot" in her latest novel-in-progress with "Dodge Dart," "Timex" and "Mountain Dew." Not only that, but arguably qualified scientists assert that the chip is also to blame for leap-year day (and its absence in the year 2100), the disappointing, not-quite-spherical shape of the earth and that annoying "bent" quality of outer space.
An Intel spokesman had no comment.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CIRCLE OF FIRE  Murder and Betrayal  in the 'Swiss Nanny' Case.
By Joyce Egginton.
Morrow, $22.


AGAINST ANDROGYNY
The logical other side of the coin in Michael Norman's About Men column, "Against Androgyny" (Dec. 11), is that same-sex partners must live in enviable harmony, get through relocation, renovation and reduced financial circumstances with never a raised voice or harsh word.
Which is of course a crock.


Tough Choices: In Vitro Vs. Adoption
ON her 40th birthday, Nancy opened her apartment door and walked into a surprise party.
"I saw the people," she says.
"I burst into tears and ran out. I had no baby. I had no baby on the way. Nothing was going to work out. I had no future. Other people could just get pregnant. But I would never be. I had no future. I was terrified.
Ann, who is Jewish and religious, wants to live a family-centered life.
But she has no children to center on.
"At synagogue, you see families and you're hit with it," she says.
"I get phone calls of pregnant friends and get hit with it. I stopped going to baby showers. I stopped going to bris."


Sports of The Times; The Owners Have Lost Their Strut
THEY weren't cocky anymore.
That was the first impression of the hockey owners when they emerged from their seven-hour scrum yesterday.
They looked so glum, they gave the impression there might actually be a hockey season in a week.
They had been so tough, so sturdy, so unified, back in October when they laughed off the players' offer to go a whole season on good faith.
Now the owners were proposing a six-year contract with no salary cap or payroll tax.
They could have done that in October.


BETTER WORK THAN WELFARE. BUT WHAT IF THERE'S NEITHER?
In its effort to put a very hard working and admirable woman in the best light, DeParle's article ignores a fundamental fact that's necessary for understanding her problem and, by extension, that of our society: Mary Ann Moore has four children born out of wedlock.
No matter how industrious she may be, her children are a long-term impediment to her ability to emerge from her circumstances.
MARTIN I. ZANKEL San Francisco


BRONX UPDATE
*
CO-OP CITY A new entrance off the Hutchinson River Parkway is drawing some traffic from the Bartow Avenue entrance of the giant, two-month-old Kmart that prompted a spate of local opposition.
"The traffic's a little bit better now that the holidays are over," said Iris Baez, who represents tenants and who had fought the Kmart.
VAN CORTLANDT PARK A local historial society argued that the installation of six tennis courts by the Van Cortlandt House Museum would damage the site.
But a state supreme court judge has ruled that the organization waited too long to file a legal challenge.
That clears the way for the courts to be built.
MELROSE More trouble for a small landlord: Marisol Lasanta never signed a lease, owed $8,000 in rent, and was absent from her apartment building at 318 East 151st Street for two months.
The landlord, Mike Persaud, thought he was finally free to evict her.
But a judge stopped him from cleaning out the apartment, and the case is back in court.


Cairo
Cairo, a dusty, throbbing metropolis of 14 million people, is the cultural and artistic center of the Middle East, known to many as Um al Dunya -- Mother of the World.
Its coffeehouses, theaters and Pharaonic sites draw tens of thousands of visitors a year, many of whom go on to Upper Egypt to view the ancient monuments in Luxor and Aswan.
This is the best time of the year to visit Cairo, when the city is cool and areas in the south warm.
Attacks by Muslim militants in the last two years have crippled tourism, which is only beginning to recover this season.
A Government crackdown, which has included the execution of several militant leaders, has improved security in Cairo.
Tourists who visit the Pharaonic sites in Upper Egypt are widely urged to avoid Nile cruises that travel between Cairo and Luxor.
The cruises between Luxor and Aswan are, however, considered secure.
Bus travel through villages and small towns is another mode of transport that is commonly targeted by militants.
One should still fly from Cairo to the southern sites.


High-Ranking Russian Officer Dies in Battle With Separatists
The commander of the Interior Ministry forces in Chechnya, Maj.
Gen.
Viktor Vorobyev, was killed today in Grozny.
He was the highest-ranking Russian officer to die in the month-old fight for the secessionist southern republic.
General Vorobyev died when a mortar shell exploded next to him, in fighting that has grown fiercer by the day.
Two other officers with him were seriously wounded.
The Itar-Tass news agency said the shell came from the direction of the presidential palace, suggesting it was fired by Chechen fighters.


RECORD BRIEF
'Canzonetta' King's Noyse. Harmonia Mundi France HMU 907127; CD.


Mr. Wiederhorn and Miss Meyers
Rebecca Emily Meyers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon Meyers of New Rochelle, N.Y., is to be married today to Michael David Wiederhorn, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Noel Wiederhorn of Wyckoff, N.J.
Rabbi Reuven Fink is to perform the ceremony at the Jewish Community Center of Harrison in Harrison, N.Y.
The bride, 22, is a research analyst at Eastman Radio in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a general partner in the Mosaic Fund, an investment fund in New York.
Her mother, Joan Meyers, is a ceramicist in New Rochelle.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 8, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
17
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
2
THE CHRISTMAS BOX, by Richard Paul Evans. (Steinway, $4.95.) When a young family moves in with an elderly widow, they all learn about the significance of Christmas.
3
34
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
4
30
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
5
7
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young student's mysterious drowning in Victorian England.
6
15
THE VAMPIRE LESTAT, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Eerie carryings-on in a tale ranging from ancient Egypt to the 20th century.
7
10
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery writer's happy family life -- and the madman determined to take his place.
8
6
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $4.99.) The romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
9
19
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's death.
10
15
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of a young boy creates a crisis.
11*
27
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly in North Vietnam.
12*
12
THE QUEEN OF THE DAMNED, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Continuing the author's chronicle of 6,000 years of vampirism.
13
11
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
14
5
MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $6.50.) Archy McNally on the trail of a malefactor at large in a Palm Beach mansion.
15
2
NATURAL CAUSES, by Michael Palmer. (Bantam, $5.99.) The ordeal of a physician after she is accused of being responsible for the deaths of pregnant women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
3
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of "Seinfeld."
2
16
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
3
52
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
4
15
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
5
11
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
6*
11
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
7
4
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
8
50
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
9
583
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
10
9
ARMORED CAV, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $15.) A "guided tour" of an armored cavalry regiment.
11
19
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
12
15
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
13
34
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
14
48
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
15
8
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) Thoughts on 44 years of marriage.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
14
HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
15
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
3
6
THE CURSE OF MADAME "C," by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) A collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
4
4
ENSUCKLOPEDIA, by Sam Johnson, Chris Marcil, et al. (MTV/Pocket, $10.) Cartoon humor featuring the television characters Beavis and Butt-head.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 24, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


A Novice Director Builds On His Beautiful Pictures
Yves Angelo, the director and screenwriter of the widely praised new film "Colonel Chabert," says he wasn't concerned in the least, as a first-time director, about undertaking a big-budget, prestige costume drama with major stars.
It helps, of course, that Mr.
Angelo is one of the pre-eminent cinematographers in France, having shot movies like "Tous les Matins du Monde," "The Accompanist," "Un Coeur en Hiver" and, most recently, the tepidly received but magnificently photographed "Germinal."
"Colonel Chabert," set in 1817 and based on the novel by Balzac, tells the tale of a soldier (played by Gerard Depardieu), assumed dead in the Battle of Eylau 10 years earlier, who returns to reclaim his fortune and his wife (Fanny Ardant), who has remarried.
Since its opening in France in September, 1.7 million people have seen the film, making it one of the biggest hits of 1994.
Janet Maslin of The New York Times, reviewing the movie when it was released in the United States last month, called it "quietly intense" and said it marked "a thoughtful directorial debut" for Mr.
Angelo.


Once Upon a Dime . . .
Let's say your parenting skills are a bit sloppy.
You're too tired to read your child a bedtime story, perhaps, or you're such a troglodyte that you haven't yet set up your youngster on the Internet.
Or maybe you're just lazy.
In any case, you may be happy to fork over 85 cents a minute (or $3.50 for 10 minutes) for the hyperbolically named Let's Imagine!!!, a storytelling-by-phone service.


Winter Bonbons
A brussels sprout tastes even more pungent than its cousin, the cabbage.
It can also be as depressing.
The stench of sulfur bears within it poverty and privation.
Those who have had to endure it understand sustenance in the meanest sense of the word.
To embrace the flavor of a brussels sprout is to embrace the bitter darkness of a winter night.
No other boiled vegetable is quite as sharp or as biting, and there is much to be said for treating it with a taste of its own medicine.


Blanche G. Etra, 79; Aided Yeshiva U.
Blanche G. Etra, a lawyer and philanthropist who played an important role in the development of Yeshiva University, died on Wednesday in her home in Manhattan.
She was 79.
The cause was leukemia, said a son, Donald, of Los Angeles.


Did Tolstoy Check the Train Schedule?
To the Editor:
Paul Rabinow, a professor of anthropology, reviewing Carl Djer assi's "Bourbaki Gambit" (Nov. 20), a fictional account of the discovery of the polymerase chain reaction, complains that the actual development of this technique didn't at all happen as the novelist pretends.
A work of fiction is faulted, in short, precisely because it is fictional.


Answers
1. Mesopotamia, around 2500 B. C.
2. Mexico, 1535.
3. Jamestown, Va., 1608.
4.
Sand -- 72 percent of the batch.
To be precise, silica sand, which is sand made of tiny particles of quartz.
The other two ingredients of soda-lime glass, the type of glass that is most commonly in use, are sodium oxide taken from soda ash (13 percent ) and calcium oxide from limestone (11 percent).
5.  Lead oxide is substituted for calcium oxide to make soda-lead, or crystal glass.
6.
Volcanic eruptions, which produce obsidian glass -- sand struck by lightning -- which, in turn, produces long slender tubes called fulgurites.
7.
A metallic oxide.
For instance, cobalt oxide produces an intense blue.
Gold oxide can produce a deep red, depending on furnace conditions.
8. Lead.
9. 1(b), 2(c), 3(a).
10.  1(c), 2(b) 3(a).
11.
It is inexpensive, machine-pressed, usually translucent glassware, mass-produced in the United States from the late 1920's to the 1940's, often used as giveaways to induce customers to buy goods or movie tickets.
12.  1(c), 2(a), 3(b).
13.
Cut-glass objects made of crystal glass are usually hand or machine cut to a design by abrasion and polishing of the glass.
"Poor man's cut glass" is made of cheap soda-lime glass pressed into a mold with elaborate designs to give a lacy or cut-glass effect.
14.  All of the above are used as backings for mirrors.


THE LAST VICTIM
It was predictable that when you finally deigned to notice the "angry" white male voter, the article would be written by a liberal woman ("The Last Victim," by Susan Estrich, Dec. 18).
I especially enjoyed the smug assumption that we might, eventually and for the sake of the Republic, "get smart." JOHN K. LUNDE Orono, Me.


Players Get Anti-Union Letter From The Owners
Taking their case directly to the players, the owners' negotiators have written a letter to them that questions the union's efforts and position in negotiations every step of the way since the owners made their first salary-cap proposal last June.
Union officials branded the letter "Union Busting 101."
The letter to "All Major League Players," dated Jan. 5, was signed by John Harrington of the Boston Red Sox, the chairman of the negotiating committee, and listed the other five members of the committee.
In the letter, the owners say they want "to communicate to you our view of the negotiations." However, the letter also seems aimed at trying to undermine the players' confidence in the union's position.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
ANOTHER 'FANTASTICKS'
In May 1960 Jerry Orbach opened in "The Fantasticks" in a little theater far off Broadway on Sullivan Street in Greenwich Village.
Since then Mr.
Orbach has gone on to fame and fortune on Broadway, in movies and television, and the musical by Tom Jones and Harvey Schmidt has been true to its name, generating 472 productions in 67 countries and just about every one of the 50 United States.


Clemens Wants to Pitch in the Olympics
If the strike ends his major league career prematurely, ROGER CLEMENS might not be through with baseball; he wants to play for the United States Olympic team.
Clemens told The Providence (R.I.) Journal-Bulletin that the uncertainty of his future with the Boston Red Sox has him considering amateur competition, although Olympic rules bar professional baseball players.


Jenny Kanganis, Guy N. Minoli
Dr.
Jenny Ann Kanganis, a daughter of Effie Michas Kanganis of Bronxville, N.Y., and George L. Kanganis of Yonkers, was married yesterday to Dr.
Guy Nicholas Minoli, a son of Mario and Marie Minoli of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert G. Stephanopoulos officiated at the Greek Orthodox Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity in New York.
The Rev.
Patrick V. McNamara, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College and received a D.D.S. degree from Columbia University.
She and the bridegroom share a general dental practice in New York and Bronxville.
She is also a clinical instructor at Columbia University School of Dental and Oral Surgery.
Her father is the owner of Valentine Flower and Plant Purveyors, a wholesaler in Yonkers.


Artists Find Isolation Ends in Hastings
AT an hour when residents of the river towns who work in Manhattan were already at their offices, about 30 members of the Rivertown Artists Group left their studios and home offices to gather upstairs in the Municipal Building here to share coffee, bagels, gossip and their latest projects.
"When you're an artist, it's a very isolating job," said Maxeen Smart, a Hastings resident who runs a home-based advertising-design studio and creates collages as well.
"Sometimes this group is your only contact with other artists."


Residents in Queens Enclave Want Gates Against Infidels
Gates of varying shapes have long been used to create sanctuaries against invaders.
Gates survive today in the doorman high-rises in Manhattan, or in the freeways that seclude the rich from the poor in Los Angeles.
But following the recent examples of other communities across the country, some residents of Cedar Grove, a middle-class neighborhood in Queens, have proposed walling off their neighborhood by erecting gates and employing security guards.
If the Cedar Grove Civic Homeowners Association has its way, residents will use keys to open gates and visitors will be announced before gaining entry.


Allison R. Armour And Bradley Garb
Allison Rees Armour, a daughter of Karen and James Armour of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday at the Waveny House in New Canaan, Conn., to Bradley Philip Garb, a son of Sheila and Andrew Garb of Pacific Palisades, Calif.
The Rev.
Dr.
James A. Kowalski, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony, and Rabbi Roy A. Rosenberg participated in it.
Mrs.
Armour-Garb, 27, is studying for a law degree at New York University.
She graduated magna cum laude from Radcliffe College and received a master's degree in public affairs from Princeton University.
Her father is a sales representative at the Century Letter Company in New York.
Her mother is the manager of public information at Asea Brown Boveri in Norwalk, Conn., the American unit of the international engineering company.


Where Projects Prevail, Not the Clock
IN light of the current state of the job market in publishing, a publisher who says his biggest problem is finding good editors and writers is an oddity.
But Seth Godin, head of Seth Godin Productions in Dobbs Ferry, still interviews 20 to 30 applicants before he hires a new employee.
"We ask that people who work here take personal responsibility and grow into positions of authority," he said.
"Maybe that job description scares people away. However, the people we do hire -- who are creative self-starters -- love it here. We work on more than 30 projects simultaneously, and everyone is involved with at least three projects at a time. Everyone manages himself or herself. There is virtually no hierarchy. We work flex time with the project, not the time clock, being the key."


A.&amp; S. Layoffs Prompt Worry in Brooklyn
One by one, the great Brooklyn institutions seem to evaporate -- the Dodgers, the breweries, Lundy's Restaurant -- but many said the latest loss seemed particularly cruel.
A.&amp; S., the department store chain, will no longer be based in Brooklyn, although it will keep its flagship store there, the chain's new owners said on Friday.
Neighboring businesses in downtown Brooklyn said they would be hurt by the loss of 900 jobs, most of them white collar.


The 'Zipper' Is Speaking a New Language
Has "the zipper" lost its zip?
Since 1928, news headlines flashed in a ticker-tape beat around the 1 Times Square building at Broadway and 42d Street.
Operators included New York Newsday, Life magazine and The New York Times.
But since Jan. 1 -- when the British media conglomerate Pearson began renting the zipper -- the headlines frequently lapse into block-long gaps.
And the copy is jarring for those accustomed to tabloid-style local news updates.
There are public-service announcements and ads for Pearson's Penguin Books and its Madame Tussaud's Wax Museum.
And there are celebrity greetings from the likes of President Clinton, Jay Leno, outgoing and incoming Governors Cuomo and Pataki and the playwright Wendy Wasserstein ("Looking for a date").


We Still Need C.I.A., but It Needs to Change; Some Kind of Analysis
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 29 front-page news analysis on the Central Intelligence Agency's failings omits one that had tremendous repercussions on the United States and on the world.


Ferguson's Insanity Defense Angers Victims and His Lawyers
FACED with multiple murder charges for the shooting and killing spree on the 5:33 Long Island Rail Road train from Penn Station to Hicksville, Colin Ferguson has ignored everyone's advice but his own and has chosen to represent himself.
Exercising his constitutional rights Mr.
Ferguson continues to frustrate and anger the victims of the terror aboard the train a year ago when, witnesses say, Mr.
Ferguson shot and killed six people and wounded 19 others.


PBS's Wheel of Fortune
NEWT GINGRICH WANTS TO "ZERO out" the taxpayers' contribution to public broadcasting, and sometimes so do I. The impulse to strangle last struck me during the bonus round of a new quiz show, "Think Twice" -- yes, a PBS quiz show.
Two contestants, already bathed in gifts from the Microsoft Corporation, failed to win the jackpot, a generously advertised $2,500 investment in a Keystone mutual fund.
No Vanna White appeared, but along with the commercials came an ebullient M.C. and players childishly applauding their own right answers, just like "Wheel of Fortune." It's not only Big Bird and "Masterpiece Theater" for whom the Gingrich tolls.
But then it's not the quality of public broadcasting that bugs the Speaker.
If it were, he'd offer more, not less, than the $300 million the Treasury contributes to public television's $1.5 billion annual expenses.
Gingrich objects in the name of principle: he contends that PBS is superfluous because cable and satellite can now serve every taste for which there is a "market." They could but they don't.


Streetscapes/59 South Elliott Place; The Tale Lurking Behind a Fort Greene Facade
AT the New York City auction last March of, for the most part, tax-foreclosed properties, Roger P. Lang, director of community programs and services at the New York Landmarks Conservancy, cautioned the successful bidder on the three-story 59 South Elliott Place.
"I asked him if he knew the building was just a facade," Mr.
Lang recalled.
"And he said, 'Oh, yeah, you mean no plumbing.' And I said, 'No sir -- I mean no floors.' "


Chargers Are Facing Another Storm
In San Diego's long and unsuccessful pursuit of a spot in the Super Bowl, the explanations for its demise have included natural forces.
There was the dangerous subzero cold in Cincinnati for the American Conference championship game in 1982.
There were the storms here in 1993 that complicated preparations for a game played across the country, in more rain, when the Chargers were shut out at Miami.
There were two forces for the Chargers to cope with this week: the intense storms that created flooding throughout Southern California and the ability of Dolphins quarterback Dan Marino.


Wards I. Bridge: History of Problems
Embattled tenants of the East River Houses live in a brick fortress of apartment towers protected from intruders in the medieval tradition.
A footbridge linking the housing project in Manhattan and Wards Island, the site of a state mental hospital, is newly barred and locked.
The midsection is lifted high, to prevent patients from crossing the river.


Government Isn't in the Mercy Business
To the Editor:
At first I thought "The Quality of Mercy in 1995," your Jan. 1 lead editorial, was a parody.
It was so full of left-wing, redistributionist cliches and code words that it seemed like a reprint of something out of the 1960's.
But no, I thought, this is The New York Times.
They take themselves much too seriously for that.
They really mean it!


Sandra C. Grant, Randall Motland
Sandra Carr Grant, a producer of educational films, was married yesterday to Randall Kent Motland, the president of Securities Associates Inc., investment managers in Armonk, N.Y.
The Rev.
Ralph E. Ahlberg, a Congregational minister, officiated at the Round Hill Community Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Motland, 51, graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
She is a daughter of Curran Earle Carr of Essex, Conn., and the late Claiborn M. Carr Jr.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Jesuits Begin Conference In Rome
The Jesuits opened their 34th General Congregation this week, enjoying a relaxation of tensions with the Vatican but grappling with the question of how to pursue the order's mission of faith and social justice with a declining number of priests.
The 223 delegates convened by the order, the Society of Jesus, began their nearly three months of meetings on Thursday with a welcome by Pope John Paul II, who exhorted them to reaffirm "the primacy of spirituality and prayer" in their lives and embrace a "new evangelization on the brink of the third Christian millennium." The Pope, who has been ailing lately, welcomed each Jesuit personally.


Remembering The Advertising Of Super Bowls
THE Museum of Broadcasting is presenting "The Super Bowl: Super Showcase for Commercials," an hourlong collection of commercials that have been shown during Super Bowls since 1967.
The video is narrated by the sports anchor Bob Costas from a script written by David Bushman, a curator at the museum.
Mr.
Bushman says all 50 ads used are instantly recognizable and have "tag lines that have become part of the lexicon."


China
To the Editor: Congratulations on the photo you chose and reproduced for the cover of the Travel Section on Dec. 4.
The man, the wall, his shadow -- a stunning image and an excellent use of your medium.
Thank you so much -- the vision lingers and my bags are packed.
TOMMY TUNE  New York, N.Y.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Fair Lawn; A Jersey Suburb with Some Surprises
WEDGED between the Passaic and the Saddle Rivers, the 5.4-square- mile Borough of Fair Lawn is a tightly packed bedroom community of small, well-maintained, sturdy houses.
Although 80 percent of the population works outside the borough, according to the 1990 census, residents speak of a feeling of community that caters to individual needs.


Clinton Invites Retired Brass To Give Views
With Republicans taking aim at many of the Administration's national security policies, President Clinton has invited more than 20 retired admirals and generals to the White House on Thursday to seek their advice on military matters.
Many of the former military leaders publicly endorsed Mr.
Clinton in the 1992 Presidential campaign, offering a counterattack to President George Bush's criticism that Mr.
Clinton avoided the draft during the Vietnam War.


Three Defenders and Seven Challengers in a Marathon at Sea
In less than 90 days, six America's Cup yachting syndicates will probably be packing their bags for home.
Each one will have spent as much as $30 million to win a boat race that ends up as a paper chase in a sea of debits and credits.
But that's what the America's Cup is all about.
The 1995 elimination races are a gantlet by any sporting standard.
The Citizen Cup defender trials are scheduled to begin on Thursday in San Diego; the Louis Vuitton Cup challenger trials begin on Saturday.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
IRVING BERLIN  A Daughter's Memoir. By Mary Ellin Barrett. Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.


For Root Vegetables, Add Imagination
THE time has come and gone to abandon ripe tomatoes, delicate zucchini and fresh garden peas.
Autumn is over, and the root vegetable season has set in.
But sturdy vegetables like carrots, parsnips, beets and celeriac can sustain many a menu, especially if some imagination is used in the preparation.
Among the possibilities are to cook these vegetables until tender, then puree them for soup or marinate them for a salad.
They can be grated raw, then tossed with a dressing for another kind of salad.
Roasting them makes them suitable to accompany a main dish platter.


THE LAST VICTIM
What seems to bother Estrich more than anything else is that the left's favorite demon -- the white male -- has stopped playing doormat for all of society's ills.
Perhaps what scares her is that common sense will once again replace the social scientist (on a Government grant) in determining what's right or wrong with society.
JOE LOMBARDO Southampton, L.I.


Don't Go South, Young Man
IN THE TV SERIES "MURDER, SHE Wrote," the character played by Angela Lansbury was accosted by a police lieutenant about a suspect she was helping: "When I sent some guys over to your place to pick him up," the cop complained, "he'd gone south."
In the opposite direction, Adam Sandler wrote in Variety that the recent video release of "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" had sold more than 17 million copies and "generated north of $300 million in retail sales."


Clamoring for a Little Quiet
Screaming car alarms, honking cabbies and raucous drunks are facts of city life.
But residents of 165 Christopher Street say one of their neighbors -- BT Summit Office Products -- has taken urban cacophony to intolerable extremes.
"I feel like I'm living in an airplane hangar," said Anne Gamble, 43.
"I wake up, on average, four or five times a night. My husband is a nursing student, and he can't concentrate. I can't open the windows in my kids' bedroom."


Britain Fills New Year With Many Arts Events
A yearlong Festival of Arts and Culture, with hundreds of special events, will be staged in Britain this year, sponsored by national and regional tourist organizations.
Among the scheduled events is a concert at Westminster Abbey on March 5 inspired by the tercentenary of the death of the 17th-century composer Henry Purcell.
The New London Consort, conducted by Martin Neary, will perform "Music From the Coronation of William and Mary," "Ode on the Queen's Birthday" and "Music Composed on the Death of Queen Mary." Another anniversary, the bicentenary of the death of the potter Josiah Wedgwood, will be celebrated in several exhibitions, including "The Genius of Wedgwood" at the Victoria &amp; Albert Museum from June 8 to Sept. 17.


Those Marches Are With It and Homespun Too
Richie Rich  Macaulay Culkin Directed by Donald Petrie PG 90 minutes


Texas Senator Gets Nod in Louisiana Republican Straw Poll
Senator Phil Gramm of Texas overwhelmingly won a Presidential popularity poll today among Louisiana Republicans that may be more a testament to his letter-writing abilities than a reflection of his prospects for the White House in 1996.
Mr.
Gramm received 902 votes to 150 for his nearest rival, Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative commentator.
None of the others had more than 100 votes.


2 Knicks Start Shooting Like Shooting Guards
The Knicks have played better recently, and so have their shooting guards.
The two are hardly a coincidence.
For much of the season, the Knicks have been concerned about both John Starks and Hubert Davis, two players whom they count on heavily for perimeter offense.
Starks has struggled through a seasonlong shooting slump.
And Davis has been exploited defensively, unable to handle bigger guards who have overpowered him.


Dumplings, Ribs, Duck and Dragons
CANTON * (212) 226-4441; 45 Division Street, near Bowery; $$; no credit cards.


Those Marches Are With It and Homespun Too
Street Fighter  Jean-Claude Van Damme, Raul Julia Directed by Steven E. de Souza PG-13 101 minutes


Duke's Coach Hospitalized With Bad Back
Duke Coach MIKE KRZYZEWSKI, hospitalized with back problems, was expected to miss last night's game between the No. 11 Blue Devils and No. 24 Georgia Tech in Atlanta.


Choices, Choices. It's Catalogue Season.
WHAT'S new is the cargo for the bandwagon ridden by nurseries and seed merchants at this time of year.
It's not just the plethora of catalogues arriving in the mail but also the multiplicity of offerings in each.
It's often difficult to decide whether to try something new.
Is the newcomer better than an old favorite?
Has the newcomer gone through proper evaluation and testing or is it just a commercial offering to generate publicity?
In other words, does the newcomer measure up?


Israel and Arabs Quarrel Over 3 Unusual Hostages
For nearly three months Israel has held two Islamic radicals as hostages, saying they will be released only when leaders of their Gaza-based Hamas group disclose the whereabouts of a long-missing Israeli soldier.
It is an unusual situation by any standard.
But it includes an element also making it a ghoulish affair for many Israelis and Palestinians: All the key figures, the radicals and the missing soldier, are dead.


How the 49ers Beat the Slary Cap
CARMEN POLICY GIVES SO MANY interviews from his car phone, a lot of football writers think his voice naturally has static in it.
But while Policy, the president of the San Francisco 49ers, sometimes sounds fuzzy, his message comes through loud and clear: the salary cap that was supposed to insure more even competition in the National Football League has been transformed in his wily hands into an instrument of domination.
When the N.F.L. salary cap went into effect last year, most football observers thought the 49ers, who had the largest payroll in the N.F.L., would have to dismantle the team to get down to the spending limit.
Instead, they compiled the best record in the league, gained home field advantage throughout the playoffs and are the odds-on favorite to win their fifth Super Bowl in the last 14 years.
They also have a payroll that's more than $20 million lighter than last year's $58.6 million.


Choices, Choices. It's Catalogue Season.
WHAT'S new is the cargo for the bandwagon ridden by nurseries and seed merchants at this time of year.
It's not just the plethora of catalogues arriving in the mail but also the multiplicity of offerings in each.
It's often difficult to decide whether to try something new.
Is the newcomer better than an old favorite?
Has the newcomer gone through proper evaluation and testing or is it just a commercial offering to generate publicity?
In other words, does the newcomer measure up?


Working Beside Leon Hirsch
To the Editor:
"Hanging In There With Leon Hirsch" (Dec. 18) is for the most part an accurate assessment of the history of Mr.
Hirsch and United States Surgical.
Mr.
Hirsch's life reads like the American dream: a boy of humble origins works hard battling to the top of Corporate America.
Mr.
Hirsch is a skilled entrepreneur, a salesman's salesman and perhaps a great businessman.


Lax on Prostitution? Not on the Northern Edge
Perched atop the Bronx, Wakefield seems far removed from the urban ills and troubled streets of the South Bronx.
But the borough's northernmost neighborhood has its own problems: its border with suburban Westchester County.
In the last decade, the intersection of East 241st Street and White Plains Road has become a notorious magnet for prostitutes, their clients and drug dealers.
Prostitution laws do not vary across county lines, but by walking a few blocks south into the Bronx, prostitutes enter an area where the court system is so crowded that often, instead of Westchester's 45-to-90-day terms, they serve only a two-day jail stay.
And for the clients, until recently, Wakefield has meant picking up prostitutes without having to look over their shoulders.


Fresh Starters
MANDARIN COURT


Strickland's Personal Best Keeps Bullets on the Skids
Trail Blazers 114, Bullets 105
Rod Strickland scored a career-high 31 points and added 11 assists last night as Portland handed Washington a seventh straight loss, 114-105, in Landover, Md.


China Questions
To the Sports Editor:
It seems that the Chinese swimming program will be questioned.
For the last two years, the program has risen out of nowhere and taken the swimming world by surprise.
It is to be hoped that the suspension of Lu Bin will start a domino effect of tests for more Chinese swimmers even though their coaches insist that their results come from hard work.


Post-Vacation Concerts Abound
WITH vacations over, university and conservatory musicians start gearing up for a full schedule of concert activity.
Yale University, has half a dozen major events scheduled this week and next starting with Sherrill Milnes, who gives a master class at Yale then stays on for an 8 P.M.
Thursday recital in Sprague Memorial Hall.
The Metropolitan Opera baritone's program with his longtime pianist-partner, Jon Spong, lists arias and songs by more than a dozen composers, representing four centuries and six countries.
Yale's Faculty Artists Series resumes at Sprague Hall at 8 P.M.
Saturday.
The flutist Ransom Wilson and pianist Sara Laimon team up for works of Haydn, Schubert, Dutilleux, Pierne, John La Montaine and Ezra Laderman.
The series continues on Jan. 18 when Sidney Harth and Ward Davenny explore what they call "neglected works for violin and piano," including sonatas of Roussel, Honegger, Arthur Sheperd and John Ireland.
In between those events, at 8 P.M. next Sunday in Sprague, New Music New Haven plunges into an evening of music for "computers and other instruments" by Roberto Morales, Bruce Pennycook, Igor Popovic and Jonathan Berger.


The 49ers No Longer Eating Quiche
Hit Steve Young cheaply and you must answer to 48 different 49ers.
Shaun Gayle crossed that line today, just after Young crossed the Chicago Bear goal line, and the result was an uncivilized scrum in the end zone.
The San Francisco 49ers are hyping themselves as new and improved brutes, and the evidence this afternoon was that eight of Young's bodyguards piled on top of Gayle.
The Chicago safety, who once wrote a children's book called "The Little Quarterback," messed with the wrong quarterback at Candlestick Park, and the first 49er to put up his dukes was a shocker: Jerry Rice.


A Contract for Our Royalist Congress
To the Editor:
Republicans in Congress have put forward a "Contract With America." I propose a three-item "contract" that all members of Congress, both houses, should adopt.


A Hero Ain't Nothin' but a Sandwich
Further proof that New Yorkers are a species unto themselves: They'll swear at each other, threaten each other, knock each other down over a bus seat.
But then, when tragedy strikes, they blindly leap to the rescue -- and then won't take any credit.
Humility reigns (with the occasional exception, of course).
"I don't consider myself a hero." -- Denfield Otto, an off-duty transit officer, after rescuing two subway passengers from a firebomb explosion. (The New York Times, Dec. 22)


Blacks Say Life In Los Angeles Is Losing Allure
For perhaps half a century, Los Angeles has lured blacks, along with hundreds of thousands of other immigrants from the South and Midwest, with its promise of jobs and the luxury of space.
But in the last decade, fed up with high housing costs, drugs and crime, blacks have been fleeing Los Angeles, not only to outlying areas, but also to other states, particularly in the South.
In fact, demographers and geographers say, middle-class and working-class blacks, born in California, are on the verge of disappearing altogether from some neighborhoods.


Worried


Business Diary: January 1-6
THE ECONOMY The Economy's Dead.
Long Live the Economy.
Two of last week's big stories seemed strikingly at odds.
Republicans stormed Capitol Hill with the glee of schoolchildren entering a long-padlocked playground, carried to glory on the shoulders of a failed economy.
But hard on the heels of that triumphant return came news that that same economy finished the year on a mighty note: the unemployment rate fell to 5.4 percent, and more than a quarter million jobs were added in December.
On top of that, there was a huge upward revision that made November's rise in payrolls the biggest in seven years.
All this brought 1994's payroll expansion to 3.5 million, over a million more than in 1993 and the strongest in a decade.
Now it might be logical to expect that such news, a clear inflation threat, would spook the markets.
But in the bond market, rates actually fell a bit, and stock prices rose strongly.


Advertising in America
To the Editor:
Upon reading Joseph Nocera's review of Randall Rothenberg's "Where the Suckers Moon" and Jackson Lears's "Fables of Abundance," I was distressed by the opinions expressed by the authors, and Mr.
Nocera's concurrence with them.


Switzer Prefers The Pro Scene
As Barry Switzer tells it, he enjoyed his 27 years as a college coach.
But when he came to the pros, he learned what coaching enjoyment really was.
Now he is a coach, not a baby sitter or surrogate father or problem-fixer.
In an interview before his Dallas Cowboys took on the Green Bay Packers in a second-round National Football League playoff game Sunday, Switzer talked of the world-without-end life of a college coach.


Indian Voices Tell A Historic Tale Of Death, of Life
ONE ACTOR STRUCK A MATCH and held it to a piece of dry sage.
Another leaned forward to take the smoke and pray.
The burning of sage and sweet grass before rehearsals is rarely among a theater's rituals.
But nothing about "Black Elk Speaks" has been conventional, from the blessing of the stage in Denver before 25 American and Canadian Indian actors set foot upon it, to standing ovations every night.


Selling What Nureyev Would Never Give Away
RUDOLF NUREYEV, THE ballet star who was legendary even before he died of AIDS in Paris two years ago at the age of 54, so valued his old dance slippers that he never gave any away, wore them until they collapsed and always traveled with a sack of his scruffiest pairs, just in case.
Yet, amazingly, examples of these precious mementos -- some torn at the toes and streaked with sweat -- may bring only modest prices at auction this week.
When the much-publicized collection of the Russian dancer's artworks, costumes and memorabilia is finally auctioned, after a year's delay, at Christie's in New York on Thursday and Friday, fans for the first time will be able to bid on 47 pairs of his ballet slippers in 17 lots.
The estimated prices range from a low of $40 for one pair of pink slippers to a high of $300 for four unworn pairs stamped with his name.


Student Curators Have Perspective
At Syracuse University, Kheli Willetts and Redell Hearn made their graduate program in museum studies something special.
They have been curators of art shows for museums and other public spaces almost since they entered Syracuse two years ago.
Both are now doctoral candidates and planning to make a careers as curators of museum exhibitions.


Elders Challenged on Return to University Job
Joycelyn Elders, forced out as Surgeon General by President Clinton almost a month ago, has survived an early challenge in returning to her old job as a professor at the University of Arkansas Medical School.
Members of the General Assembly's budget committee here on Thursday tried to block her return, which has drawn fire from conservatives and groups from the Christian right.


A Firm Hand In the Schools
FOR three years, the young secretary squeezed law school into the breakfast hour.
Then, she squeezed the classes into her lunch hour.
After that, after she had married and gotten a loan from an in-law, she quit work and squeezed school into as many hours of the day as she could.
None of it was easy, but all of it beat the days when Norma Paulus could only stare out the window of the Oregon Supreme Court building, yearning to be at the Willamette Law School across the street.
By 1962, five years after starting her studies, she had her degree.


Off the Grid
A warming morning late in October, and James (Bo) Gritz stands on a mountaintop in north-central Idaho, addressing the faggot press.
His words.
Still, look at them: a Brit with blond hair fringing his round head -- The London Times calling; a reporter from People with long hair and a goatee; the neo-beat novelist William T. Vollmann, on assignment from Spin magazine and accompanied by a friend, a birdlike woman with bright red lipstick and purple gloves.
And there are three or four others, including a photographer from this magazine who has slipped his earring into his pocket to get under the faggot radar.
Gritz (rhymes with "bites") is long-winded.


Quick Reply To Parents on Scholarships
It is nice to be accepted, but even nicer to know you can afford to be accepted.
When Pennsylvania State University accepts students, it gives them a rapid indication of how much financial aid they'll be offered.
All they have to do is answer six questions on a touch-tone phone connected to the school's computer.


Infant Falls to His Death During Panic in an Apartment Fire
Dense smoke from a small hallway fire led to panic and tragedy in a Brooklyn apartment building yesterday as two women, one cradling a baby, rushed to sixth floor windows to dangle and scream.
The baby fell to his death, and his 67-year-old grandmother was seriously hurt when she slipped from a firefighter's grasp and fell two stories while being lowered into a courtyard.
It was only a minor blaze in an old couch that broke out about 2:10 P.M. in a third floor hall of the building at 474 Brooklyn Avenue, near Sterling Street in Crown Heights, fire officials said.
Flames destroyed the couch and damaged the walls but were quickly put out by firefighters using a fire extinguisher.
A man in his twenties, whose name was not released, was arrested last night in connection with the fire by officers from the 71st Precinct.


Mexico Will Prosper, but Not Very Soon
IN 1863, the American Civil War wasn't the only battle going on in this hemisphere.
A French expeditionary force reached Mexico City, having invaded in anger over Mexico's failure to pay its bills.
The history of foreign investment in Latin America is a history of great expectations, fleeting profits, dashed hopes and defaults.
There is potential aplenty, but it seems that every generation has its own disaster.
As far back as 1825, the ramifications of a Latin American investment boom gone bust almost brought down the Bank of England.


Q. &amp; A.
A Diplomat Sublets a Co-op Unit Q I recently sublet my co-op apartment to a foreign diplomatic mission accredited to the United Nations.
The co-op board insisted that the sublease agreement contain a clause stating that the subtenant "waives its immunity from jurisdiction, attachment and execution in any matter which comes between the parties under or because of this sublease." Is this clause enforceable? . . .
Perry Meyers, Bronx.


America's Cup
Three U.S. defenders and seven international challengers begin a marathon at sea when the 1995 races begin on Thursday off San Diego.
John Bertrand of Australia and Dennis Conner of the U.S. lead an impressive lineup of sailors.


Elizabeth Poynor, W. S. Tichenor
Dr.
Elizabeth Ann Poynor, a fellow in gynecological oncology at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Wellington Shelton Tichenor, an allergist in New York and Water Mill, L.I.
The Rev.
Gary P. Fertig performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York.
Dr.
Poynor, 32, graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and received her medical degree from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Elizabeth and Paul Poynor of Ponca City, Okla.
Her father retired as a research consultant in chemical engineering from Conoco, an oil company in Ponca City, where her mother is the director of technical support and research.


In Modern Polish Politics, It's Still Solidarity vs. the Communists
President Lech Walesa surprised few Poles this week when he announced that he would refuse to pay higher income taxes and encouraged voters to follow his example.
There was not much astonishment, either, when in retaliation for Mr.
Walesa's move, Prime Minister Waldemar Pawlak nominated this week an ex-Communist who was once a foe of NATO for the post of Defense Minister, a nomination he knew Mr.
Walesa would reject.


Worthy Successor to an Accomplished Pub
PETER'S INN lives.
Legions of Long Islanders were disappointed when the popular dining spot in East Northport closed in the fall.
But by Thanksgiving Day their sadness turned to jubilation with the opening of the Crossroads Cafe.
The two restaurants share more than location.
Robert Haddow, an earlier chef at Peter's Inn, is co-owner of the new enterprise.
Managing the front of the house is his partner, James Olsen, a sophisticated Manhattan restaurateur.


China
To the Editor: Nicholas D. Kristof brought back memories of the trip my wife and I made to China in 1988.
He mentioned a few places we wish we had visited, but he also left out one of our favorites: Suzhou, city of canals, arched bridges and the wonderfully idiosyncratic scholars' gardens.
Of course it is impossible to mention every place worth visiting in a travel article, but it would be a shame for anyone on Mr.
Kristof's general itinerary to miss this gem, which is only an hour and a quarter by train from Shanghai.
JEFFREY HARRISON  East Woodstock, Conn.


Jan. 1-7; A Yankee Hears Cheers Again
The roar of the crowd began to recede for Gil McDougald, the standout infielder of the great Yankee teams of the 1950's, in the summer of 1955.
He was struck just above the right ear by a line drive while standing near second base during batting practice.
The blow eventually impaired the hearing organs in both ears, and he gradually went deaf.
Mr.
McDougald retired from baseball in 1960 and went into the building maintenance business.
But the hearing loss forced him to retire from that.


Not Much Fanfare, Yet Notable
ALTHOUGH some restaurants open with blizzards of news releases, promotions and parties, most do not.
Rather, they open quietly, receiving relatively little notice, except, perhaps, from nearby residents who happen to pass by frequently.
In the last half of the year, Long Island saw many restaurants open without fanfare, a pattern that seems to be continuing.


Wall Street; Raider Sees the Other Side of a Raid
IS this the T. Boone Pickens Jr. clearance sale?
Or is Mr.
Pickens defending his Mesa Inc. against the very sort of takeover tactics that he developed years ago?
Perhaps a little of both.
Dennis R. Washington, a Montana investor advised by Mesa's former president, David Batchelder, has accumulated nearly 5 percent of Mesa's shares and has filed to buy as much as 49.9 percent.
Meanwhile, Mr.
Pickens has promised to sell off a portion of Mesa's prime natural gas fields to pay off debt and pump up his stock's value.


Jan. 1-7; The Cardinal Goes On Line
John Cardinal O'Connor preached the virtues of faith to a virtual congregation last week when he went on line with a national audience.
The Cardinal, Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York, addressed questions ranging from his impressions of Pope John Paul II and suggestions for prayer to his views on the recent abortion clinic killings and church acceptance of gay people.
Nearly 100 people took part in the computer chat session sponsored by the Prodigy computer information service.
Though Cardinal O'Connor admitted he had not kept up with changes in computer technology, he thought such electronic forums were a good way to reach people who never go to church.


Handrail Help
To the Editor: I had the great pleasure of taking a Harvard-Yale-Museum of Natural History family cruise to Greece and Turkey in July, accompanied by a 12-year-old grandson.
Experience is teaching me that handrails are often lacking on steep steps in museums, even new ones, or hotels.


Rapist Attacking Women in Queens and Robbing Them at A.T.M.'s
He forces women into their cars at gunpoint, drives them to automated teller machines where he makes them withdraw cash and hand it over and then takes his victims to a motel where he sexually assaults them, the police said.
He has done it four times since September, most recently on Friday.
"He struck again last night," Sgt.
Gary Politi of the Queens Special Victims Squad said yesterday.
In three instances, the sergeant said, the women were kidnapped in Fresh Meadows, Queens; in the fourth, from nearby Jamaica.


Dinosaurs and Destiny
To the Editor:
In a Jan. 3 Science Times article you report on a theory that dinosaurs died out after an asteroid hit sulfur-rich rock in what is now the Yucatan Peninsula of Mexico, producing a haze of sulfuric acid that blocked sunlight for decades.
Had the rock not been rich in sulfur, you say, "the dinosaurs might well have survived the impact, thereby changing the course of evolution."


For Hall, 15 Tries, 15 Losses In Syracuse
There is something about the Carrier Dome, even when it's not as rowdy and raucous as it can be -- especially if you play for Seton Hall.
The Hall is the only Big East school that has never won against Syracuse here except for Miami, which has been in the league for four years and has yet to win anywhere on the road.
Tonight, in front of a strangely subdued 24,875 under the bubble, the Pirates did not play all that badly.
But they did not end the streak, either.


When Justice Shows Its Darker Side
SPEAKING to the jurors who would sentence Jesse Dewayne Jacobs to death, Montgomery County District Attorney Peter Speers declared: "The simple fact of the matter is that Jesse Jacobs and Jesse Jacobs alone killed Etta Ann Urdiales." Actually, another prosecutor said a few months later, at the trial of Mr.
Jacobs's sister, Bobbie Jean Hogan, in the same 1986 killing, it didn't happen that way at all: the sister pulled the trigger; Mr.
Jacobs didn't even know she had a gun.
No matter.


Congressional Memo; 73 Mr. Smiths, of the G.O.P., Go to Washington
The seven House Republicans chosen by their party to summarize the accomplishments of the opening week of the 104th Congress for the press on Friday had a grand combined total of about 14 days in office.
They had succeeded lawmakers with a combined total of 110 years in office.
Some reporters had to struggle for the freshmen's names, and the freshmen themselves seemed a little unsure about news conference protocol.
But they had their message down, and they had their huge blowup of the "Contract With America," the Republican campaign manifesto.
And they were able to check off some items, changes in House rules accomplished and delivered "on behalf of average people," in the words of Representative Gil Gutknecht, a freshman from Minnesota.
They were, in short, on their way to "a new day in American politics," as Representative Sue Myrick of North Carolina declared.


Urban Rule No. 1: Live Cranky, but Live Well
AS a general rule, I would rather curse the darkness than light a candle.
Most New Yorkers are like me, because to suggest that there might be solutions to our ossified civic problems is to risk being taken for a rube, or even a tourist from Minneapolis.


Jan. 1-7: A Tale of Patience; Germany Tells Old Creditors Their Bonds Are in the Mail
Chalk it up to German reunification.
In the years after World War II, some of the money that Weimar Germany had borrowed from American bondholders, and that Hitler had stopped repaying, was paid back.
But other parts of the debt were delayed when an international conference said Germany would have to make arrangements to honor the obligations -- but only after it was reunified.
And that didn't seem too likely.


Vivian Kartsonis, Spyros Mezitis
Vivian S. Kartsonis, a daughter of Athanasia and Bill K. Kartsonis of Malba, Queens, is to be married today to Dr.
Spyros G. E. Mezitis, a son of Sophia and Dr.
Elias N. Mezitis of Merion, Pa.
Bishop Philotheos of Meloa is to officiate at the Greek Orthodox Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity in New York.
The bride, 29, graduated from New York University and received a master's degree in English literature from St.
John's University.
She manages residential and commercial real estate at the Kartsonis Realty Company, her parents' real estate firm in Astoria, Queens.
Her father is also a founder and a chief loan officer of Marathon National Bank of New York in Astoria.


Stitched and Bound
In a shapely new development, the corset is coming out from under


On the Comeback Trail, 'Just for Laughs'
THE spotlight sets upon Gates (Tom Poston) and Mills (Tim Conway), a 1950's television comedy team, reunited.
Watch them demonstrate how a routine evolves, how to make a punch line work.
The vignette is no big deal, not terrific mind you, but rather a pleasant interplay that lets the audience in on the process of funny business, the labors funny men go through so that it all looks easy.
If the knack of comedy is all in the timing, the effectuality of a comic act is in its placement, and this one couldn't be in a worse spot.
It's during the final curtain call that Gates and Mills get around to the most diverting part of the new show at the Rich Forum.
By then, the usual contingent of the rude and the hasty have bolted.
Those with even less patience got away during intermission.


Q and A
Going Home to Brooklyn
Q.
After 48 years in southern California, my wife and I want to "go home again" to Brooklyn.
No travel agency brochure I've seen has that itinerary, but I believe there are small groups or even individuals who give personal tours of the borough.
Can you help? -- Ed Wissner, Los Alamitos, Calif.


Jan. 1-7; Seeking Shelter


Nanny Pride
To the Editor:
The meager listing of six holidays for "domestics" hardly fosters year-round thoughtfulness ("Thoughtfulness Should Be Year-Round," Your Own Account, Dec. 4) and perpetuates the notion that domestics do not deserve what the rest of the working population generally receives.


Making a City Green
AS the heat of the day turns to cool dusk in Jerusalem, families and friends emerge for an evening's stroll in one of the thousand or more parks, gardens and green spaces of every size throughout the city.
Yet when Teddy Kollek was elected mayor of Jerusalem in 1965, there was scarcely a single park or playground.
After the city was united in 1967, he gathered an international committee of architects, landscape architects, writers and professors to establish guidelines for development.
As a result, the greening of this ancient city has also preserved its character.
An ordinance requiring that all buildings be constructed of Jerusalem limestone -- a legacy of British rule -- is responsible for the mellow pinkish cast that unifies the cityscape.
Regulations limiting the height of buildings (in certain areas they can be no more than eight stories) makes it possible to see the whole city from many vantage points as it swoops up and down the hillsides.
One of the first tasks was to clear away the ramshackle housing leaning against the ancient walls and create a greenbelt around the Old City that gives it today, with its more than 30 grass-covered archeological sites, the biblical appearance of a city on an open plain.


Blanche G. Etra, 79; Aided Yeshiva U.
Blanche G. Etra, a lawyer and philanthropist who played an important role in the development of Yeshiva University, died on Wednesday in her home in Manhattan.
She was 79.
The cause was leukemia, said a son, Donald, of Los Angeles.


Time, Space and Pocahontas
COLLECTED NOVELLAS Collected Early Fiction 1949-1964, Volume 1.
By Arno Schmidt.
Translated by John E. Woods. 432 pp.
Normal, Ill.: Dalkey Archive Press. $22.95.


Off the Team At Georgetown
Georgetown guard George Butler has been dismissed from the team for academic reasons, Coach John Thompson announced today.
Butler, a 6-foot-2-inch senior from Gary, Ind., was the Hoyas' second-leading scorer this season.
Thompson announced Butler's dismissal after Georgetown's 71-64 Big East Conference victory over Miami this afternoon.


AGAINST ANDROGYNY
Well there you have it: A "collision course" and "coming to blows" is what love between men and women is all about.
Actually, Norman may be right.
Violence and sex have been equated so often in the news media that this may now be a conditioned fact.


BEST SELLERS: January 8, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
29
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
2
3
45
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3*
2
19
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
4*
4
12
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work in their small Maine town.
5
5
6
WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World War II America.
6
8
26
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
7
7
126
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
8
6
9
THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote themselves to solving crimes.
9
10
7
DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful Government agency.
10
11
24
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its inhabitants, as well as her own.
11
9
14
TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching Hour" and "Lasher."
12
15
16
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
13
13
7
GOD'S OTHER SON, by Don Imus. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A 1981 novel about Billy Sol Hargus, a lecherous television evangelist from Texas.
14
14
14
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
15
12
5
A CUP OF CHRISTMAS TEA, by Tom Hegg. (Waldman House, $10.95.) A book of verses, illustrated by Warren Hanson.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
10
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of belief, suffering and hope.
2
1
14
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
3
4
18
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
4
6
55
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
5
3
15
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales.
6
5
17
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The life of the former First Lady.
7
8
13
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
8
7
13
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the country singer.
9
10
10
THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence affect American life.
10
9
6
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
11
11
14
BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An illustrated history of the game.
12
12
44
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
13
13
4
IT WASN'T ALWAYS EASY, BUT I SURE HAD FUN, by Lewis Grizzard. (Villard, $20.) A collection of essays by the late Southern humorist.
14
9
ALL THE TROUBLE IN THE WORLD, by P.J.
O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.) A humorist considers problems like overpopulation, famine and plague.
15*
14
12
NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World War II.
16*
1
PALE BLUE DOT, by Carl Sagan. (Random House, $35.) The astronomer's vision of the future role of human beings in the universe.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
3
37
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
85
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
1
2
ILLUMINATA, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $20.) A celebration of the power of prayers, with examples of those fitting a variety of situations.
4
4
15
MAGIC EYE III, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Oscillating designs in color.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 24, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE ART AND ARCHITECTURE OF ISLAM, 1250-1800, by Sheila S. Blair and Jonathan M. Bloom. (Yale University, $65.) A bold, competent and fresh attempt to rewrite the history of later Islamic art from scratch, with plenty of splendid color illustrations and other useful graphics.
BOREDOM: The Literary History of a State of Mind, by Patricia Meyer Spacks. (University of Chicago, $24.95.) A persuasive account of a concept invented in the 18th century; its roots include a growing concentration on "inner experience" as the locus of personal reality.
THE FIRST WORLD WAR: A Complete History, by Martin Gilbert. (Holt, $35.) Mr.
Gilbert's enormous breadth of view seeks to render this dreadful conflict as soldiers lived it on many fronts, often relying on the poetry and prose of the many gifted writers who saw action.
GENTLEMAN SPY: The Life of Allen Dulles, by Peter Grose. (Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $30.) A biography, full of new information, of the irresistibly charming (and manipulative) man who headed -- and embodied -- the Central Intelligence Agency from 1953 to 1961.
THE INFERNO OF DANTE: A New Verse Translation, by Robert Pinsky. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) A gripping and near-symphonic rendition of the tour through hell attains a truly Dantean velocity without missing a jot or a tittle.
IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War, by Tobias Wolff. (Knopf, $23.) The follow-up volume to Mr.
Wolff's memoir "This Boy's Life" is a series of small, elegant, personal sketches of his year in Vietnam.
LONG WALK TO FREEDOM: The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela, by Nelson Mandela. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The President of South Africa comes across not as moralist or messiah but as a pragmatic politician who chose what might work over what was ideologically agreeable.
THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG, by J.M.
Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.
A NATION UNDER LAWYERS: How the Crisis in the Legal Profession Is Transforming American Society, by Mary Ann Glendon. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A Harvard law professor sees hyperactive litigators and "romantic" judges as depriving the nation of lawyers' real talents: solving problems and designing social structures.
ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON: A Biography, by Frank McLynn. (Random House, $30.) A thoroughly detailed life, taking the most recent scholarship into account, of the great Scottish writer of English prose who died at 44 in 1894.
THE ROCKET AND THE REICH: Peenemunde and the Coming of the Ballistic Missile Era, by Michael J. Neufeld. (Free Press, $25.) A chronicle of the Nazis' brutal V-2 rocket program and the German scientists who became the American space technologists of 1945 and after.


Operatic Blood and Thunder
THE SURPRISE HIT OF THE Proms concerts at the Royal Albert Hall in London last summer was "The Wreckers," an adventure opera by an obscure English composer, Ethyl Smyth, who died in 1944.
The Proms performance, recorded live by Conifer, has now been issued on disk (75605 51250 2; two CD's).
"The Wreckers" is a blood-and-thunder yarn about a cult of religious fanatics who lure ships to their doom on the rocky coast of Cornwall -- just the sort of improbably plotted melodrama that Gilbert and Sullivan lampooned in "The Pirates of Penzance" and "H.M.S. Pinafore." The story revolves around the cult members' attempt to determine who in their midst is kindling fires on the shore to warn away passing ships.


Strike Out
To the Sports Editor:
One searches in vain for any semblance of objective reportage from The Times's sportswriters concerning the baseball strike.
All we get is their self-righteous blather about being "union men" and then listen as they ridicule and castigate the owners for their intransigence without once examining the greed and unreasonableness of the players union.
JOSEPH LEVY  Chester, N.J.


Ringing In the New
First Night New York '95, a family-oriented, alcohol-free celebration, was held at several landmark sites in the city, including Grand Central Terminal, Dec. 31.


BETTER WORK THAN WELFARE. BUT WHAT IF THERE'S NEITHER?
DeParle's focus on Moore hits the nail on the head.
We need to look beyond the myths about welfare mothers and examine their lives within the context of their historical and social circumstances.
Moore is neither lazy nor unmotivated to work.
Yet stereotypes like these fuel punitive welfare "reform" proposals.
VIRGINIA E. SCHEIN Gettysburg, Pa.


The Executive Computer; For Translation Software, una Rosa Ist Eine Rose Is a Rose
IS your business thinking globally, but budgeting locally?
If there's no money to hire a multinational staff, but you don't want to miss opportunities to cultivate foreign customers or suppliers, consider desktop translation software. (And if trusting your personal computer to translate sensitive documents brings to mind uneasy memories of Monty Python's Hungarian phrase book, rest assured: these programs produce translations that, if hardly fluent, are at least inoffensive.)
Language translation was one of the first tasks tried on computers during World War II.
But even in the 1950's and 60's, the complexity and size of the programs brought early mainframes to their knees.


Corrections
A table in the Automobiles section last Sunday comparing engine designs misstated the number of valves in the 1995 Lincoln Continental.
It is 32, not 24.


Oh, to Do Something Shocking!
A PRIVATE VIEW By Anita Brookner. 242 pp. New York: Random House. $23.


Deborah Malloy, Hans Winkler
Deborah Ann Malloy, a daughter of Vivien and Harry Malloy of Waccabuc, N.Y., was married on Dec. 9 to Hans Gunther Winkler, the son of the late Paul and Emmi Timm Winkler.
A registrar officiated at the town hall in Katzenelnbogen, Germany.
Mrs.
Malloy-Winkler is an equestrian who competes in show jumping in Europe.
Her father is a vice president of Bain Hogg Robinson, insurance brokers in New York.
He and the bride's mother own Edition Farm in Waccabuc, where they own and breed thoroughbreds.


Seat Pitch
To the Editor: The Practical Traveler column "Sizing Up Airline Seating" (Nov. 6) overlooked one problem with the reduced pitch on economy flights on most airlines.
Have you ever spent five to six hours on a transcontinental flight behind someone who, right after takeoff, pushed his or her seat back to the fully reclined position and kept it that way for the entire flight?
If you have, and if you are more than five feet tall, you know how uncomfortable that can be.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 1 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the Pilobolus Dance Theater misstates the title of a staff member, David Chapman.
He is director of production, not an artistic director.


Holdover Sniping From Cold War Claims a Victim
Five years after the Berlin wall came down, ghosts from the cold war haunt a stormy public debate here: Did left-wing writers and other opinion makers in Britain accept money or favors from Soviet intelligence agents seeking to advance the Kremlin's propaganda efforts?
The question emerged suddenly last month when Richard Gott, the literary editor of The Guardian, one of Britain's most highly regarded newspapers, resigned in the face of published allegations in a conservative magazine that he was one of as many as two dozen "agents of influence" recruited by the K.G.B. during the 1970's and 1980's in Britain.


Remembered


Don't Talk Too Dirty to Me
Sallie Tisdale is the author of "Talk Dirty to Me: An Intimate Philosophy of Sex," which, among other things, argues in favor of pornography.
Still, Tisdale gets upset when people think that is the book's sole focus. (What it's really about, she insists, is "why sex is so important to people.") Men, as Tisdale learned on a six-week book tour, are the worst offenders.
Q: How did men react on your recent tour?


Death of a Baby Sitter
SNOW ANGELS By Stewart O'Nan. 305 pp. New York:  Doubleday. $20.


O.K., CALL IT WAR
You may have opened the door for a true debate on legalizing drugs.
The issue is simple.
The same thing will occur that occurred with the end of Prohibition: the related problems will disappear.
Period.
Don't spend one second wringing your hands about how to do it, just keep the Feds out of it.
Let the states regulate it.
With possibly a full 50 experiments, we will quickly find out what works and what doesn't.


Crashing the 'Old Boy' Party
IT was a chilly October night in 1984, at the end of a two-year recession and the start of a shakeout in Boston's medical establishment, when a dozen or so women -- all health care professionals -- got together over a dinner of chicken and shop talk in Brookline, Mass.
The women, all in their 30's, most of them married with children, had been meeting monthly for seven years.
During that time, they had navigated their way from middle management to senior positions at local hospitals and in state government and academia.
And for the most part, their conversations focused on the nitty gritty of health care administration -- nursing shortages, obstreperous physicians, salaries.


Music, Then Magic
New Year's Eve Party after 'Die Fledermaus' at the Metropolitan Opera.


Atlas in Large Type
For travelers tired of squinting at small-scale maps, the new Rand McNally Easy-to-Read 1995 Travel Atlas is a colorful, 176-page large-type guide to the 50 states, Mexico and Canada.
Besides listing cities, rivers and significant roads, the atlas gives points of interest and a national parks guide.
It's available for $14.95 at bookstores or by calling (800) 284-6565.
TERRY TRUCCO


Testing Computer Manners
Say you are a new student at the University of Delaware.
And say you want to use the university computer.
Test time!
The school has instituted what it calls an Electronic Community Citizenship Examination to make sure students know their own cybernetic rights, as well as those of others.
The idea is to prevent people from doing something illegal, immoral or even knowingly discourteous.


Saving Money in Congress: Dump the House Historian and Hire a New One
House Speaker Newt Gingrich returned today to his home state and his weekend job as history professor -- and to some of the disputes that have dogged his dual roles as well.
After delivering a two-hour lecture on "Renewing American Civilization," Mr.
Gingrich said he had chosen a little-known political scientist and friend to be the new historian of the House of Representatives and defended her as having "energy and enthusiasm" for expanding the job's educational side.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Mon.
Consumer credit, Nov., chg., $ bils.
11.6
10.8
Tues.
Producer prices, Dec., pct. change
0.5
0.2
Wholesale trade, Nov., pct. change
0.3
0.5
Wed.
Consumer prices, Dec., pct. change
0.3
0.2
Thur.
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
335
325
Fri.
Retail sales, Dec., pct. change
1.2
0.7
This Week's Developments
Tues.
*3*Alan Greenspan to testify to House and Senate budget committees
Thur.
*3*Atlanta Federal Reserve December business survey


In the Region/Connecticut; Construction Nears on a Technology Park at Storrs
WITH final environmental approvals drawing near, construction of a technology park should begin soon on 390 acres north of the University of Connecticut's campus in the Storrs section of the Town of Mansfield.
The first structure will be a 92,000-square foot Advanced Technologies Institute building, with construction financed by $10 million each from the state and Federal Governments.
It is expected to be ready for occupancy in about a year..


When the Bible Becomes the Excuse for Killings at Clinics
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 2 front-page article on John C. Salvi 3d, the suspect in killings at a Massachusetts clinic and violence outside a Norfolk, Va., clinic, carries a picture on page 10 depicting a family praying for Mr.
Salvi outside the Norfolk jail where he is being held.
A sign they carry, with a biblical reference, states "God bless John Salvi Num 25:13."


Armory's Status Is Quo As a Dispute Drags On
The Flushing Armory was converted into a homeless shelter in 1981, just when downtown Flushing shook itself out of economic doldrums.
Over the years, various groups from the Flushing Chinese Business Association to the Borough President's Office have complained bitterly that the shelter brought loitering, prostitution and drugs into the heart of a busy retail area and an Asian center rivaling Manhattan's Chinatown.
And recent turns and twists in the armory's debated life have only irritated them further.


Advertising in America
To the Editor:
I am writing to express my profound disappointment with Joseph Nocera's review of Jackson Lears's book "Fables of Abundance: A Cultural History of Advertising in America" (Dec. 11).


Familiar Territory
To the Editor:
I was delighted to see the painting by Julius Schmid illustrating Alex Ross's article on Franz Schubert's piano sonatas  [ "A Revolution Couched in Beautiful Melodies," Dec. 4 ] .
In 1971-72, while teaching modern dance at the Musikhochschule in Vienna, I lived in the house shown in the painting.
It is known in Vienna as the Fledermaus Villa because Johann Strauss lived there while composing his operetta.
It was later owned by Julius Schmid, whose daughter Putzi Prohaska was my landlady.
She was the widow of the composer Karl Prohaska and the mother of the conductor Felix Prohaska.


UP AND COMING: Roma Maffia; Ask Her Anything, But Don't Ask, 'What Is She?'
THE HOTEL SUITE INTERVIEW had so far been affable and ambling, a few wisecracks about being a 36-year-old ingenue but nothing heavy.
Certainly nothing to suggest Roma Maffia's portrayal of the steel-and-sparks lawyer who so ably represents Michael Douglas in a sexual harassment case against Demi Moore, his boss, in the film "Disclosure."
But then Ms.
Maffia spoke about what she drew on from her own experience to create her character's flinty indignation.
No, not episodes of sexual harassment ("I used to be a bartender; I know how to tell someone to leave me alone") but repeated questions about her ethnicity.


Halls of Congress Fill With New Lobbyists
No one is likely to be inspired to make a sequel to "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington," but major league club owners will go to Washington this week, beginning their blitz of Capitol Hill.
Taking more seriously than ever the threat to baseball's antitrust exemptions, the clubs will dispatch as many as a dozen owners this week and more in coming weeks to the offices of Senators and Representatives to explain to them why they should do nothing to disturb the aberration in the nation's antitrust laws.


Getting College Credit For Being a Trekkie
Washington State's Evergreen State College in Olympia appears to have taken academic silliness to a whole new level: It is offering a course on "Star Trek" that is the only class students are required to take for two full semesters, the term just ended and the one now beginning.
The college maintains that "Star Trek" has been an important part of American popular culture for more than a quarter of a century, and offers sophisticated lessons in fields from cognitive psychology to quantum physics to movie script-writing.
Fifty-two students, mostly sophomores and juniors, signed up for the two-quarter course, which involves 17 hours of classes a week.
Four students had never seen the series, and two hated it.
The school newspaper made unmerciful fun of it at first, but that has stopped.


Why Do Women Do the Shopping?
ENTERTAINING ANGELS By Marita van der Vyver.
Translated by Catherine Knox. 214 pp.
New York: Dutton. $20.95.


No Doubt About It: Steelers in Title Game
Throughout the year, the Steelers' defense left little doubt about its ability to dominate a game.
It finished the season with 55 sacks, which led all the teams in the National Football League.
Pittsburgh's offense has played under a cloud of suspicion all season, despite the fact that it led the league in rushing with an average of 136.6 yards a game.
There were questions about the ability of quarterback Neil O'Donnell to perform at a playoff-caliber level.
There were doubts as to whether the offense had enough firepower to score enough points to make a run through the playoffs.


For Russia's Troops, Humbling Days
To understand the confusion, anger and depression of the average Russian soldier fighting the Chechen rebels here, one has only to look into the frightened eyes of Vitaly Ponvin, 19.
Or have a talk with 18-year-old Artur Ivanov, who winces when he describes his combat experience.


Frightening


Journal; Dance of Death
Take it from me: Critics make people mad.
But usually they do so because of what they review.
In a Christmas week essay in The New Yorker, Arlene Croce, the most gifted of dance critics, started a firestorm by declaring that she would neither see nor review "Still/Here," the acclaimed multimedia show by the choreographer Bill T. Jones.
She then proceeded to trash "Still/Here" sight unseen as "victim art," on the grounds that Mr.
Jones is H.I.V. positive and his show includes videotaped testimony from people with life-threatening illnesses.
"I can't review someone I feel sorry for or hopeless about," Ms.
Croce wrote of Mr.


BETTER WORK THAN WELFARE. BUT WHAT IF THERE'S NEITHER?
For the past 15 years, I have worked with a program that helps inner-city youths in Chicago prepare for, find and keep good private-sector jobs.
In "Better Work Than Welfare. But What If There's Neither?" (Dec. 18), Jason DeParle gives the subject of welfare reform a human face -- largely absent from the pronouncements of politicians.


Sports Peace in Our Time? Not Till Attitudes Change
It is, perhaps, someday soon.
A week from now, two weeks, a month, it is finally that unpostponable morning after that follows an unthinkable cancellation of the season.
The exhilaration of those final frantic hours when, as owner or player, you stood proudly with your brethren and did what you had to do, is gone.
Now it is done.
Now nothing about hockey matters until September.
It is 5 years from now, or 10, and every year after that.
You are a former player or owner, commissioner or executive director.
You are a doer by nature; no thought sits long undirected in your mind, no feeling unchanneled, uncontrolled.
But every time you see the line 1994-95 (No Season) you wince.
You scramble and cover the wince, explaining to that holdout part of you why it happened, had to happen, how it was better that way, but you can never explain well enough.
You see it; you wince.
Three days after, 5 or 10 years after, every year after that, was it worth it?
Even remembering all the details of that time, everything that made you do what you did, but knowing the rest, too, would you still do it?
Forget the effect on fans, sponsors, bottom lines and bank statements.
Those you can argue any way you want.
What about on you?
How does it make you feel about you?
It is now.
The owners, until yesterday, had been insisting on a salary cap or payroll tax.
The players had refused.
There was no common ground, "no basis for agreement." Everybody was doing his job.
Gary Bettman's was to get labor peace for the owners under a formula in which player salaries rise less precipitously.
Bob Goodenow's was to build a player union strong and unified enough to resist, to allow the market to take salaries where they go.
The problem needed only a nudge to start.
Whose push turned to whose shove didn't matter.
As with most strikes and lockouts, both sides wanted a fight.
Now, in light of yesterday's new offer by the owners, the question is: Do the two sides finally want to stop?
Issues don't divide, attitudes do.
A partly cloudy day is mostly sunny if you decide to see it that way.
When there is a will for war, fighting happens.
When there is a will for peace, it stops.
What can turn hockey's will for division into a will for agreement?
The fans have been remarkably patient.
Supposedly passionate about their game and teams, they have done little picketing, issued few threats of future boycott.
Perhaps it is because settlement (to them) has always seemed imminent; perhaps because for so long, the alternative game has seemed almost as exciting.
Showdown meetings, team player against team owner, expressions of solidarity, not much that had "Play of the Day" potential, but something to talk about.
Yet the fans have been patient because they know their place.
Players and owners can choose to play, or not play.
The power is in their hands, and fans know that.
They do not like it, but it's a power they respect.
And between the fans, the players and the owners, some unexpressed bargain seems to have been struck.
How much of a season you give me, a fan says, is your right.
That you give me a season, is mine.
Not because I have any power over that, but because it is right.
Break the bargain, break the patience.
A sport seems unimaginably important during the early days of a strike or lockout.
As days pass, it becomes clear how much greater fantasy is to any reality.
Life does go on.
Call the bluff, and you may get an answer you don't want to hear.
What we always assumed was passion may have only been habit.
But the will to agreement needs a way, and the players and owners, until now, have found none.
It may be they have been looking in the wrong place.
They want to put this unrelenting squabbling behind them.
They're tired, the fans are tired.
Everyone needs to get on with it.
Always fighting over who gets what share of the pie, they need peace to grow that pie.
Years of it!
But what is the formula, appropriate now, flexible enough to apply to all the changes of later, that both sides can live with?
Basketball thought it had one; now its players don't think so, and they play the N.B.A. season looking for something new.
Football and baseball are looking, too.
It's not there!
That's the message of the length and vehemence of the baseball and hockey labor disputes.
History is moving in the players' direction; the owners want to stop the clock.
For them, the future seems an impossibly difficult place.
Next year is one thing; two, three, four years from now, they can see where the players are going and they can't see how they can get there themselves.
But history isn't lived in four-year chunks.
Today, you manage; tomorrow, you find a way.
And tomorrow after that.
There is no way that every baseball team in 1975 could survive this free agency era that has followed, and yet every team has.
The business of sport is changing too rapidly.
The formula as solution is an illusion.
Long-term interests, from the perspective of now, are too divided.
If the search for formula continues through negotiation and seasons await the outcome, there will be no seasons.
There isn't one team that can't survive until next year.
Focus on four-year deals to put trouble behind you, and you put nothing but trouble in front of you.
A four, five or six-year focus turns things ideological, hypothetical, rhetorical, makes the possible impossible.
Yesterday's formula was power, and the owners had it.
Now in all sports, there is a growing balance.
It is hard to break the other guy, bring him to your way of thinking unless it is his way of thinking, too.
Deciding there must be either peace or war is disastrous.
There is nothing wrong with muddling along.
Maybe there will come a time when more is possible.
If not, the parties still will have survived, the games will be played.
And muddling along also forces players and owners to muddle together.
In time, perhaps they will come to understand, trust, respect and get respect back, to work together and produce through the back door what neither side would tolerate through the front -- some form of cooperation.
It was time to fight; now, it's time to play.
Time for Gary Bettman's and Bob Goodenow's job to be defined differently so that success for each is measured in a season played, in the 1995 Stanley Cup being won.
So that neither side forces the other to carry the can of a bad deal, days and years later, having to wince even harder at that.
Great performers in any activity have a sense of timing.
Now, they realize, is when the game is being won and lost, now is when the big hit must be made, the goal must be scored.
Now is when the deal must be done.


We Still Need C.I.A., but It Needs to Change
To the Editor:
"For C.I.A., History Is the Big Traitor" (The Week in Review, Jan. 1) nails the soft spots in national intelligence: the secondary role of intelligence in international crime; the competition of open-source information; the marginal potentials of intelligence to contribute to ecology, environment and even economic threats, and the lack of a vision of future strategic intelligence needs.


Foreign Affairs; China Syndrome
I did my Christmas shopping early this year.
Traveling around southern China and Hong Kong I bought Microsoft Word and Word Perfect for $10 each.
Picked up a CD of Walt Disney's "The Lion King" for $4.50 and got an armful of Disney sweatshirts for small change.
They were all pirated rip-offs produced in Chinese factories and they were about as hard to buy here as noodles and white rice.
Pretty brazen, you say, selling all this bootleg out in the open?
Hey, that's nothing.
Joseph Stiglitz, a member of President Clinton's Council of Economic Advisers, once got a letter from a Chinese pirate publisher asking him to write a special preface for the pirated Chinese edition of his own economics textbook -- for which he was receiving no royalties.


Choices, Choices. It's Catalogue Season.
WHAT'S new is the cargo for the bandwagon ridden by nurseries and seed merchants at this time of year.
It's not just the plethora of catalogues arriving in the mail but also the multiplicity of offerings in each.
It's often difficult to decide whether to try something new.
Is the newcomer better than an old favorite?
Has the newcomer gone through proper evaluation and testing or is it just a commercial offering to generate publicity?
In other words, does the newcomer measure up?


Women's Team Swears Like . . . Well, Sailors
The coaches did not invite me to San Diego for my knowledge of the sea.
I am supposed to add some muscle to the historic all-women's America's Cup team.
Rowing on two Olympic teams whetted my passion for racing and winning, and I know my way around a weight room, but six weeks ago I was still quietly wondering about the distinction between windward and leeward, winch and wench.
Past America's Cup campaigns, though, have recruited male rowers and turned them into grinders.
Some of those men, like me and the seven other grinders on our team -- five of whom are rowers, one an elite weight lifter, the other a bodybuilder/American Gladiator -- knew nothing of winches, halyards or spinnakers when they started.


For Root Vegetables, Add Imagination
THE time has come and gone to abandon ripe tomatoes, delicate zucchini and fresh garden peas.
Autumn is over, and the root vegetable season has set in.
But sturdy vegetables like carrots, parsnips, beets and celeriac can sustain many a menu, especially if some imagination is used in the preparation.
Among the possibilities are to cook these vegetables until tender, then puree them for soup or marinate them for a salad.
They can be grated raw, then tossed with a dressing for another kind of salad.
Roasting them makes them suitable to accompany a main dish platter.


Fleamarket Frenzy, Pro and Con


Joan B. Zoref and Roy A. Israel
Joan Barbara Zoref, a daughter of Selma and Leonard Zoref of East Hills, L.I., is to be married today to Roy Alan Israel, a son of Muriel and Dr.
Ira Israel of Old Westbury, L.I.
Rabbi Neil Gillman is to perform the ceremony at the Old Westbury Golf and Country Club.
The bride graduated from American University and received a master's degree in urban studies from Boston University.
She is a principal in and the chief executive of Zoref Color Labsin New York, a custom photographic concern.
Her father is its chairman and founder.


Corrections
A survey of New Yorkers' wishes for 1995 last Sunday misstated the name of a center directed by one respondent, Ester R. Fuchs.
It is the Barnard-Columbia Center for Leadership and Urban Public Policy, not the Columbia Center for Urban Affairs.


Dancing Precariously On the Bottom Line
THE OFFICE IS A CLUTTER OF battered furniture, overflowing file cabinets and obsolete business machines.
Highly skilled employees, paid as little as $485 a week, and only for the weeks they work, labor under the constant threat of layoffs.
Management, lacking a dependable flow of cash or assets to back regular bank loans, must rely on credit-card debt to cover month-to-month obligations.
From the description, this could be any of thousands of small businesses that lack the capital necessary to survive for the long term.
In fact, it is Pilobolus Dance Theater, one of America's most popular modern-dance troupes, and its struggles are hardly atypical.
The American Ballet Theater came back from a near-death experience in 1993 after gaining concessions from creditors and unions.
The Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance Company has downsized drastically just to stay afloat.
The Joffrey Ballet, battered by financial problems, announced last month that it would cancel part of its 1995 season.


Unexpected Arrivals Settle a Casualty Condominium
AMONG the new renters in a residential building called Tiffany Mews at 63 Tiffany Place in the Carroll Gardens section of Brooklyn is Julieta Macias, a graduate student at Adelphi University.
She feels fortunate to be there, although she may not realize how much she owes her presence to the Government of Finland.
In November Ms.
Macias moved into a spacious one-bedroom apartment on the sixth floor of Tiffany Mews, with a view looking east across the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway to the communities of Cobble Hill and Carroll Gardens.
Her apartment has all the appointments of the new condominium it was designed to be, if not the waterfront view of the Statue of Liberty available on the opposite side of the building.
It was to have sold for about $180,000.
But she is paying only $504 a month in rent.


Choices, Choices. It's Catalogue Season.
WHAT'S new is the cargo for the bandwagon ridden by nurseries and seed merchants at this time of year.
It's not just the plethora of catalogues arriving in the mail but also the multiplicity of offerings in each.
It's often difficult to decide whether to try something new.
Is the newcomer better than an old favorite?
Has the newcomer gone through proper evaluation and testing or is it just a commercial offering to generate publicity?
In other words, does the newcomer measure up?


Birth-Defect Lawsuit That Set Science Standard Is Dismissed
Applying standards that the United States Supreme Court set in the case, a Federal appeals court has dismissed a lawsuit brought by two San Diego children who say their birth defects were caused by the drug Bendectin.
The Supreme Court ruled in 1993 that Federal judges should be active gatekeepers who insure that "any and all scientific testimony or evidence admitted is not only relevant, but reliable." The High Court held that the judges should focus on the methodology behind the scientific testimony, rather than following an earlier standard that concentrated on whether the experts' ideas or conclusions have won "general acceptance."


Correction
A review on Dec. 18 about "The Art and Architecture of Islam, 1250-1800," by Sheila S. Blair and Jonathan M. Bloom, referred incorrectly to the dictionary in which sections on Islamic art were edited by Ms.
Blair and Mr.
Bloom.
It is "The Dictionary of Art," and its publisher in the United States is Grove's Dictionaries Inc., a division of Macmillan Publishers Ltd. of London.
Macmillan is its publisher in Britain.


Jack Donohue's 365 Cups of Kindness
The seat at the end of Donohue's bar is noticeably empty these days, and the mood there is somber.
"Jack Donohue is definitely missed," said Bob Grady, sitting on the next bar stool and shaking his head over his lunchtime hamburger.
For 25 years, Jack Donohue held court at the restaurant he owned on West 72d Street at Broadway, offering everything from personal advice and political insights to free sandwiches and help finding a job to the tight crowd of regulars who considered the bar their second home.
When he died last month at age 63 of complications from diabetes, friends and neighbors on the Upper West Side marked the passing of an era.


Cruise Ships Offer Winter Discounts
Travelers looking for a respite from winter aboard a cruise ship will find that because of overcapacity in the cruise industry bargains are more prevalent than usual at this time of year.
Celebrity Cruises, for example, is offering two-for-one rates on the Horizon, the Meridian and the Zenith on selected dates, some through April, starting at $1,145 for two people, which is the regular rate for one person in double occupancy, for a seven-night Caribbean cruise.
In some cases, it is necessary to buy an air-sea package to qualify for a half-price cabin.


Schmidt Appears Headed for Hall of Fame
When the voting is announced tomorrow night, MIKE SCHMIDT is certain to be the newest member elected to the Hall of Fame.
In his 17-year career with the Philadelphia Phillies, he hit 548 home runs, seventh on the career list; won three awards as the National League's most valuable player, and earned 10 Gold Gloves.
He even stole 174 bases before retiring in 1989.


General Services Nominee Is Criticized
The man picked by Gov.
George E. Pataki to manage New York State's office space and its $2 billion purchasing operation has been doing the same job for five years in Westchester County, where he has been criticized for awarding lucrative leases to Republican contributors.
As general services administrator here, the nominee, Peter W. Delaney, has been accused by both Democratic and Republican county legislators of steering leases for office space that was not always needed to landlords and developers who were political supporters of the Republican County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke.


College 101: There's No Business Like the Pro Business
The decision was reached, the announcement was made, the cap was placed on Stephon Marbury's head.
The father, Donald Marbury, bent over and gave his son a gentle kiss.
Family members joyously wept.
Exultant grown men shook hands and embraced and roamed the back area of the restaurant in the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn as if it were visiting hours at the maternity ward.
Actually, it was a birth of sorts, another future millionaire passing from the high school womb into the neon world of television lights and sycophants.
Stephon Marbury next goes to an incubator named Georgia Tech, where he will spend a couple of years getting some tournament seasoning and adding necessary muscular bulk.
Then will come another news conference, at which he will thank his coach, Bobby Cremins, and announce that it is time for him to become a pro.


Mayor Says Crime Data Affirm Strategies
Flanked by police officials and detailed charts on easels, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday that crime in New York City fell significantly last year in every major category, and said the declines affirmed the policing strategies of his administration in its first year.
Announcing the yearly crime statistics with full fanfare at City Hall, Mr.
Giuliani said the declines at least in part reflected his administration's efforts to focus on "quality of life" annoyances from aggressive panhandlers to squeegee pests, even as the police undertook new strategies to combat more serious crimes.


Gigi Decavalles, Kevin D. Hughes
Georgia Artemis Decavalles, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Andonis Decavalles of Madison, N.J., was married yesterday to Kevin Douglas Hughes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Hughes of Castle Rock, Colo.
The Rev.
Alexander Leondis performed the ceremony at Holy Trinity Greek Orthodox Church in Westfield, N.J.
Ms.
Decavalles-Hughes, 28, is known as Gigi.
She is a management analyst at the administrative office of the United States Courts in Washington.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's degree in urban planning from New York University.
Her father is a poet laureate of the Academy of Athens and is a professor emeritus of comparative literature at Fairleigh Dickinson University in Madison.
Her mother, Kalliope Decavalles, teaches French at Fairleigh Dickinson and at the County College of Morris in Randolph, N.J.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LAND O'GOSHEN  By Charles McNair. Wyatt/St. Martin's, $20.95.


Dateline: Chinatown
ONE recent day, John Yu, a porter in a hotel and an immigrant from Hong Kong, stopped at the newsstand on Canal Street near Mott and perused the four major Chinese-language daily newspapers: World Journal, Sing Tao Daily, The China Press and The United Journal.
"My English isn't that good," Mr.
Yu said.
"This is the only way I can find out what's going on in the world."


The Prices Are Down and Business Is Up
NOW you see it, now you don't.
That's about how long the French restaurant Le Champignon lasted in Stamford.
It was converted by its management, seemingly overnight, to Da Vincenzo, which calls itself a French-Italian bistro.
Actually, the large dining space is much as it was before, with a glassed-in greenhouse front and tables with fresh flowers.


Assessing Effects of Impending Cuts in Government Services
Long Island elected officials from four levels of government met recently at the office of The New York Times in Garden City to discuss the effect of coming changes on the region.
The participants were Representative Rick Lazio of Brightwaters and Assemblyman Michael A. L. Balboni of Mineola, both Republicans; Suffolk County Legislator Nora Bredes of Stony Brook and Supervisor Bruce Nyman of Long Beach, both Democrats.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
BATTERY PARK CITY
$325,000
380 Rector Place  (Liberty Terrace)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 873-sq.-ft. condo in a 7-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, balcony, harbor view; common charge $619; taxes $4,953, listed at $325,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: D.J. Knight)


Glenn E. Nordlinger, Kimara Ahnert
Kimara Leigh Ahnert, the daughter of Mrs.
Thomas Rudeski of Bushkill, Pa., and the stepdaughter of Mr.
Rudeski, was married last evening to Glenn Edward Nordlinger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Nordlinger of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Rabbi Charles Davidson officiated at the Metropolitan Club.
The Rev.
John Bergamo, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.


Sol Tax, 87, Anthropologist Who Founded Journal, Dies
Sol Tax, a professor of anthropology at the University of Chicago who is credited with helping to organize anthropology as a global discipline, died on Wednesday at his home in Chicago.
He was 87.
The cause was a heart attack, said William Harms, a spokesman for the university.


Simpson, Citing Need to Respond to Public, Signs a Book Deal
A book by O. J. Simpson, discussing spousal abuse, his slain ex-wife and his assertion of innocence in her slaying, will be published next month by Little, Brown &amp; Company.
Titled "I Want to Tell You" and written in collaboration with Lawrence Schiller, the book was described yesterday as an effort by Mr.
Simpson to respond to the more than 300,000 pieces of mail he has received since his arrest in June on charges that he murdered his ex-wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend Ronald L. Goldman outside her home in the Brentwood section of Los Angeles.


Katherine Riker, Erich Sternberg
Katherine Lee Riker, the daughter of Stephen J. Riker of New York and the late Susan G. Riker, was married last evening to Erich Sternberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hans J. Sternberg of Baton Rouge, La.
Rabbi Alex Goldman performed the ceremony at the Union Club in New York.
Mrs.
Sternberg graduated from Skidmore College and is studying for an M.B.A. at the Australian Graduate School of Management in Sydney.
Her father is the chairman of Colliers ABR, a real estate company in New York.
Her stepmother, Margery Baker Riker, is the national editor at CBS News in New York.


The Timeless Heart of Damascus
BEYOND the Bab Jairoon, the gate set in the eastern wall of the great Umayyad Mosque, the Old City of Damascus dissolves in a bewildering labyrinth of narrow streets and low passageways.
This is Amarah Jouwaniyyeh, a dense, dust-brown maze of leaning houses and whitewashed buildings, some hundreds of years old and built so close together the overhanging thicket of sagging roofs and broken balconies nearly blocks out the sunlight.
Along roads no wider than a taxicab, inside cramped shop fronts no bigger than closets, men bent over bare bulbs shape the legs of wooden furniture on pedal lathes, or hand-stitch shoes and purses that will be sold in the noisy bazaars a few blocks away.
Less than a mile from the din and clamor of downtown Damascus, where modern apartment and office blocks rise against the dun-colored cliffs of the Anti-Lebanon Mountains to the west, this ancient quarter is at the heart of one of the world's oldest cities, a dim place of shadows suffused with the aromas of wood shavings and coffee and overripe fruit.
In the late afternoon, when the setting sun stains the desert sky a kind of blood orange, minarets across the quarter crackle to life at once, the muezzins' amplified call to prayer drawing the men into the alleys and winding tributaries that weave and wander toward the southern wall of the great mosque.


Superstar of the Slalom; Tomba Is Weary of Fame, but He Still Keeps on Winning
The young husky, as white as the snow on the peaks of the surrounding Dolomites, romped through the lobby of the hotel, wagging its tail at well-heeled guests.
In most five-star establishments, this would have been cause for considerable alarm, but here at the Hotel Corona, there were only benevolent smiles.
This husky belonged to Alberto Tomba, and just like its very popular master, Yukon had been given the run of the place.


Margaret A. Long, C. F. Macchetto
Margaret Ann Long, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Long of Armonk, N.Y., and Claudio Fernando Macchetto, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
F.
Duccio Macchetto of Bethesda, Md., were married yesterday in the Dahlgren Chapel of Georgetown University in Washington.
The Roman Catholic ceremony was performed by the Rev.
John F. Long, an uncle of the bride, who is the rector of the Pontifical Russian College and the vice rector and professor at the Pontifical Oriental Institute at the Vatican.
The bride, 25, graduated from Lafayette College and is a third-year law student at Georgetown University.
Her father is the corporate secretary and an executive vice president for external affairs of Citicorp and Citibank in New York.


6 Found Slain In Apartment In Queens
Six people were found slain yesterday -- some shot, others stabbed -- in an apartment in a quiet Queens neighborhood, the police said.
Neighbors said at least two victims were teen-age girls.
A seventh person survived the attack, escaping through a rear window of the second-floor apartment in College Point, and was found with gunshot and stabbing wounds on the front lawn, the police said.


Campus Safety By Computer
College is sometimes thought of as a sylvan, otherworldly realm of the mind.
Well, check out the crime statistics: In 1992, some 2,400 colleges reported 1,000 rapes, 17 murders and 1,800 robberies.
Urban, suburban and rural campuses all had roughly similar per-capita rates, to the figures required to be reported under the Student Right-to-Know and Campus Security Act of 1990.


POSTINGS: Coming This Fall to Ladies' Mile; A Flagship For Old Navy
One of Ladies' Mile's most unusual and elaborate buildings -- the four-story terra cotta Beaux Arts confection at the southeast corner of 18th Street and Avenue of the Americas -- will be transformed this fall into Manhattan's flagship Old Navy retail store, a lower-priced offshoot of The Gap chain.
The building at 604-612 Avenue of the Americas, and its two-story sister building around the corner at 50-58 West 18th Street, most recently housed a Honda showroom.


Jerusalem's Stones Yield To Change
WHAT brings visitors to Jerusalem are things eternal: the shrines of Judaism, Christianity and Islam; the extraordinary light that bounces sunsets of purple and gold off the Old City walls; the clatter of carts on the stone pavements and narrow lanes of the Muslim Quarter; the hush that settles upon most of the city on Friday afternoons as the Sabbath approaches; the muezzin's cry from the minarets mixing with the rumble of prayer from the Western Wall.
Jerusalem is made of stone, and stone is a good metaphor for a place that has been embattled for thousands of years no matter how much it is heralded in hymns and religious prose as a symbol of peace.
Stone does not yield.
In Jerusalem, religions and cultures have collided century upon century, hatred and pain accumulating until sometimes it feels as though there is room for nothing else.


A New Mall for the City of 1,000 Stores
BEFORE this city became the corporate headquarters of Westchester County, it was known as the city of 1,000 stores.
And through all its recent economic troubles, involving corporate consolidations and one of the highest office vacancy rates in the country, White Plains has remained the hub of Westchester's retail scene.
That reputation will be enhanced when The Westchester, a $250 million, 2.5 million-square-foot megamall (1 million square feet of retail space and 1.5 million for parking) makes its entrance into the already crowded retail field with a scheduled gala opening on March 17.


Pamela J. Hogan, Jeffrey L. Kimball
Pamela J. Hogan, a publishing executive, was married yesterday to Jeffrey L. Kimball, a film industry executive.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Joyce Fuchs Gioia, an interfaith minister, officiated at the Manhattan Penthouse, a catering establishment in New York.
Ms.
Hogan, who is 39 and is keeping her name, is the director of United States video publishing for the Reader's Digest Associaton.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of the late Elisabeth Morris Hogan and the late Donald Hogan.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.
Her great-great-grandfather Luzon Burritt Morris was Governor of Connecticut from 1893 to 1895.


You Want to Play, Not Pay? Listen Up
YOU'RE the go-to man on your junior high school basketball team, or the one they call Dr.
Spike on the girls' volleyball team.
What you want to know is: Can this athletic prowess be turned into a ticket to college, perhaps a passport to financial aid?
Good question.
When it comes to preparing for a college athletic career, seventh grade is none too soon to start.


Evil Ants Vanquished?
Finally, a solution to the dreaded fire ant problem.
These stinging South American insects, which invaded the southern United States more than 50 years ago, are powerfully attracted to electric currents.
They prefer exposed circuitry, but will gladly chew through insulation if necessary. (Some die in the process.) Junction boxes, sockets and fuses are all on the fire ant's menu.
If that traffic light you pull up to in Georgia is not working, there may well be fire ants nearby.
The problem, according to one expert who has been hired by a Texas utility company, is much worse than the utilities are likely to let on.
Enter Sanford Porter, an entomologist with the Federal Agriculture Research Service.
Porter is marshaling an assassination squad of parasitic South American flies called Pseudacteons, whose females are rather fond of the fire ant.
With a needlelike ovipositor, the fly injects an egg into the ant.
The egg develops into a maggot, which eventually produces enzymes that decapitate the ant.


Factory Samples
Edmund White once called Andy Warhol "a brilliant dumbbell." Willem de Kooning reportedly accused him of being a "killer of art." Yet behind what the critic Arthur C. Danto has called Warhol's "fool" persona was an intelligence uncannily attuned to the Zeitgeist.
When Warhol died in 1987, his legacy included a 27-room town house filled with fine art, furnishings, objets d'art and jewelry that generated a staggering $25.3 million when auctioned in 1988 at Sotheby's -- funds that subsequently would be used to create the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts and later, with additional money from the Dia Center for the Arts and the Carnegie Institute, to establish a museum in Pittsburgh devoted solely to Warhol's work.
THE ANDY WARHOL MUSEUM (The Andy Warhol Museum/Distributed Art Publishers, $40) is a record of this collective endeavor, filled with photographs from the extensive Warhol archives.
It offers a grab bag of readings, from Mr.
Danto's provocative essay exploring the philosophical underpinnings of Warhol's art to Helen Searing's long-winded architectural treatise on industrial conversions and the making of museums.
In the most personal of these pieces, Bennard B. Perlman, a college friend, writes engagingly of Warhol's childhood and student years.
His recollections of Warhol as a shy, physically awkward observer contrast sharply with the irreverent, ultra-hip art star and socialite of Warhol's New York years.
More titillating though less revealing is the picture-album-cum-captions chronology that follows.
Here we learn everything from the year Warhol underwent cosmetic surgery on his nose to the scoop on the "50 Most Beautiful People" party at Warhol's infamous studio, the Factory.
A compact disk of 17 brief audio recordings also comes with the book.
"Andy taped thousands of hours of conversations, meetings, parties and dinners," reports the narrator, John Giorno, a poet who appeared in "Sleep," Warhol's first movie.
Perhaps this obsession with self-documentation explains why Warhol felt he had no need for memory and could glibly announce, "My mind is like a tape recorder with one button -- erase." ANDREA BARNET


Big Trouble at High Tea: The Mayfair Is in Default
The Mayfair, long among the city's handful of premier hotels, prides itself on the elegance of its refined afternoon English tea and the legendary Le Cirque restaurant housed there.
The hotel's elite clientele includes the King of Spain, Sophia Loren, Sir Georg Solti and Letitia Baldrige.
But despite its gilded 70-year history on Park Avenue at 65th Street -- and room rates ranging from $275 to $1,700 a night -- the Mayfair is in deep financial trouble.
A foreclosure suit in state court charges that the hotel defaulted on a $72 million mortgage held by the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association pension fund.


Diversity in the Workplace
Outer space, or television's version of it, may be the only place where multiculturalism operates frictionlessly.
Trekkers have long tolerated Vulcans, Kling ons and assorted humanoids, but two new shows, "Earth 2" and "Star Trek: Voyager" (which makes its debut Jan. 16), go where no species have gone before.
On "Earth 2," humans coexist with fish-faced monsters called Grendlers.
"Star Trek: Voyager" features a black Vulcan, a Native American and a chief officer who is -- gasp -- a woman. (The mission commander on "Earth 2" is also a woman; what is outer space coming to?) This diverse future does discriminate in one respect, though: Each character must be technologically savvy enough to, say, deconstruct an alien genome.
In the next generation, the unread, the unfed and, especially, the undereducated are quite plainly unwelcome.


NEW YORK'S FIGHT ON DEATH PENALTY SHIFTS TO COURTS
With the inauguration of Gov.
George E. Pataki virtually insuring the enactment of the death penalty in New York, the focus of the debate over capital punishment has shifted to the mechanics of drafting a bill that will survive a challenge in the state courts.
Many of those who have led the battle against capital punishment over the years, including the New York Civil Liberties Union and the Roman Catholic Church, refuse to give up the fight.
Other opponents acknowledge that New York will become the 38th state to enact the death penalty and believe their energy is better spent trying to make New York's bill more fair.


New Depths?
To the Sports Editor:
When the Apostle Paul teaches us to "suffer fools gladly," he has obviously never listened to Eli Strand of Westchester on WFAN.


Angela R. Arabia, Edward P. Meyer
Angela Rose Arabia, the daughter of Elaine Seman of New Milford, N.J., and Anthony Arabia of Ramsey, N.J., was married yesterday to Edward Peter Meyer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Meyer of Bloomingburg, N.Y.
The Rev.
Benedict P. Militello performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Madonna in Fort Lee, N.J.
Mrs.
Arabia-Meyer, 28, is to begin studying for a master's degree in education later this month at Montclair State University.
She graduated from Boston University.


Gregory R. Brevetti and Lucy M. Sun
Lucy Marie Sun and Gregory Raymond Brevetti, surgical residents at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics in Iowa City, were married yesterday at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
The Rev.
Vittorio Morrone, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 27, graduated from the University of Michigan, and she and her husband received M.D. degrees from the State University Health Science Center at Brooklyn.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rusky Sun of Berkeley Heights, N.J.
Her father is the president of Sunland State, a real estate company in New York.


Comfort and Dread
To the Editor:
I'm glad that Robert Pinsky found "An Xmas Murder," which I wrote several years ago, worth including in his excellent discussion of Christmas poems ("Tidings of Comfort and Dread: Poetry and the Dark Beauty of Christmas," Dec. 4).
One detail of the poem's plot differs from Mr.
Pinsky's summary of it.
The character named Dr.
Stephens does not fail to report seeing the perpetrators commit their crime; but his testimony is ignored by the jury, which dismisses charges against them.
Rumors about the doctor's sexual orientation are then spread, and he is subject to reprisals and loss of his livelihood.


No Headline
"It is horrible and bitter to admit, but Russia doesn't have an army anymore. It has only toy soldiers,  formations of boys with no capacity." LIEUT.
GEN.
ALEKSANDR I.LEBED, one of Russia's most senior army generals.  [ 6:1. ]


For Root Vegetables, Add Imagination
THE time has come and gone to abandon ripe tomatoes, delicate zucchini and fresh garden peas.
Autumn is over, and the root vegetable season has set in.
But sturdy vegetables like carrots, parsnips, beets and celeriac can sustain many a menu, especially if some imagination is used in the preparation.
Among the possibilities are to cook these vegetables until tender, then puree them for soup or marinate them for a salad.
They can be grated raw, then tossed with a dressing for another kind of salad.
Roasting them makes them suitable to accompany a main dish platter.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Manager's Profile
Ronald C. Ognar Fund: Strong Growth Fund; $106 million in assets.
Manager since Jan. 1, 1994, inception. (Sponsor: Strong Capital Management, Milwaukee.)


China
To the Editor: What wonderful memories flooded back as I read "Seeing China Under Your Own Steam." In 1989 a friend and I were told it was impossible to go independently, that we had to be part of a tour group.
We declared ourselves a group of two and just went.
By train, bus and plane we traveled from south to north, then west to Tibet.
Later I was asked to leave Lhasa, the Tibetan capital, because my passport identified me as a journalist, even though I wasn't on assignment; it was the anniversary of the takeover by China, and Beijing wanted all of us out of the country.


Looking Outward to Keep U.S. Economy Chugging
With the nation's economic expansion still strong but aging, this year is likely to provide a crucial test of whether increased trade can visibly deliver on its promised benefits to Americans.
For now that the advance in domestic demand is expected to slow at least somewhat, trade specialists say, foreign growth is the best hope to animate the United States economy.
"If the U.S. slows down in the next couple of years," said Jeffrey E. Garten, Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade, "a lot of slack can be taken up by the resurgence in Europe, Japan and the emerging markets."


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
RIVERDALE Listening to Chamber Music In Diplomatic Settings
The Bronx Arts Ensemble is celebrating the 50th anniversary of the United Nations with two chamber music concerts.
The first, today, is at the residence of the Kenyan Ambassador to the United Nations, Francis Muthaura.
The second is on March 19 at the home of the First Secretary of the Russian mission, Yuriy A. Goryachev.


Gita F. Rothschild, Andrew T. Berry
Gita F. Rothschild and Andrew T. Berry, partners in the Newark law firm of McCarter &amp; English, were married last Sunday at the couple's home in Westfield, N.J.
Judge Joseph E. Irenas of the Federal District Court of New Jersey, in Camden, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Rothschild-Berry, 44, graduated cum laude from George Washington University.
She received a master's degree in communications from Boston University and a law degree from Temple University.
The bride is a daughter of Sidney and Syd Sklaroff of Philadelphia.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Infiniti J30t; That Face, That Name; Have We Met Before?
I WAS remembering a guy at a Massachusetts mall a long time back.
He was carrying a briefcase, looking lost and saying over and over: "They stole my car. I can't believe they stole my car."
That picture flashed through my addled brain the other day, and what evoked the memory was that I, too, was muttering to myself in a shopping mall parking lot.
That is what you do when you can't find your car.


Irish to Delay Vote to Allow Divorce
The new Irish Government, formed last month under Prime Minister John Bruton, is expected to delay action on two of this Roman Catholic country's most emotional issues: divorce and abortion.
The Government of Albert Reynolds, deposed in a scandal over the handling of the extradition of a Catholic priest accused and later convicted of child molestation in Northern Ireland, had planned to consider changes in divorce and abortion laws in the spring.
There had been tentative plans to hold a referendum on divorce, which is banned by the Constitution, and to legalize the distribution of information on foreign abortion clinics.
Abortion in Ireland is legal only when the life of the mother is threatened.


Blunt Fury
To the Editor:
I was rather surprised at one reference in James R. Kincaid's review.
Speaking of all those who have previously written about Hardy, Mr.
Kincaid says, "Mr. Seymour-Smith goes after them with the blunt fury of a grizzly whose cubs have been cuddled by tourists from Ohio."


Some Countries Stop Spraying U.S. Airliners
Several countries have dropped or changed their policies of spraying insecticides aboard planes arriving from the United States.
After the United States Department of Transportation released a list in July of 25 countries that require spraying of airplanes from the United States, seven countries -- Chile, El Salvador, Cape Verde, St.
Lucia, Belize, Costa Rica and Jamaica -- and American Samoa have either stopped the practice or changed their requirements to spraying when planes are empty of passengers rather than when they are on board, according to a Department of Transportation spokesman.


A Mother Remembers Her Son While Helping Others
In the comforting din of a coffee shop, a woman with tired eyes sat down to discuss one of the saddest events of her life.
On the table she gently propped up three framed pictures of her son, who died in the summer.
Audrey Amdursky explained how she had found a bit of solace after his death.
In July, Mrs.
Amdursky's son Richard Amdur died of complications from H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
He was born with hemophilia, an inherited blood disorder.
But his case was mild and never kept him from leading a normal life.


Paris: A Retreat And a Return
MANY years ago, my first impulse as an aspiring novelist was to expatriate.
Having mulled over "The Sun Also Rises" and "A Moveable Feast" as though they were self-help manuals, I moved to Paris, prepared to plunge into what I believed was a city whose delights were accessible to anybody who didn't wear Bermuda shorts or mash his peas before eating them.
But what I found was an impenetrable metropolis that turned a stony face to foreigners, and concealed its secrets behind high walls, curtained windows and closed doors.
Compared to the States, it seemed an uptight, rule-ridden place where even in public parks one felt like a convict on work release.


Maureen Galvin and David Till
Maureen Ann Galvin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald M. Galvin of Forest Hills Gardens, Queens, and David Leo Till, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Till of Pittsburgh, were married yesterday.
Msgr.
Francis Mulhall performed the ceremony at Our Lady Queen of Martyrs Roman Catholic Church in Forest Hills.
Mrs.
Till, 25, is a graduate of Providence College.
She is the licensing coordinator at the National Audubon Society in New York.
Her father is a dentist in New York.
Her mother, Patricia Galvin, is a sales associate at Sara Jones Realty in Forest Hills.


No. 2 U.C.L.A. Rebounds With Rally at Oregon State
U.C.L.A. 87, Oregon State 78
Tyus Edney scored 23 points and triggered a late surge as second-ranked U.C.L.A. pulled away to beat Oregon State, 87-78, yesterday at Corvallis, Ore.
The Bruins (7-1 over all, 1-1 Pac-10) flirted with their second straight road loss before outscoring Oregon State (4-7, 1-1) by 12-5 in the final two minutes.
They bounced back from an 82-72 loss at Oregon on Thursday night.


Cultures Clash in Suburbs; Schools Struggle to Cope With Influx of Immigrant Students
Below a small, drooping American flag, the high school beginners' English class was growing restless and noisy.
Not even the imposing presence of Westbury High School's principal, Pless M. Dickerson, quieted the whispers in Spanish and Haitian Creole.
Mr.
Dickerson waited for the school bell to ring to confide his own frustration.


A Small Start At Beachfront On Rockaway
Ever since Mayor John V. Lindsay's urban-renewal bulldozers pushed over its crumbling summer cottages in the late 1960's, a vast tract of land in the Arverne section of the Rockaway peninsula has remained desolate, its weeds blowing in the ocean breeze along two miles of some of the best urban beachfront on the East Coast.
For a quarter century, every mayor since Mr.
Lindsay has tried to redevelop Arverne, the largest tract of city-owned vacant land in New York.
But none has been able to overcome a combination of economic and social problems that have made the 307 acres of Arverne in Queens one of the greatest planning and development challenges in New York City.


The Basinger Bankruptcy
To the Editor:
We are writing this letter on behalf of our client, Kim Basinger, to correct false implications which we believe exist in the article about her that appeared last week, "The Basinger Bankruptcy Bomb."


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
101.40
99.73
111.80
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5645
1.5495
1.7283
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.4003
1.4014
1.3183
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5495
1.5665
1.4930
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$371.80
$382.80
$386.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Habitats/129 Columbia Heights; A Real 2-Bedroom Find With Views of the Harbor
EVERY now and then you meet someone who has just won the apartment-hunting lottery, finding not just an affordable apartment with some serendipitous features, but an apartment that suits the buyer to perfection.
If those are the criteria, then Lee Willett just struck it rich.


On Sunday; A Society Spurns Death For Animals
THE kennel erupted with yapping pleas and wagging tails as Joanne Yohannan entered, newly freed of old obligations to see to humane euthanizing of the city's excess pets and newly focused on specializing in their adoption.
"This guy was just dumped on the B.Q.E.," she said of one feverishly friendly dog found on the dizzying Brooklyn-Queens Expressway.
The animal, his eyes aglisten, licked her hand between the bars.
He half whirled at the bit of attention, as if dancing because the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals has quietly retreated to its roots and quit the animal-killing business.


Never Did Spinder More Hungrily Wait
FELICIA'S JOURNEY By William Trevor. 213 pp. New York:  Viking. $21.95.


BETTER WORK THAN WELFARE. BUT WHAT IF THERE'S NEITHER?
If the bottom line is that welfare pays more than work does, the obvious solution is to reduce welfare payments gradually, until it pays to work.
JESSE BRYANT New York


Sports of The Times; It's a Cakewalk All the Way to Super Bowl
IF everything they say out here is true, the folks who vote for the National Football League's most valuable player have it all wrong.
Deion Sanders is more than the National Football League's defensive player of the year.
He should be the league's most valuable player as well.
Sanders not only dominated games this season, he greatly influenced an intransigent San Francisco 49ers culture built on solemnity, win or lose, an unyielding businesslike manner, win or lose.


Serving Needs of Disabled
THE common areas of New York City's older co-op buildings typically have two or three steps separating the street level from the lobby.
Another couple of steps may separate the lobby from the elevators.
These few steps, architects have found, can be troublesome because they cannot easily be covered with a ramp for the disabled without its grade exceeding normal safety levels.
Elevators and doors may also be too narrow for a wheelchair.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
'Beating Up on the Boys'
WHEN there is a fencer in the family, you have to watch your vocabulary.
"We were in the airport," Karen Coley of Freeport said, "and they asked, 'What's in the bag?' "


More Budget Cuts Possible As Tax Revenues Tumble
With tax revenues falling, the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has ordered New York City's agencies to prepare to cut spending by an additional 3 percent this year -- even if it means eliminating more programs and services.
In a letter sent to all commissioners on Friday, the Mayor's outgoing budget director, Abraham M. Lackman, also ordered agencies to begin drafting ways to cut another 3 percent from their budgets for the 1996 fiscal year, which begins in July.


Kotite at Home And in Charge
The Jets are losers, and just what is Rich Kotite going to do about it?
"The collapses are all history to me," Kotite, the Jets' new coach, said Friday.
"But what's more important is what we plan to do in the future."


Mutual Funds; 3 Advisers Set Model Courses for '95
MOST mutual fund investors had a bad 1994, as stock funds lost just over 2.5 percent, on average, and bond funds fell nearly twice that.
But 1995 looks more promising.
Ballooning equity valuations have finally burst.
And last year's growing economy, which prompted the Fed to raise interest rates six times, may at last be starting to slow down.


The Romanovs in Florida
One of the largest collections of Romanov treasures ever to leave the Kremlin museums will be on display beginning Wednesday in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
The new $6 million Florida International Museum in St.
Petersburg will open with "Treasures of the Czars: From the Moscow Kremlin Museums," an exhibition of more than 250 pieces from the collection of the royal family that ruled Russia for 300 years.
Highlights of the exhibition include the Crown of Monomach, an Eastern-styled, sable-trimmed and jewel-studded headdress worn by Peter I at the age of 10 in his dual coronation with his older half brother Ivan in 1682.
Also on display will be a tricentennial Faberge Easter Egg of gold, silver and diamonds with miniature portaits of all 18 czars and czarinas that Nicholas II presented to his wife Alexandra on Easter, 1913.


Purchase to Sample Chopin by Ohlsson
MUSING recently about "big careers versus mega careers" in music, the pianist Garrick Ohlsson pondered where he fit in.
"Maybe I made it difficult for myself, because I didn't want to specialize," he said.
"If I had, I might have become a more easily identifiable product."
The 46-year-old Mr.
Ohlsson, whom some call the greatest living American pianist, was not disparaging superstardom -- that indefinable state cinched by appearances on shows like "Late Show With David Letterman." In fact, anyone seeking an affable, articulate spokesman for classical music might do well to call Mr.
Ohlsson, who talks almost as fast as his fingers fly over the keyboard.
He is especially happy talking about Chopin just now.
As he puts it, he is so saturated with Chopin that if you pinch him, the composer's music will ooze out.


An Unfinished Woman
The earrings were gold and shaped like shields, and in the center of each shield was a hummingbird's egg of coral.
They were in a treasure shop in Sperlonga, an Italian town built on a promontory that confronts the sea.
The shape of the earrings was perhaps fateful, for Sperlonga is famous for guarding its possessions: in 1957, after Roman relics were found nearby in the Grotto of Tiberius, the Sperlongani blocked the road to Rome to prevent the fragments from being carted away.
It was the end of the season, and the shop was the only one open on the bleached crab leg of street that led down toward the water from the high white shell of the Piazza della Repubblica.
To its door, a little bell had been attached.
There was some Murano glass; a tray of rings; a few dark, heavy pieces of furniture, and the earrings, displayed on a piece of black velvet.
They were 18th century, said the proprietor, who was quick to tell us that the shop was open because he was a true Sperlongani: he lived here, year round, in the centro storico.


Worlds Falling Apart and Getting Hooked Up
AT the State Museum here, Ellen Levy ponders "The Collapse of Postmodernism" by way of recent paintings and drawings.
Concurrent with this, at the Trenton City Museum, is a show of constructions, assemblages, sculpture and videotapes by 20 artists, all of whom address the subject of the telephone.
Different though they are, both spectacles imply that it is not the art but the thought behind it that counts.
In Ms.
Levy's case, the thought goes back more than 30 years to a picture of the walls of Jericho falling, which she produced at age 11.
It would have made a rewarding addition to the show, but there is evidence enough in the new works and in Gail Levin's catalogue essay to indicate that it set the tone for Ms.
Levy's career.


Jets Say Steinberg and Co. Will Stay On
Although Coach Rich Kotite is being given broad powers in drafting and personnel decisions, the Jets will retain General Manager Dick Steinberg and his front-office personnel, a club official said yesterday.
The Jets' spokesman, Frank Ramos, said, "There are no plans to change." He also said that, contrary to published reports, the club had not contacted a longtime National Football League official, Peter Hadhazy, about joining the team, presumably to take over duties once belonging to Steinberg, who last month learned he had stomach cancer.


Mexicans Find Dreams Devalued
WITH dreams of new prosperity evaporating all around him, the young economist who became Mexico's President last month, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, said the time had come for people to hear the truth.
"The development of Mexico demands that we recognize with all realism that we do not constitute a rich country but a nation of grave needs and wants," he said.


Where They Sit in Albany
The hub of power in state government is a medium-sized office on the second floor of the ornate Capitol building in Albany, which Gov.
George E. Pataki moved into last week.
His top advisers are within a few short steps.
But even if influence comes with proximity, the office assignments are not necessarily a gauge of clout.
For the most part, the new officials simply took over the offices of their predecessors.


China
To the Editor: Having recently returned after nine and a half weeks in China, my wife and I found "Seeing China Under Your Own Steam" (Dec. 4) interesting.
In describing "a two-week self-guided tour designed to get visitors off the tourist route, closer to the country and its people," Nicholas D. Kristof misses his objective by recommending relying on hotel airport pickup and on concierges to arrange train and air tickets.
Flying certainly enables travelers to reach a destination quickly, but then they miss so much of the countryside.


Economics Counts Little When Cabbies Pass Blacks
To the Editor:
In the Jan. 1 Soapbox essay "Why Cabbies Pass Up Blacks," a taxicab driver, William Mersey, tells only part of the truth.
Economics may play a role when black passengers are passed, but the primary reason is because they are black, period.


Those Marches Are With It and Homespun Too
The Jungle Book  Jason Scott Lee, Cary Elwes, Lena Headey Directed by Stephen Sommers PG 108 minutes


Sports of The Times; The 'Terrible Towel' Waves Once Again
THICK gray clouds resembled the dome of smoke and soot that once hung above the steel mills that are closed now.
Only the nickname has endured: Steelers.
And yesterday, for the first time in their long rivalry, the Steelers and the Cleveland Browns were in a playoff game together, a Blue Collar Bowl en route, possibly, to the Super Bowl.
Even during the team introductions, the rivalry erupted at the drop of a towel.


A Nuclear Deal, With Iran
Iran may add an atomic bomb to its arsenal within the next decade, perhaps within five years, American and Israeli officials warn.
Before it is too late to head off that dangerous development, Washington needs to reconsider how to deal with Teheran on this issue.
The U.S. has sought to contain Iran, along with next-door rival Iraq.
This policy of dual containment has in practice meant dual isolation, trying to minimize all contact and commerce, not only by Americans but also by other countries.
That policy is apparently failing to keep Iran from getting what it needs to build a bomb.


Kareene Nahas, John McCarus
JOHN McCARUS, 35, and Kareene Nahas, 29, are not people a dating-service computer would ever match up.
He is a 9-to-5 advertising account manager at Gourmet magazine in New York who used to wake up to an alarm clock and to keep cigars and fancy coffees in the freezer.


World Markets; Schweppes and the Battle for King Cola
WHEN Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C. released its last earnings report in September, the soft drink and candy company was bubbling over with optimism.
Pretax profit was up by 23.2 percent for the first half of the year, the merger of A &amp; W Brands into its beverage business in the United States had gone smoothly and unusually warm summer weather in Europe seemed to promise a strong sales increase for the second half of the year.
But in the last few months, the fizz has gone out of Cadbury Schweppes, at least as far as investors are concerned.
The stock, which rallied over the summer after having plunged along with the rest of the market earlier in the year, has fallen sharply again since September.


It's Seed Time! First, the Vegetables
JANUARY is traditionally the month to pore over seed catalogues.
If you wait until February, you're already behind, because you should be starting your leeks, under lights, along with two billion viola seeds.
When nongardeners say "I guess it's pretty quiet in the garden right now," I laugh hysterically.
I'll talk about cut flowers and perennials, old-time apple trees and climbing roses soon enough, but somehow, the cold winter wind always turns my mind to vegetables.
Rutabagas are high on my wish list this year, after having had them during the holidays for the first time -- mashed, with plenty of butter and salt and pepper.
They are a beautiful golden orange color, with a flavor halfway between a turnip and a chestnut.


Not Always An Ego Trip
To the Editor:
While I found Josh Young's article "Film Production Companies: What Price Vanity?"  [ Dec. 11 ]  intelligent and well researched, it strikes me as sad that Mr.
Young still uses the pejorative word "vanity" to describe productions by actors smart enough to create roles for themselves in a movie.


RESULTS PLUS
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  UConn Stops St.
John's  Rebecca Lobo, the senior forward, scored 24 points as Connecticut improved to 10-0 with a 98-64 victory over host St.
John's yesterday.
Kara Wolters added 15 points and 9 rebounds and Jamelle Elliott scored 13 as second-ranked Connecticut shot 55 percent from the field.
Connecticut led by 55-25 at halftime as St.
John's shot a dismal 28 percent (11 for 29) in the first half.
Tawana Jackson scored 15 points and Marcia Price 13 to lead St.
John's (6-5).


Anybody Home?
The Democrats are in the throes of an advice crisis.
For once, there is a shortage of people eager to tell the President exactly what he needs to do.
Meanwhile, the dangerous White House public-relations team continues to display its gift for feckless hairsplitting (the Hilton Head flyover) and humiliating imagery (the President posing with two terminally lame ducks).
Well, things do look bad for the Razorback Renaissance.
Pretty soon, a bulb will have to blink on over Bill Clinton's head or they can turn the lights out at the re-elect office.
But with time and discipline, Mr.
Clinton could again become a factor in shaping the national policy agenda that was his alone to write only two years ago.


Beard Says Nets Not Playing Like Pros
On the surface, the Nets miss Kenny Anderson like a kid leaving for college could only miss mom and pop.
They appear lonely in the backcourt without their All-Star point guard, looking for support where there is none, yearning for something familiar and surviving on spare change from underneath the couch.
Butch Beard is not buying this one, though.
He believes the problem is much deeper after his team disintegrated in the fourth quarter and lost badly, 102-85, to the Atlanta Hawks tonight at the Omni.


N.H.L. Clubs Closer to Player Offer
Faced with the impending cancellation of their season after 99 days of a labor lockout, the National Hockey League's board of governors made another collective bargaining proposal yesterday, as well as a firm threat.
The proposal resembles, but doesn't match, the most recent offer of the N.H.L.
Players Association.
The threat is that the season will canceled if there is no agreement by noon on Tuesday.


Officer Shoots 4 During Fight In Queens Shop
An off-duty transit police officer shot four men, including a bystander, yesterday after she was attacked in a Dunkin' Donuts shop in Queens, the police said.
The officer, Kim Jackson, walked into the store, at 118-07 Queens Boulevard in Forest Hills, after five young men at 2:14 A.M., said Lieut.
Robert J. Valentino, a spokesman for the transit police.


In California, Political Prestidigitation
HOW swiftly and smoothly Dick Gephardt and Newt Gingrich accomplished it in Washington.
A few gracious words, a symbolic passing of the gavel and, presto change-o, a new House Speaker and an end to 40 years of Democratic rule.
Here in California, political revolution is proving a little more complicated and a great deal more entertaining.
Two months after Republicans gained narrow control of the 80-member State Assembly and a day before the Republican Governor, Pete Wilson, is to deliver the State of the State address in its ornate green chamber, just who will run the place, and how, remains an open question.


IN SHORT: FICTION
MAIDENHOME  By Ding Xiaoqi. Aunt Lute, paper, $8.95.


THE LAST VICTIM
In her essay about the anger of white male voters, Estrich misses the point about Hillary Rodham Clinton.
If Mrs.
Clinton wants power, let her earn it in the political arena.
Who appointed her to take on Newt Gingrich on the subject of orphanages before the President did?
Gingrich is an elected official, accountable to the voters; she is not.


Pamela Gilbert, Charles Lewis 3d
Pamela Beth Gilbert, a lawyer in Washington, and Charles Reed Esray Lewis 3d, the founder of a research organization there, were married yesterday in Princeton, N.J.
Mayor Marvin R. Reed of Princeton performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Gilbert.
Ms.
Gilbert, 36, is keeping her name.
She is the legislative counsel in Washington for Malkin &amp; Ross, a New York law firm.
Until last month she was the director of Congress Watch, an arm of Public Citizen, the public-interest group.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from New York University.


High-Tech Cabins
When the 1,740-passenger Century, Celebrity Cruises' newest ship, sails its maiden voyage, scheduled for next December, passengers will be able to book shore excursions, schedule a massage, watch movies of their choice and shop in the ship's stores without leaving their cabins.
These and an array of other high-tech accoutrements -- video games, interactive kiosks detailing passenger services, conference room with language translation and teleconferencing equipment -- are part of a sophisticated new interactive entertainment system designed for Celebrity by Sony.
Based in Fort Lauderdale, the Century, an 800-foot, 70,000-ton ship, will cruise the Caribbean.
Two additional new Celebrity ships, to be launched over the next three years, will also feature the entertainment system.


Contrarians at The Gate
IF SCIENCE IS A SURE EDIFICE OF knowledge, with each brick tested by experiment, then all scientists should agree on the main floor plan, with disputes generally reserved for matters of detail.
Yet fundamental dissents are not so rare and occasionally prevail.
The best-known dissenters in science today are probably the small group of biologists who repudiate the notion that the human immunodeficiency virus is the cause of AIDS.
They complain they can't get financing to prove their ideas, and that the AIDS research establishment has self-interested reasons for ignoring their objections.


Keeping Control Of the Surge After School
It's a problem across the city.
High school dismissal bells ring, and suddenly throngs of exuberant teenagers burst onto the streets.
Neighbors complain that too often the result is rowdiness, graffiti, litter, vandalism, shoplifting and fights.
Now, a new program is helping in Clinton.
Although some difficulties remain, it is being touted as a model, said Kevin O'Connor, a community affairs police officer.


Recovery? Not in Your Paycheck.
SOMETHING is wrong with America's economic boom.
After nearly four years of ever-stronger growth, people's wages should be going up faster than their expenses.
For most people they're not, and this is the first time in decades that a recovery has gone so long without putting more money in more pockets.
And now, if the recovery runs out of steam in 1995 -- as so many economists predict -- that money might never show up.
Raising wages has become the No. 1 economic issue in the nation today.
Robust economic growth and rapid job creation are no longer enough to raise spirits.
Both occurred in plenty of time for the November election, and still the Democrats lost Congress.
In his last speech to the nation, in mid-December, President Clinton made raising incomes, particularly wages, the new top priority.
But neither the Democrats nor the Republicans are proposing ways to do this, except by lowering taxes.


O.K., CALL IT WAR
We as a nation have not been able to control our eating, drinking or smoking, yet we demand that people addicted to narcotics kick the habit.
If they don't, they are forced into a life of crime.
In "O.K., Call It War" (Word &amp; Image, Dec. 18), Max Frankel has raised important issues.
The true price of continuing a losing battle against drugs is an intolerable level of crime and violence.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-11  RUSSIAN ARMY HUMBLED  The once-feared Russian military has been humbled in the separatist area of Chechnya by a few thousand urban guerrillas, and the failure has been a source of growing humiliation for Russia.  1  The commander of the Russian military in Chechnya was killed.  6


Conservative Radio Host Says He Has AIDS, and Boston Shows Its Heart
David Brudnoy, as one of the country's most popular radio personalities, rails against President Bubba and welfare mothers and affirmative action, but he never fit the stereotype of the blustering right-wing talk-show host, particularly not this week.
In his usual soothing professorial tones, he delved into the topic of AIDS by revealing the graphic details of his own case.
It was the first time that Mr.
Brudnoy had discussed his homosexuality or his disease with his callers, and the commotion he caused in Boston was a testament both to his appeal and to the power of talk radio.
The medium is routinely accused of fomenting divisiveness and hate, but Mr.
Brudnoy's revelations prompted a citywide burst of affection.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Cracking down on graffiti is not just a quality-of-life issue.
It can sometimes lead to bigger things.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 How the Chinese-language press covers New York, the nation and the world.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 9 The best Super Bowl commercials; a Coney Island sideshow in SoHo and a concert with the Kenyan ambassador.
MOVIE CLOCK 11 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 12 A Chinatown tour: From no-frills Chef Ho Dumpling House to the expansive Nice Restaurant.
SOAPBOX 13 A mother looks back on a mistake that cost her son his life.
And advice to help the city's bottom line.


Those Marches Are With It and Homespun Too
Dumb and Dumber  Jim Carrey, Jeff Daniels Directed by Peter Farrelly PG-13 107 minutes


Word for Word/National Empowerment Television; You Want Your Newt TV? Whether You Do or You Don't, It's Here.
NEWT GINGRICH, the new Speaker of the House, says he wants to "zero out" funding for public broadcasting because he doesn't think taxpayers should have to "subsidize something that told them how to think."
National Empowerment Television is more his speed.
Founded just over a year ago by Paul Weyrich, the 24-hour, Washington-based network is home to two of Mr.
Gingrich's programs, including a history course.
He says that with its emphasis on live, viewer call-in programming, the conservative network provides a better alternative to the "distortions" of the "media elite."


BUDGET WOES EASE FOR CITIES IN U.S., ANALYSTS REPORT
Flush with growing tax receipts from an improved economy and reaping the benefits of years of belt-tightening, the country's major cities are in their best financial shape in years, city officials and analysts say.
This trend is evident despite the fact that it does not include the nation's two largest cities, New York and Los Angeles, where weak local economies have contributed to continuing budget woes.


Concerned


Erasmus Tales
To the Sports Editor:
As a student at Erasmus Hall High School during Sid Luckman's glory years there, permit me to supplement Ira Berkow's piece related to the rededication of Erasmus Field in Sid's honor ("I Remember It All As if It Were Yesterday," The Times, Dec. 2).


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
LIVE FROM THE BATTLEFIELD.
From Vietnam to Baghdad: 35 Years in the World's War Zones By Peter Arnett.
Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $14.
A reporter who has covered conflicts all over the globe, most recently the gulf war, describes the dangerous work that has earned him many distinguished prizes, but also the criticism of senators and Presidents.
His memoir is "lean and clear . . . rich in anecdote, redolent in its description," Bill Keller said here last year.


CRIME
The dead, the near dead and the living dead haunt Michael Dibdin's DEAD LAGOON (Pantheon, $21).
The morbid title comes from the lifeless swamps and salt marshes that Venetians call the laguna morta and that the author uses as a powerful symbol for a great city in stagnation.
Melancholy images of death and decay overwhelm Aurelio Zen when the high-ranking ministry officer visits his native Venice on a secret assignment involving the kidnapping of an American businessman.
To maintain his cover, Zen pretends to look into the charges of a batty noblewoman that ghosts have invaded her palazzo.
The international incident takes Zen into the contemporary underworld of drug dealers and corrupt civil officials, while the Contessa's poignant story plunges him deep into his own past and into the wartime history of the city.


Trail of the Sheik -- A special report; On Trial: An Islamic Cleric Battles Secularism
At the end of a humble residential street in Fayoum, Egypt, underneath a balconied apartment building, is a modest, unadorned mosque with two barred windows and a wooden door.
It was at this mosque, along a street where neighborhood children kick up the dust playing soccer and laundry is hung to dry from balconies above, that Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman made his reputation as a kind of religious revolutionary, a threat to the secular order.


POSTINGS: For the Dashing Commuter; L.I.R.R. Finishing 34th St. Pavilion
The finishing touches are being put on the new 34th Street entrance pavilion for the Long Island Rail Road at Penn Station in Manhattan.
More lighting will be installed and focused.
Granite bases will be added at the foot of the walls to prevent water seepage.
An unsightly box will soon be removed from the top of the old clock that dangles like a pendant from the ceiling; the four-faced clock was salvaged from the original Pennsylvania Station, which was demolished in the early 1960's.


Jan. 1-7: The Call of the Ecosystem; U.S. to Wolves: Come Back. All Is Forgiven.
It has been more than half a century since the howl of a wolf was heard inside Yellowstone National Park.
But after a judge removed one of the last legal hurdles to wolf restoration last week, the four-legged carnivore is likely to be back in Yellowstone in a matter of days.
The gray wolf, an endangered species in every state but Alaska and Minnesota, is at the center of an epic fight over two views of the West.
Ranchers and some Western politicians had fought to keep wolves out of the park, saying they posed a threat to livestock.
Others said the wolf was needed to thin huge numbers of elk, deer and moose, which have flourished in the absence of a predator.


Rare Glow Of Palmyra
I FIRST saw Palmyra in moonlight as a ghostly forest of arches and columns.
I walked through it alone, although indeed Abdul, our hired driver, was parked nearby discreetly.
Soon, I was surrounded on all sides by 25-foot-high columns.
Made of porous stone, they did not gleam as marble would have, but rather pulsed with a softer light that was calming.
My son Wynn and I had traveled on Syrian roads all day, starting early from the northern city of Aleppo near the Turkish border.At the once-grand, now-seedy Baron Hotel in Aleppo, the manager had introduced us to Abdul, who drove us, stopping at several sites along the way.
Abdul was big and outgoing; his buddy, Musa, a quieter man who hoped some day to be a tour guide, had come along for the ride.


Glamour Brings Angst To Lincoln Square
Christie Brinkley has seen two movies at the new Sony Theaters Lincoln Square on Broadway at 68th Street, and Susan Sarandon and Ben Kingsley attended the premiere showing there of "Death and the Maiden." Sherry Lansing, the chairman of Paramount Pictures, toured the glitzy 10-screen theater, and Steven Spielberg, the director, took his family to see the special effects on the eight-story Imax screen.
The visits from stars, Hollywood bigshots and even busloads of entertainment journalists have delighted the management of the theater, which has been wildly successful since it opened in November.
But they have infuriated neighbors, who say that idling limousines and other vehicles are choking Broadway.


Flea Market's Growth Has School Neighbors Waspish
The flea market at Intermediate School 44 on Columbus Avenue at 76th Street began humbly enough: a few fruit and vegetable stands in the early 1980's that gave part of their proceeds to the school.
Now the Sundays-only market, incorporated under the name Greenflea, draws as many as 350 vendors and 10,000 visitors.
Over the last four years it has raised as much as $1 million for the schools.


Wall Street; A Promising Start, but the Numbers Took Their Toll
ATTENTION Kmart shoppers. Some bargains aren't such good deals.
In November, Kmart sold off majority stakes in two of its specialty retailers to an eager public.
The first one, Officemax, leaped on the day of the offering and has continued to rise.
The second, The Sports Authority, was viewed as cheap when it came public.
But last week its buyers got a rude shock.


Long Island Q&amp;A: Milton Cohen; Why One Business Planted Its Headquarters in Westbury
MILTON COHEN'S life has become a little easier.
After commuting from Long Island to Brooklyn for 38 years, Mr.
Cohen, president of the Lifetime Hoan Corporation, a designer of cutlery, kitchen tools and other gadgets, has moved his company to Westbury.
The new office, in a sprawling complex once occupied by the Olsten Corporation, is certainly more convenient, but that was not his first priority, Mr.
Cohen said.
The company moved, in October, to "secure the firm's profitability" after a recession that devastated more than a few retailers.


A Cosmopolitan Food Scene in Jerusalem
"JERUSALEM the golden," goes the hymn, "with milk and honey blest." But friends had warned us that it would not be easy to eat well in Jerusalem outside private homes.
All the good restaurants are in Tel Aviv, said some; Middle Eastern food is all the same, complained others.
Stay in Rome if you want to eat well, they all concluded.
They were wrong.
During a brief stay in the lull between Hanukkah and Christmas we ate well and variously at a range of prices, and did not begin to exhaust the choices, which included international gourmet and ethnic, offered by the archetypal cosmopolis.
Although a certain lack of polish was occasionally evident, we suspected it was deliberate policy or the national ethic. (Want dancing waiters? Go to France.)
As might be expected, even gastronomy is not entirely free of politics -- for example, Israeli oenophiles are terrified of losing the vineyards of the Golan Heights -- but we were struck by the wonderful live-and-let-live ecumenism of the food scene.
Practically the only style of cooking not represented -- small loss -- is the half-a-steamed-carrot approach of nouvelle cuisine, while "creative cuisine" here usually means kosher solutions for, among others, French, Italian, Chinese, Argentine, Indian, Ethiopian, Moroccan and Yemenite menus and, most recently, for a sushi bar.


Yu-chieh Lee, Taiwan Church Head, 95
Yu-chieh Lee, head of the Lord of Universe Church in Taiwan, died on Dec. 26 in Nantow, Taiwan.
He was 95.
The cause was kidney failure, a spokesman said.
Before he founded the church in 1980, he was publisher and editor of The Independent Evening Post in Taipei.


Expansionist Designs on an Old Power Plant
EMPIRE BUILDER?
Nicholas Serota hardly looks the part.
His soft-spoken manner, rimless glasses and slim frame suggest an esthete rather than a power broker.
He even grows edgy at the suggestion that as director of the Tate Gallery of London, he is displaying inordinate imperial ambitions.
"Well, we're not doing anything abroad yet," he said with a nervous laugh.
Still, in the six years since he took over Britain's foremost museum of British and modern art, the Tate has opened two popular out-of-town branches, one in Liverpool, the other at St.
Ives, on the Cornish coast.
Now, in its most daring expansion since it was founded in 1897, the Tate plans to turn an abandoned power station on the south side of the Thames into Bankside, a museum for modern art that will be even larger than its Millbank headquarters on the north bank.
The branch is expected to open by the year 2000.


Owners Have Their Fingers Crossed
By fashioning a collective-bargaining proposal that excludes a salary cap or a payroll tax, the National Hockey League believes it has moved a great distance in addressing the union's chief concerns.
And although league officials acknowledge some significant differences with the union's most recent plan, they say those issues should not keep the union from approving the proposal.
"But if anyone thinks this is a home run for the owners, he's a fool," said Brian Burke, senior vice president of the N.H.L.
"And anyone who thinks this is a home run for the players is a fool."


BENEFITS
New-York Historical Society  MONDAY -- The New-York Historical Society will benefit from a black-tie dinner and a preview of old master paintings from the Society's collection to be auctioned this week.
The evening at Sotheby's, 1334 York Avenue, at 72d Street, will begin at 7 with cocktails, followed by dinner at 8.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 873-3400, extension 253.
For Historic Preservation  TUESDAY -- A dinner and evening with Brendan Gill and Wendy Wasserstein will be held at the Colony Club, 564 Park Avenue, at 62d Street, to benefit the Friends of the Upper East Side Historic Districts.
The event will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner at 8.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 535-2526.
About Dr.
King  TUESDAY -- Yolanda King will perform her one-woman show about her father, "Tracks: A Celebration of the Triumph and Spirit of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr." The event will raise funds for the scholarship fund of the Edges Group, a nonprofit mentors' network primarily for African-American students who have achieved excellence in business courses.
The performance will begin at 7:30 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall and will be followed by a cocktail reception at 9:30.
Tickets, $100, from (718) 638-8199.
Leukemia Society Benefit  TUESDAY -- The Leukemia Society will benefit from a dinner at the Grand Hyatt Hotel honoring Mike Richter, a hockey player for the New York Rangers.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 6, followed by dinner at 7.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 697-7949.
Benefit Concert  SATURDAY -- A reception and concert will be held at Trinity Lutheran Church, 164 West 100th Street, to benefit the educational programs of the American Negro Spiritual Research Foundation.
Performers will include Arthur Thompson, Faye Robinson and the Harlem Spiritual Ensemble.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 749-3657.
Benefit Dance  SATURDAY -- The Community Health Project will sponsor the first annual Snowball, to raise funds for its lesbian health program.
The event, at the Westbeth Theater Music Hall, 151 Bank Street, between West and Washington streets, will begin at 7 P.M. and will include cocktails and a cabaret followed by a fashion show at 8:30 by Patricia Field and a dance party at 10.
Tickets, $100, or $50 for the fashion show and dance, from (212) 675-3559.
Saving the Rain Forest  SATURDAY -- An auction and concert to benefit the African rain forest project of the Tanzania Wildlife Fund will be held at Nell's, 246 West 14th Street.
The event, at which George Plimpton is to be the host, will include an auction of works by such artists as Peter Beard, Andy Moses and James Nares, and a concert by Harper Simon.
The evening will begin with a buffet dinner at 7, followed by the auction at 8:45 and music at 9:15.
Tickets, $85, from (212) 802-9227.
Benefit for the Urban League  NEXT SUNDAY -- The New York Urban League will benefit from its 28th annual New Year's Reception, which will include a buffet luncheon and dancing, from 11:30 A.M. to 4 P.M. at the Plaza Hotel.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 926-8000, extension 77.


On a Sleeper, From Bonn to Berlin
IN Germany, where trains are already among the best in the world, a new overnight service is setting a remarkable standard for comfort on rails.
Specially built trains labeled InterCityNight on the side have been plying two routes, Berlin-Bonn and Berlin-Munich, since the service was introduced in May.
They are already carrying about 600 passengers daily, in two classes of seating.


A Source Of Inspiration
To the Editor:
There are even more reasons to admire Jascha Heifetz than those offered by Edward Rothstein in "A Good Argument for the 'Great Man' Theory"  [ Dec. 18 ] .
For those musicians who played in orchestras with which Heifetz performed concertos, as I did, the experience could be edifying; the ensemble sounded better for weeks after he appeared.


Tech Notes; Fighting Frozen Pipes at the Source
AS the season's first true wintry blasts hit the Northeast last week, many homeowners were reminded of the bitter cold of last winter, which froze water pipes and caused hundreds of millions of dollars in damage.
More precisely, the damage was caused when frozen pipes burst and then leaked when the weather warmed up.
While insurance companies covered much of the damage -- State Farm, for example, paid $212 million in 1993 for such cases -- the payments did not cover the aggravation of cleanup and repairs or the sentimental value of lost possessions.


BETTER WORK THAN WELFARE. BUT WHAT IF THERE'S NEITHER?
DeParle contrasts Moore's "menial labor" with the supposed greater significance of work in "corporate offices or the White House." I do not see anything menial, anything lacking dignity or significance, in Moore's work: she is preparing food for others and doing so with obvious concern for their welfare.
What work is of greater importance?
MARK R. STEWART Cambridge, Mass.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Racks of Ribs, Hold the Concept
Their name is changing, from Tony Roma's to Texas Grill, So is their "secret" barbeque sauce.
And so, says their owner, is their "concept," featuring mechanical bulls for customers to ride.
But much of the fare at three former Roma franchises (two in Manhattan and one in Yonkers) will stay the same -- ribs, chicken and Tex-Mex staples like stuffed jalapeno poppers.


Marla Spiegel and Marc Shapses
Marla Spiegel, a daughter of Myra and Stanley Spiegel of Douglaston, Queens, was married last evening to Marc Shapses, the son of Barbara Shapses of Great Neck, L.I., and Stewart Shapses of New York.
Rabbi Jerome Berkowitz officiated at Fresh Meadows Jewish Center in Fresh Meadows, Queens.


Beyond Beavis and Butt-head: MTV's Sketch-Comedy Group
KILLING TIME ON A Manhattan sound stage, waiting for technicians to prepare a set for their cable-television show, the 11 members of the State were doing what they do best: jumping in with one-liners like a tag-team wrestling act.
The 10 men and 1 woman, who met as students at New York University, all write, perform and edit their comedy sketches.
Improbably, they also make all important decisions collectively, from which sketches to include on their show to provisions in their agreement with MTV, which renewed them for a third cycle of shows.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: HARLEM;
If money is power, five political appointees are destined for the fast track.
The five, still to be chosen, will decide how $300 million in public money will be spent in Harlem, Washington Heights and parts of the South Bronx, one of six urban empowerment zones picked by President Clinton late last year.
For two years, community advocates in the three areas have compiled wish-lists of projects they would pay for if New York was tapped for the direct government aid and tax breaks zone status confers.
At the top: a "one-stop capital shop" for small businesses, two centers to recruit and train unemployed residents for jobs, more day-care and clean-up of vacant lots.


Right Double-Cross?
To the Editor:
John Ward's response to "A Fond Farewell to Big Government" (Letters, Dec. 11; At Work, Nov. 13) is beyond even the incredible standards of the ridiculous established by economists and M.B.A.'s.
Now that protectionism is associated with unions' trying to save jobs, history is revised to blame -- of all things -- the Smoot Hawley Tariff for the Great Depression!
Greed, speculation on margin and general stupidity apparently had nothing to do with it.


When City Walls Speak
THE police expected a shootout.
After all, they had seen the writing on the wall: a threat scrawled in spray paint on a housing project doorway.
Someone named Dock vowed that when he ran into his enemy, Rine, he was going to TOS him -- terminate him on sight.
The cops knew Dock and Rine (rhymes with "sign").
Both had been behind bars for vandalism.
But now they were back on the street.
The police found Dock, who runs with a crew called the Deadly Ones, and explained that bumping off Rine, a member of the rival Manhattan Known Bombers, would mean jail, for years.


Remembering Lydia
THE FIRST WOMAN IN THE REPUBLIC A Cultural Biography of Lydia Maria Child.
By Carolyn L. Karcher.
Illustrated. 804 pp.
Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press. $37.95.


For Learning Disabled, New Help With College
The first time Chris Lokker had to approach a college professor to say that she was learning-disabled, she was a nervous wreck: "I went up to my psych professor after class, shaking, and said I had to tell him something," said Ms.
Lokker, a student at Ocean County Community College in Tom's River, N. J. "Then I started to cry."


An Art Gallery Seen Only When It Rains
It's raining art.
Early in this century, the umbrella began its evolution, first from black to color, and in the last decade or so, as a commercial reproduction.


Excesses of Free Speech Do Not Excuse Censorship
To the Editor:
Yes, I realize that Anka Radakovich, the sex columnist for Details, was probably kidding in her comment for your Jan. 1 article, "New Year's Wishes for a Better New York." She probably would not actually "require mandatory muzzles for men who scream out street evaluations of female body parts."


Library Events Set Mood for the New Year
FROM ragtime to the riches of Pergolesi, the new year's music making is off to a rousing start.
In at least three of the county's libraries, there is more than books.
At 2:30 P.M. today, Marianne McShane and the group Fiddlesticks regale children with an Irish song and storytelling session at the White Plains Public Library, while at 3, it's "January Jazz" at the Ossining Public Library as the jazz banjoist Cynthia Sayer and her Crazy Rhythm group play ragtime, music of the Roaring 20's and Tin Pan Alley favorites.


Erickson Meets With Seahawk Ownership
The Miami Hurricanes' DENNIS ERICKSON met with the management of the Seattle Seahawks yesterday after saying that their coaching post was the only National Football League job he could imagine himself taking.
"I'm interested in the situation because it was where I was born and raised," Erickson told The Seattle Times after his arrival Friday night at San Francisco International Airport.
"I've had other options with other N.F.L. teams. But this is the one I have chosen to pursue."


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Education Life/Section 4A
The hottest issue in classrooms: teaching virtues.


Iranian Foundation Head Denies Accusations of Corruption
A prominent Iranian official is publicly defending the giant foundation he runs, which is under investigation by the Government because of accusations of corruption.
The Foundation for the Oppressed, a repository for the confiscated assets of the late Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi and 53 industrialists in exile, was intended to benefit the poor and people who were disabled in the Iran-Iraq war of 1980-88.


Commercial Property/The Avenue of the Americas; Tug-of-War Over a Business Improvement District
LATELY, everyone has been touting business improvement districts as cures for all that ails an area.
BID's, as they are known, are credited with cleaning up 34th Street and Union Square, with making Times Square and the Grand Central area feel safer, with turning Bryant Park from a dangerous eyesore to a neighborhood oasis.
Some people even expect that lower Manhattan's new BID will help solve one of the city's seemingly intractable problems, persistent high vacancy rates downtown.


When the Bible Becomes the Excuse for Killings at Clinics; Words Matter
To the Editor:
The abuse of language by some religious and political leaders is important in understanding the physical violence and murders that have occurred in abortion clinics.


Jan. 1-7: Return Visit; Quayle Is Hospitalized To Remove Appendix
Former Vice President Dan Quayle had an enlarged appendix removed last week during his second admission in a month to Indiana University Hospital in Indianapolis.
Mr.
Quayle, who is 47, en-tered the hospital the first time to treat blood clots in his lungs.
He has been taking an anti-coagulant pill to reduce risks of a recurrence.
As he prepared to leave the hospital this weekend, a crucial question was answered: A pathology report showed the appendix contained a benign growth, according to The Associated Press.
It was a cyst-like tumor containing mucous and known to doctors as mucinous cystadenoma.


Near the Pastures, New Protests


Hans-Otto Steiff, 75, German Toy Maker
Hans-Otto Steiff, former president of Margarete Steiff G.m.b.H., makers of teddy bears and other animal toys, died on Dec. 31 in his hometown of Giengen in Baden-Wurttemberg, Germany.
He was 75.
He suffered a long illness after a series of strokes, Rolf H. Honniger, managing director of the Steiff international holding company, said.


Despite Safety Concerns, Tourism to Peru Surges
UNFAZED by reports of terrorism, cholera and street crime, tourists from Atlanta to Australia are pouring into Peru at an unprecedented rate, drawn mainly by the lost Inca city of Machu Picchu, and officials expect the final figures to show that 1994 was a record year for tourism in Peru.
Based on preliminary figures, Peru's National Tourism Board estimates that the number of foreign tourists passing through Peru in 1994 exceeded 400,000, compared with 275,000 in 1993.


Sarah A. Collingwood, Paul X. Tobin
Sarah Alison Collingwood, a daughter of John and Christine Collingwood of Melbourne, Australia, was married there on Thursday to Paul Xavier Tobin, a son of Jim and Ellen Tobin of Bay Head, N.J.
Bishop James Grant, the Anglican Dean of Melbourne, performed the ceremony at the Chapel of St.
Luke the Evangelist at the Melbourne Girls' Grammar School.
The bride, 25, graduated from Monash University and received a graduate diploma in office systems from the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, both in Melbourne.
She is a marketing programs specialist with the Platinum Software Corporation, developers and marketers of financial and accounting software, in Irvine, Calif.
Her father is the chief executive of Johnson Tiles, a maker of wall and floor tiles in Melbourne.


THE LAST VICTIM
The backlash against Hillary Clinton et al. includes men who came of age as liberals in the 1960's believing in social justice.
As they have aged, they have kept their dedication to those ideals while acquiring the common sense that, one hopes, accompanies maturity.
They find it not so much threatening as offensively stupid to maintain that a 5-foot-4-inch, 115-pound woman has a "right" to be a firefighter or a cop or a combat marine; or that a Playboy pinup in a fireman's locker creates a "hostile work environment" entitling some woman to a million dollars in punitive damages.


'Happy Trails'
To the Editor:
A fond childhood memory I have is of my father taking my sister and me to our neighborhood theater in Kenosha, Wis., to see the Thursday night specials of three cowboy films.
It was a particular delight if two of the three were flicks by Roy Rogers and Dale Evans.
My sister was so enamored of Dale that she proudly wore with a fringed blue vest and skirt her two cast-metal "Queen of the West" six-shooters, holstered on her hips in a kind of proto-feminist bid for equality.


45 Minutes of Mushing
For dog-sled enthusiasts who want to yell "mush" and mean it, the Iditarod Trail Committee, organizers of the fabled 1,049-mile race between Anchorage and Nome, Alaska, is staging an auction.
The top 67 bidders will ride in the first seven miles of the March 4 race, seated in a sled commanded by an Iditarod musher and drawn by 16 Alaskan huskies.
The initial leg, about 45 minutes long, captures the feel and flavor of the race without the hairpin turns or dizzying drops, a spokeswoman said.


Data Bank/January 8, 1995
Data Bank/January 8, 1995
Employment
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
In thousands
124,570
124,600
124,200
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
7,200 (5.4)
7,300 (5.6)
7,600 (5.7)
Construction Spending
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Monthly percent change
0.7
0.9
1.7
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
2.6
-0.4
0.0
Weekly Jobless Claims
Dec. 30
Dec. 23
Dec. 16
In thousands
335
321
325
3-Month Treasury Bonds
Jan. 6
Dec. 30
Dec. 23
Rate in percent
5.72
5.54
5.51
Gold
London late fix, per ounce
$375.25
$381.66
$381.25
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
Friday spot price, per barrel
$17.67
$17.76
$17.35


Victor Mitchell, Bridge Player, 71
Victor Mitchell, one of America's top-ranked bridge players, died on Thursday in Memorial Sloan-Kettering Hospital in Manhattan at the age of 71.
He died of lung disease, according to his wife, Jacqui Mitchell.
He lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Mitchell, who was born in Brooklyn, was a professional bridge player.
He represented the United States internationally many times.
In 1964, the American team of which he was a member reached the final of the World Team Olympiad in Manhattan, but was then defeated by the Italian Blue Team.


How About Honoring American Dancers?
To the Editor:
Thanks to Frank Rich for his Jan. 1 column on the Kennedy Center Honors television broadcast.
I agree that the program was wrongheaded, embarrassing and, well, lame.


Really, You Shouldn't Have
A truism: Colleges perpetually need money.
Boom years, bust years, Government subsidies or none, it matters not -- the old alma mater will aways exhort alumni to give, give, give.
And, for the most part, alumni and others respond, and generously.
But not always with unrestricted cash.
In the past few years, bemused college fund-raisers have received such donations as a malfunctioning dinosaur model, an unreachable island, a nondisplayable painting and a passel of animals and cemetery plots.
And they have gotten huge amounts of money tied to goals the colleges had never thought to pursue.
Unanimously, college officials say they prefer unfettered cash.
But at fund-raising time, they cannot be too choosy.


Ms. Sonnenblick And Mr. Gardner
Linda Beth Sonnenblick, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur Sonnenblick of River Vale, N.J., is to be married today to Alexander Howard Gardner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward L. Gardner of Rye, N.Y.
Rabbi Andre Unger is to perform the ceremony at the Rainbow Room in New York.
The bride, 26, is the learning-disabilities specialist at Reece School in New York.
She graduated from Hobart and William Smith Colleges and received a master's degree in special education from Columbia University Teachers College.
Her father is a dentist in Fort Lee, N.J.
The bride's mother, Susan Sonnenblick, is her husband's office manager.


Correction
An article on Dec. 25 about memorable quotations from people in the arts misidentified an official of the National Gallery of Art in Washington.
Vicki Porter is the curator of the Micro Gallery there, not the director of the National Gallery.


Salt's Here, But Where Is All the Snow?
HEAVY snowfalls were forecast for December -- with more bad weather on the way for January, at least according to the latest edition of the Old Farmer's Almanac.
By contrast, National Weather Service forecasters have been hedging their bets, saying the future is anyone's guess and looking only six or seven days ahead.
At the outside, they concede that the next 30-day period could have warmer than normal temperatures and higher than average precipitation.
Meanwhile in Peekskill last week, James Madaffari was not paying heed to either the Almanac or Weather Service forecasters.


Mr. Speaker; Taking Power In the Age Of Defiance
THE time of Newt began with soft words and hard votes, with a conciliatory, even humble speech from the new Speaker, and then a steamroller of 15 roll-call votes with not a single Republican defection over 14 hours.
But whether this lasts a moment, a season or an era depends not only on the determination, organization and intelligence of Newt Gingrich of Georgia, but even more on three historical factors over which he has little or no control.


Manhattan Escapes Rutgers in Overtime
Manhattan 92, Rutgers 90
After soaring to a 9-0 start this season, Manhattan was in serious jeopardy of crash-landing yesterday.
But the Jaspers prevented it by rallying to defeat Rutgers, 92-90 in overtime, at Draddy Gymnasium in the Bronx.


The Ghosts of Outlaw Past, Present and Future
DOWNTOWN -- "It's New Year's night, and I'm thinking of the outlaw souls of the Lower East Side 20 years ago," Eric Bogosian said.
He was one of the 150 outlaw souls reading at the Poetry Project's 21st annual New Year's marathon at St.
Mark's in the Bowery.
For an audience that packed the sanctuary, Mr.
Bogosian, who gave his first performance at the Poetry Project in 1977, rhapsodized about ghosts and the era before MTV, "when a cigarette was meaningful."


Los Angeles Journal; Mexican Cooking Without Any Salsa
Does it take a Jewish mother to make real chicken soup, or a Chinese to drop the egg into authentic egg-drop soup?
If a Frenchman speaks English -- or an Englishman speaks French -- with an accent, do they cook with an accent, too?
If food is the truest expression of a culture, an art handed down in the intimacy of the kitchen from mother to daughter and father to son -- if cooking is "the only really living tissue that connects the present to the past," as Michael Batterberry, founding editor of Food Arts magazine puts it -- then what are we to make of the extraordinary culinary display of Los Angeles?


Blunt Fury
To the Editor:
I was delighted by James R. Kincaid's hilarious review of Martin Seymour-Smith's biography of Thomas Hardy (Dec. 18).
Mr.
Seymour-Smith's "blunt fury" and "pugnaciousness" as a critic -- and the delicious savagery with which he attacks any and all who stand in the way of his righteous judgment -- have always made his writing as refreshing as it is insightful.
How gratifying to know he's still in top form.


Math Without Tears And the Moons of Mars
JUST because you have a slice of ham, a leaf of lettuce, a dollop of mayo and a few slices of rye doesn't mean you have a tasty sandwich.
Likewise, a program with a lot of sound, light, music, photos, video clips and animation on a CD-ROM doesn't automatically combine into good children's software.


A Super Store? Or Just Too Big?
Adding a gigantic Herman's sporting goods store to a planned multi-purpose sports center on the Chelsea waterfront is "a perfect marriage" to Tom Bernstein, president of Chelsea Piers Management, the center's development group.
But some West Side legislators and community advocates want the marriage annulled -- posthaste.
And they're seeking legal counsel.


Jan. 1-7: The DNA Fight; Simpson's Lawyers Shift Their Tactics And Save Some Time
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson decided last week to spare everyone an expensive, tedious and probably unsuccessful pretrial challenge to the admissibility of DNA evidence.
But the defense was merely postponing its attack, and opting to use a laser instead of a sledgehammer.
Prosecutors may have nothing linking Mr.
Simpson to the murders of his former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend, Ronald L. Goldman, except for blood and hair samples.
So his lawyers have been girding to keep the jury from hearing the results of laboratory analysis of those samples.
In what might have been months of stupefyingly technical testimony, they were prepared to argue that DNA testing had yet to win general acceptance among scientists.


INSIDE
6 Are Found Slain in Queens
Six people were found shot or stabbed to death in a Queens apartment, the police said, casting a shadow over an announcement of sharp declines in murders and other major crimes in the city.
Pages. 25 and 26.
Simpson, in His Own Words
Little, Brown &amp; Company will publish a book by O. J. Simpson with his answers to some of the more than 300,000 letters he has received since being jailed in the death of his former wife.
Page 18.


Ringing In the Old: A Tradition Is Revived
Merchant's House Museum open house, Jan. 1.


The World According to Channel One
It is the highest-profile -- one might even say most glamorous -- controversy in American education.
For the past five years, teachers, business executives, politicians and editorial writers have been fiercely debating the merits of Channel One, the commercial-studded classroom news show founded by entrepreneur Christopher Whittle.
Is it immoral to beam advertising to captive middle-school and high-school students?
Or are two minutes of television ads a small price to pay for 10 minutes of news and public affairs programming?
Is Channel One's format -- its MTV-esque graphics and fast pace -- anti-teacher, anti-literacy and ultimately anti-education?
Or is it the best way to capture the attention of media-saturated teenagers?


F.Y.I.
Fares by Mail Q.  Recently I observed a man in a wheelchair boarding a bus and saw the driver hand him a mail-in envelope.
When I asked the driver what it was, he said that's how the disabled paid their fares, by mailing the money in.
What's the rationale for this?
A.
An honor system for paying fares dates back to the Transit Authority's purchase of wheelchair-lifting buses in 1981.


A Dog's Life: Kindergarten, Dentists and Portraits
HANNIBAL is a 7 1/2-year-old Labrador retriever whose life is punctuated by episodes of extreme pain caused by a congenital hip dysplasia.
"When he's in pain, you can tell," said his owner, Arlene Hubner of Glen Ridge.
"He walks like a little old lady -- all bent over."
Ms.
Hubner took Hannibal to a chiropractor who specializes in dogs and to an acupuncturist, but neither practitioner was able to provide much relief.
Finally, two and a half years ago, Ms.
Hubner met Pamela Hannay, who practices the shiatsu massage techniques on dogs as well as horses and people.


Jan. 1-7; The Sacred Texts: Torah. Talmud. Contract?
THERE is an old Jewish joke about a teacher who takes her class to the zoo and instructs her pupils to write a composition about the elephant.
The Protestant child writes a paper called "The Elephants Are Our Friends." The Catholic child writes "The Elephant and Her Babies" and the Jewish child writes "The Elephant and the Jewish Problem."


For Root Vegetables, Add Imagination
THE time has come and gone to abandon ripe tomatoes, delicate zucchini and fresh garden peas.
Autumn is over, and the root vegetable season has set in.
But sturdy vegetables like carrots, parsnips, beets and celeriac can sustain many a menu, especially if some imagination is used in the preparation.
Among the possibilities are to cook these vegetables until tender, then puree them for soup or marinate them for a salad.
They can be grated raw, then tossed with a dressing for another kind of salad.
Roasting them makes them suitable to accompany a main dish platter.


Rose-Marie Fox, William S. Shanahan
Rose-Marie Fox, a principal in the Cornerstone Financial Corporation, a New York investment bank, and William Stephen Shanahan, the president and chief operating officer of the Colgate-Palmolive Company in New York, were married last Sunday in the Tillman Chapel of the Church Center for the United Nations.
The Rev.
Anna May Nielsen, a Unity minister, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Shanahan, 43, graduated from Manhattanville College and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Fox of Bethany, Conn.
Her father retired as a vocational teacher at the Eli Whitney Technical School in New Haven.
Her mother, Rose Fox, also retired, was the accountant in Meriden for the Municipal Police Training Council of the State of Connecticut.


2 Drops, and Browns Never Pick Up
Mind you, the Browns weren't intimidated by the Steelers today.
The suggestion was made, and Cleveland denied it.
They merely were, well, pressured, into a thorough 29-9 defeat that took shape before the game was 3 minutes old when the Browns' first-round rookie receiver, Derrick Alexander, dropped consecutive passes from Vinny Testaverde.


BETTER WORK THAN WELFARE. BUT WHAT IF THERE'S NEITHER?
It seems to me that Moore didn't worry too much about quitting jobs she didn't like.
Only the middle class does that.
Expensive work-training programs aren't the answer.
People go to work and hold on to jobs when they have to.
They learn to get along with others and to show up on time because they have to.
They practice birth control because they have to.
They wait to have children until they are married because they have to.
Some of us are old enough to remember when every American lived that way.
The incentive is economic survival.
Welfare has taken that away.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Cloture: Vote to kill an amendment to the Senate rules that would change the current filibuster rule, under which 60 votes are needed to end debate, so that after several attempts just 51 votes would be needed.
Approved 76 to 19, Jan. 5.


At Work; The New Deal on Drug Testing
A FAR-REACHING piece of legislation slipped into effect last week, under the very noses of the new majority on Capitol Hill who would eradicate all evidence of regulatory activism.
Prudence, perhaps, on the part of the agency involved, the Transportation Department, dictated a slight delay in one of the measure's provisions, but the delay is unlikely to stave off its inevitability.
It is safe to say that few of the people affected by the measure are happy.
Congress passed the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act of 1991 in the wake of an alcohol-related accident on a New York subway that killed several people.
The legislation broadens the coverage and scope of alcohol- and drug-testing programs for "safety sensitive" employees in several transportation industries, expanding by at least three million the number of workers who would be covered.
The measure would have gone into effect several months ago but for bureaucratic delays.
Those delays held up the publication of the rules in the Federal Register until last February, giving employers almost 11 months to prepare for the changes.


FASHION


Sound Bytes; Gearing Up for Interactivity
BUD COLLIGAN paid his dues in Silicon Valley.
At Apple Computer Inc., he conducted forecasting and market research for the original Macintosh, which was introduced in 1984, and he helped establish the Mac as computer of choice in schools.
He left Apple in 1989 to head Authorware Inc., a multimedia-software developer based in Minneapolis.
In 1992, he became president and chief executive of Macromedia, a multimedia company created through the merger of Authorware and two other software companies -- none of which were profitable.
Macromedia went public in December 1993, and has been profitable for nine straight quarters.


Signs of a New Agenda: A Jumble of Cartons, Euphoria and Attitude


Of Renaissance Visions And American Dreams
"ITALIAN RENAISSANCE Architecture," at the National Gallery in Washington, is a pale shadow of the sumptuous exhibition mounted last summer at the Palazzo Grassi in Venice.
Still, even this severely truncated version is worth a visit, especially when seen in conjunction with "World War II and the American Dream," the National Building Museum's outstanding survey of military construction.
Though the shows explore vastly different periods, styles and building types, they tell similar stories.
Both are studies in architectural subterfuge.
They show how buildings have helped to disguise as well as drive major shifts in cultural history.


The Dream For 49ers Is Bears' Nightmare
What happens in a football game when the slipper does not fit, when the carriage turns into a pumpkin -- when you jump over that candle just a bit too low?
Here is what happens: The San Francisco 49ers 44, the Chicago Bears 15.


China
To the Editor: Having recently spent a month in China, we enthusiastically agree with Nicholas D. Kristof.
Your readers should know that an alternative to climbing Mount Tai's 6,000 steps is to take an aerial tramway that leaves you at a point only several hundred steps from the top.


Technology; Will Video Game Machines Turn Into PC Killers?
AT this year's Consumer Electronics Show, which ends this evening, it became clear that the personal computer is finally a bona fide consumer-electronics item.
Entertainment software for home personal computers has been the talk of the show and William H. Gates -- the king of Microsoft, who seems to be everywhere these days -- gave a keynote address yesterday where he described his company's new "Bob" software, which is designed to simplify the family PC.


Against All Odds, Trying to Help the Forgotten
CONEY ISLAND, Brownsville, East New York.
Too often, these neighborhoods conjure up only frightening images: drugs, teen-agers with guns, teen-agers with babies, the elderly trapped behind locked doors, afraid to venture out.
The horror stories aren't the only stories.
Everyday, people in these areas battle to keep their families, schools and blocks above water.
Here are excerpts from recent literature on embattled Brooklyn neighborhoods THE TEACHER AND THE CLASS  From "The Ville," by Greg Donaldson (Anchor Books)
(Sharon King teaches social studies at Jefferson High School in Brownsville-East New York. It is the first day of school.)


Correction
An article on Dec. 18 about four islands off Mozambique misstated the year of the country's independence from Portugal.
It was 1973, not 1975.


Historic Cleaning
My home furnishings are not what you would call historic, although much of their attendant dirt may be.
My living quarters do not, by formal definitions, constitute a museum.
Still, I do have the recurring nightmare that a friend visiting for dinner will lift up one of my couch cushions and discover a perfect diorama of a tiny fishing village, rendered in the detritus of countless evenings spent ingesting tacos.
If I had a cleaner apartment, or better domestic habits, I could simply buy some cleaning products and get to work.
But I lose interest.
To me, housecleaning is like Chekhov: it starts slow and then it tapers off.
So, in my role as a participatory journalist over the years, I have tried several nontraditional cleaning methods.
I hired a clutter consultant.
She taught me to ask: "Do I need it? Do I want it? Do I love it?" And I hired nude housecleaners (they advertise in the back of small urban weeklies).
But I wasn't able to stick with either method.
The first was too involved; the second, too distracting.


Shoppers! Deciding? Just Ask Your Child.
AS the members of the beleaguered middle class contemplate the economic forces that are devouring their discretionary funds, they might also look at the self-inflicted one: indulging their children.
Such an idea may not be all that surprising to parents who have made it through another holiday shopping spree and are now realizing how much of a body blow was dealt the family budget by purchases of Power Rangers, the American Girl Doll with accessories or the portable Game Gear with Mortal Kombat.
Even as the American public insists that the Government tighten its belt and curb spending, the willingness of parents to shower their children with material goods continues to accelerate.


Should Old Masters Be Fund-Raisers?
ON THURSDAY MORNING, A SALE OF Old Master paintings that shouldn't have been allowed to happen will take place at Sotheby's.
The works belong to the New-York Historical Society.
It is hoping to raise money, not to buy other works, as public institutions are supposed to do when they sell art from their collections, but to replenish an endowment that has been squandered over the years.
To be sure, the 190-year-old Historical Society is not like most public institutions: decades of mismanagement finally forced it to shut its doors to the public a couple of years ago.
It has been on life support ever since, and many people have wondered whether it serves a purpose any longer.
Maybe the society has outlived its usefulness, they have suggested, and should be allowed to die.
Let its collections be dispersed among other, more resilient institutions, they say, that are already doing what the society is supposed to do.


THE WORLD: Behind the Chechnya Disaster; Leading Russia Into the Quagmire
AS Boris N. Yeltsin's "quick little war" in Chechnya turns into an Afghanistan-like quagmire -- or, worse, a debacle putting the whole Russian leadership at risk -- Russians aren't alone in wondering who actually decided to invade.
Put another way, the question is: Who runs Russia?
Back in 1979, when the Soviet Union decided to invade Afghanistan, the plan went through the Politburo by a single vote, or so the story goes.
There's less information on the war in Chechnya, in which hundreds, including a major general in the Interior Ministry, have died.
Still, what follows is a reasonable guess.


Higher Standards for Athletes
When the N.C.A.A. convention meets in San Diego tomorrow, the college presidents and athletic directors need to take special note of Stephon Marbury, the high school basketball wizard who caused a national stir last week when he announced that he would play for Georgia Tech.
Like tens of thousands of young men all over the country, Stephon, now 17, has been seduced by the dream of a professional basketball contract, and said as much in his announcement on Thursday.
But so were three brothers who came before him.
His oldest brother, Eric, played at the University of Georgia and failed to graduate.
His next two brothers, Donnie and Norman, followed a similar path and neither achieved the professional dream.


Integration Trail
To the Sports Editor:
In regard to Harvey Araton's column on Nets Coach Butch Beard, ("Picture Still Clear for Beard," The Times, Dec. 21), your readers might be interested to know that the Southeastern Conference was integrated in 1966 by Perry Wallace playing for Vanderbilt University.


A Threat to State Investigators' Future
THREE months ago, the State Commission of Investigation issued its 25th annual report -- a 45-page document that chronicled the panel's years as an official watchdog of political corruption and organized crime in the state.
The commission, which must be renewed every five years by the Legislature, had gained such wide respect among officials that earlier in the year legislation was favorably released from an Assembly committee -- with the enthusiastic support of the Republican leadership -- to make the commission permanent.


At the Cineplex It's Dumb, Dumber, Dumbest
FORGET THE THEORY OF relativity.
As the new movie "I.Q." tells you, what really matters about Albert Einstein (played by Walter Matthau) is that he is a great little matchmaker, able to see at a glance that his brilliant mathematician niece, Catherine (Meg Ryan), is secretly pining for a local mechanic named Ed (Tim Robbins).
Ed is not a stupid guy, but he's no rocket scientist.
In the lexicon of current American movies, Ed's lack of erudition is enough to hint that he's a decent man.
"Forrest Gump" is the most successful film to equate low I.Q. with inner goodness, but it has a lot of company on screen.
In "Nell," which David Letterman more accurately called "Bride of Gump," Jodie Foster holds the moral high ground as a backwoods woman deprived of education and ordinary language.
The doctors who study her discover that book learning is bad, primitivism is good.


Feels Like a Vacation For Huston at La Costa
Ordinarily, the first official tournament of the year on the PGA Tour is not the place for players to be true to form.
If they aren't trying out new equipment or tinkering with their game, they are rusty after a few weeks on the couch.
But here at the Mercedes Championships at the La Costa Resort and Spa, we have a predictable leader after three rounds.
John Huston, whose even-par round of 72 today left him at 205, 11 under par and 4 strokes ahead of Craig Stadler and Fred Couples, has shown he is very much at home at resorts.
Show him a Doral, a Walt Disney World, a La Costa, he flips on the shades, slips into his comfort zone and slides around under par.


Those Marches Are With It and Homespun Too
Little Women  Winona Ryder, Susan Sarandon, Kirsten Dunst Directed by Gillian Armstrong PG 110 minutes


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
SOUNDS OF THE PAST
Flute, oboe and horn concertos by Mozart, and Haydn's Symphony No. 49 will be heard as they were in the 1700's, when the Orchestra of the Old Fairfield Academy performs on Saturday at the Westport Arts Center.
Diana Erdmann, soprano, will be the soloist in an aria from Haydn's opera "Il Ritornodi Tobais."


Economics Counts Little When Cabbies Pass Blacks
To the Editor:
In part, the multitude of problems we face as a society stem from the fact that most people like William Mersey would prefer to offer an excuse for injustices rather than acknowledging a problem and offering solutions.
Saying that cabbies pass blacks for economic reasons is just such an excuse.


Tracks Lower Ticket Prices
New York's race tracks reached out to their dwindling public yesterday and consoled them where it counts: in the pocketbook.
The tracks announced that ticket prices will be reduced at Belmont Park and Saratoga and that the already reduced prices at Aqueduct will be made permanent.


Puzzling
You think: Jigsaw puzzle.
You think: Rectangular, with straight edges, a nice seaside scene, perhaps.
You think: Nice, easy fun.
You think wrong.
Olivia the Octopus is a 225-piece handcrafted puzzle that can be put together 10,000 ways, only one of them right (in which Olivia nests inside her coral reef).
She is the twisted invention of Steve Richardson, owner of Stave Puzzles (not a misprint) of Norwich, Vt.
And she costs $995.


Haiti's Fate: Out of Repression, Into a Crime Wave
At a dinner party in a wealthy neighborhood here this week, the conversation focused for a change on something other than politics: crime.
Of five Haitian couples seated around the table, no one had escaped break-ins at their homes or businesses in the last two months, and two said their cars had been stolen.
After three years of enduring state-sponsored lawlessness and violence under a military dictatorship, Haiti is suddenly confronting a wave of conventional crime.
Despite the presence of thousands of American troops and hundreds of international police monitors, the country is awash in new opportunities for criminals, some of them apparently the same gunmen who had terrorized people in the Government's name.


Landmarks Notes On 2 SoHo Blocks
To the Editor:
I was pleased to read in "2 SoHo Blocks: A Landmarks Notebook" on Dec. 18 how many of the building owners, developers and architects had good things to say about the Landmarks Preservation Commission.
Year in and year out the commission is doing a fine job for all of us, protecting historic and architectural values.


Artifacts From the Civilizations of the Ancient Mediterranean
ON view in the Neuberger Museum of Art at Purchase College here is "Mediterranean Antiquities," a selection of sculpture and artifacts produced between the second millennium B.C. and the third century A.D.
As organized by its guest curator, Karen L. Manchester, the show is testimony in miniature to the series of civilizations that have flourished around the Mediterranean, beginning with the Cycladic and ending with the Roman.
And it doesn't hurt that the objects, most of them in cases, appear to float against walls painted an aqueous green.
Some of them were donated to the Neuberger by Nelson A. Rockefeller in 1971, but the majority come from the personal collection of Roy R. Neuberger, for whom the museum was named.


Jan. 1-7; Clinton Ducks the Revolution
As the Republican Congress blew the bugle of change, President Clinton heeded the call of the wild last week, heading home to Arkansas for 48 hours of not-too-restful relaxation and a predawn duck hunt with old pals.
Why a duck?
To prove, as Chico Marx might have put it, that he's-a-no chicken.
The White House knew the President could not compete for attention with the Republicans, so he sought instead to show his solidarity with the rod-and-gun set of disgruntled white men who forsook the Democrats last fall.


Le Shuttle Taking Autos Under Channel
Le Shuttle, Eurotunnel's passenger service for motorists and their cars, began late last month, making the trip between Calais and Folkestone in 35 minutes, instead of the hour and a half it takes by ferry (in good weather).
The Eurostar passenger train, a separate service, began running under the Channel in November.


N.C.A.A. Delegates Brace For Debates on Eligibility
The relationship between academic standards and opportunities for college athletes will become more complex on Monday.
Continuing a debate that has lasted a dozen years, delegates at the 89th National Collegiate Athletic Association convention will consider proposals that could tighten, relax or merely delay new standards.
A year after college basketball coaches threatened a boycott to protest what they consider a decrease in opportunities for prospects, particularly those from disadvantaged backgrounds, the membership will debate formulas that would determine eligibility for freshman athletes and define the length of an athlete's career and limitations on his or her participation.


A Personal 'Chronicler' for Newt Gingrich
In appointing an outspoken political supporter and former colleague from Georgia as the new House historian, Newt Gingrich is also gaining something no Speaker has ever had -- a personal "chronicler."
The new historian, 47-year-old Christina Jeffrey, an assistant professor of political science at Kennesaw State University in Georgia, where Mr.
Gingrich once taught, said that her husband, Robert, also a professor from Georgia, would be "chronicling the Speaker and doing for the Republicans what academics did for F.D.R."


RESULTS PLUS
ALPINE SKIING  It's No. 7 for Tomba  In the words of Marc Girardelli, the five-time World Cup overall champion, Alberto Tomba "seems to be from another world." Girardelli spoke after the Italian Olympic champion captured his seventh victory of the season by winning the slalom for the third straight year in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany.
Tomba, who extended his overall World Cup lead to 400 points, was timed in 1 minute 38.67 seconds on the Gudiberg course, leading after the first run in 49.97, and clocking 48.70 in the second.
With his 40th victory, Tomba tied Pirmin Zurbriggen for third on the career list.
Ingemar Stenmark leads with 86 triumphs and Girardelli has 43.
Girardelli had his best result of the season, finishing second at 1:40.62.


Suspect Faces Police Queries In Killing of 6
The police yesterday questioned a man they called a suspect in the slaying of six people in a Queens apartment, but they are still unsure whether the bloodbath was drug-related, officials said.
Information given by the sole survivor of the attack, a woman who was left for dead in the College Point apartment, led investigators to a man who they believe may have been one of the killers, said a law-enforcement official who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Detectives questioned the man for much of the day and into the evening at the 109th Precinct station house, and they said they hoped he would identify others who might have been involved.


A Label Goes Onstage In Soft Mode
In the 1980's, the Manhattan independent record label Shimmy Disc was known as a refuge for renegade musicians who liked to make quirky, dissonant music.
But today, most of Shimmy Disc's best-known rock bands have moved to bigger labels or broken up.
With major labels now signing more underground bands and a glut of independent labels, Shimmy Disc's impact on alternative music has weakened.
On Friday night at the Knitting Factory, Shimmy Disc showed an entirely new face, a softer, gentler one, as the duet of Kramer (the label's owner) and Dogbowl performed along with Low, the Semi-Beings and Lida Husik.


When a Type-Cast Wotan Puts His Bass to Other Uses
The bass James Morris is the Wotan of choice for opera companies staging Wagner's "Ring" these days, but if that role has eclipsed some of his others, he reminded listeners of his interpretive range in a concert with Julius Rudel and the Orchestra of St.
Luke's on Saturday evening at Carnegie Hall.
He began on familiar ground, with three songs by Richard Strauss that were enlivened by his attentiveness to the gentler aspects of the texts.
In the best of them, "Traum durch die Dammerung," this meant holding back so that his voice barely carried over the orchestra, not because he lacked power but as a way of luring the listener into the song's twilight world.


HUNDREDS KILLED IN CHECHEN STRIFE
The streets of Chechnya's capital were littered with bodies today as Russian tank and infantry forces sprayed mortar and rocket fire at what seemed to be every building left standing there.
Russian television showed pictures of the fighting in the Chechen capital, Grozny, with Russian and Chechen soldiers very often battling for control of single buildings and opposite sides of the same street.


Argonaut Group Inc.(AGII,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


D'Arcy Masius Gets Mobile Media Job
Mobile Media Communications Inc., a provider of paging and personal communications systems like voice mail, has named D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York and four sibling agencies to handle its expanded integrated advertising and marketing communications account, with billing estimated at $7 million to $10 million.
The account, when it included fewer assignments, had been divided between Clarion Marketing and Communications, a D.M.B.&amp; B. unit in Greenwich, Conn., and Ketchum Advertising San Francisco.


Group Homes, Havens for the Mentally Ill, Fight Mistrust
The smell of ashes still lingers over a placid country road here seven weeks after someone set fire to a driftwood-gray house chosen as a home for 12 mentally ill men.
The fire in November at 6 Manor Lane, which authorities have ruled an arson, staggered residents, even those opposed to the arrival of the men.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  BLOODY FIGHTING IN RUSSIA
Russian forces pressed their attack on the separatist region of Chechnya, spraying mortar and rocket fire on the rebel capital of Grozny.
The intensity of the fighting seemed to underscore Moscow's determination to take control.
A1


Modest Rally Seen for Dollar in '95
After a year of unexpected weakness, the dollar is set to appreciate modestly against other major currencies this year, in the view of many bankers and economists.
The rally, they say, will be helped by the expectation of a narrowing United States trade deficit and pledges by the Republicans controlling Congress to start slaughtering sacred budget cows.
But in an age of global capital flows where the bias is still against the dollar, the American currency is not set to regain the strength it showed in the 1980's, when it reached 277.65 yen and 3.4525 marks to the dollar, or even the modestly bullish values at the beginning of the 1990's, when the dollar reached 159.90 yen and 1.8350 marks.


E. Ira Marienhoff, High School Teacher, 72
E.
Ira Marienhoff, who taught social studies in New York City schools for nearly five decades, died on Dec. 17 in the hospice of Beth Israel Hospital.
He was 72 and lived in Teaneck, N.J.
The cause was cancer, said Dr.
Anthony Miserandino, the principal of Hunter College High School, where Mr.
Marienhoff taught history, political science and economics for the last 28 years.


CHRONICLE
Few people have the same reason to rejoice over the elevation of NEWT GINGRICH to Speaker of the House as one of Mr.
Gingrich's sages, MORRIS R. SHECHTMAN , a management consultant from Illinois who specializes in helping corporations cope with change.
Mr.
Shechtman's first book, "Working Without a Net: How to Survive and Thrive in Today's High-Risk Business World," was published last month by Prentice Hall.
No sooner had it arrived in bookstores than Mr.
Gingrich began mentioning it in various speeches.


Even a Steady Worker Can Need Some Help
Traveling an hour aboard the No. 5 subway each day to the Metropolitan Life building in Manhattan has become a welcome routine for Melantha Williams, a single mother living in the Bronx.
After sending her two older children to school and taking her 9-month-old son to the baby sitter, she looks forward to her job as a purchasing clerk.
But it was only recently that her life took on this normality and regularity.
Pregnant with her latest child last year, Ms.
Williams, now 31, found herself struggling to pay bills while preparing for her baby.
She had to make a $200 pre-admission deposit at the hospital and pay her daughter's Catholic school tuition of $250.
One bill seemed to pile on top of another.
After going on paid maternity leave for three months, she took an unpaid leave of absence from May to August to care for her baby.
Her financial problems grew worse.
She fell two months behind on her rent and faced eviction from the apartment her family had been living in for several years.


Beard Lets Off Steam After a Lost Weekend
Butch Beard's VCR remote control went out late Thursday night and he had to stay up all evening manually plodding through game tapes.
He lost his point guard to the flu and a game to Charlotte on Friday.
On Saturday, in the fourth quarter against Atlanta, he looked into the eyes of his players, some of whose heads one could build shopping malls in, and saw nothing.


Accounts
*
Catapult Entertainment Inc., Cupertino, Calif., to Goldberg Moser O'Neill, San Francisco, as the first agency to handle advertising for Xband, its interactive video game network.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $5 million. *
Warren Clark &amp; Graham Inc., Atlanta, was awarded three accounts with combined billings estimated at $2.5 million: Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia and Riedinger Hearing Resources, both of Atlanta, and Jericho 3-on-3 Basketball Tournaments, Maryville, Tenn.


Essay; Yeltsin's Tiananmen
Which great power is more unsta ble today China or Russia?
The quick answer, of course, is Russia.
The elected leader, Boris Yeltsin, is besieged in Moscow after his bloody siege of Grozny, capital of the Connecticut-sized breakaway republic of Chechnya.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press on Dec. 23 about a misappropriation of funds from the Boston Children's Heart Foundation misstated the professional affiliation of Dr.
Bernardo Nadal-Ginard, the cardiologist ordered to repay the foundation.
Dr.
Nadal-Ginard is a tenured full professor at the Harvard Medical School, on leave of absence.
He is not a former professor there.


Press
TWO journalists remembered war and the courage of colleagues in separate conversations recently.
They were describing the men and women who risked their lives and drew international attention during the siege of Sarajevo by publishing a newspaper every day.
Their recollections were shaped by whether they were inside looking out or outside looking in.
Tom Gjelten sat down here in the studios of National Public Radio, which sent him to Sarajevo as a correspondent.
While there he came to know and eventually to chronicle the story of the Muslim, Serb and Croat journalists who worked at Oslobodjenje, the city's main newspaper.


Knox to Learn of His Rams Future Today
Los Angeles Rams Coach CHUCK KNOX is scheduled to meet today with the team president, JOHN SHAW, who has already given members of Knox's staff permission to talk with other teams about jobs.
A Rams vice president, JAY ZYGMUNT, said he and Shaw have already given the Rams' owner, GEORGIA FRONTIERE, a recommendation concerning the coaching situation, but wouldn't say what it is.


Albany Memo; As Pataki Settles In as Governor, His Style Offers Contrasts to Cuomo's
State Senator Thomas W. Libous, who is known for his impressions of the powerful here, is perfecting his Pataki.
To get into character, Mr.
Libous has to imagine stretching his 5-foot-9-inch frame a full 8 inches and draping it over a chair.
He might run his fingers through mussed hair, rub his eyes or maybe pretend to fiddle with a dirty contact lens.
"You know at the State of the State how he put his arms up like the half-Nixon?" Mr.
Libous said when asked how he would impersonate his old friend, the new Governor.
"I'm working on that."


Patents; A Doctor and Two Chemists Develop an Inexpensive Method of Testing for Oral Cancer
A doctor and two chemists have patented what they say is a simple and inexpensive test to detect oral cancer, which strikes primarily tobacco users and heavy drinkers and is the eighth-most-common type of cancer in the United States.
Because there is no commercially available test for oral cancer, it is usually detected through a physical examination.
However, by the time the cancer is visible, it has often already spread to other parts of the body.
About half of all people who develop oral cancer die from it.


What That Gingrich Tribute to the Democrats Really Meant
To the Editor:
So even you are taken in by the "magnanimity" of House Speaker Newt Gingrich in throwing bouquets to the Democrats in his inaugural speech ("The Gingrich Paradox," editorial, Jan. 5).
Those flowers were riddled with poisoned thorns.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Testing the Waters Outside the 18th Century  Patricia Schuman Soprano Weill Recital Hall
Much of Patricia Schuman's success in the last few seasons has come in an 18th-century operatic repertory that well accommodates her young voice.
Ms.
Schuman, who gave a more encompassing program on Friday night, sings with an easy flexibility and a bright, buoyant sound.
Its apparent ability to penetrate big spaces makes it a voice opera impresarios can use.


Woman Tied to 1977 Hijacking Fights Extradition to Germany
The lone survivor of four Palestinians who hijacked a Lufthansa jet in 1977, killing the pilot and holding 86 passengers hostage for five days, is fighting to stay with her family in Norway after German authorities discovered her whereabouts and sought extradition.
The fate of Souhaila Sami Andrawes lies with the Norwegian Supreme Court and ultimately the Government of Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland.
The high court is expected to issue a ruling in the coming week.


Familiar Faces in a Flurry of Midseason Sitcoms
In an unusual January flurry of new sitcoms, the jittery networks are falling back on familiar faces.
Tonight on CBS you can find Delta Burke, once of "Designing Women," recreating in "Women of the House" the role of Suzanne Sugarbaker, a former Georgia beauty queen who is moving to Washington to fill her late husband's seat in the House of Representatives.
Then there's Cybill Shepherd, once of "Moonlighting," starring in "Cybill" (also on CBS) as an elegantly aging actress who bears more than a passing resemblance to Cybill Shepherd.
And on ABC, Corbin Bernsen, once of "L.A. Law," appears in "A Whole New Ballgame," as a baseball jock who specializes in sexual harassment.
"Women of the House" is created by Linda Bloodworth-Thomason and Harry Thomason, prominent Friends of Bill who were ensnared in one of the Clinton Administration's lesser embarrassments, the business about the White House travel office.
They are still obviously fuming, and that's part of the problem with this new series.
The whining ranges from "There's no such thing as a little mistake in Washington" to "Nobody tells the truth in Washington unless they're in an underground parking lot and terminally ill."


Congress, a Soon-to-Be Law Says, Must Now Do Unto Itself as It Already Does Unto Others
For decades Capitol Hill has often been derided as "The Last Plantation," a reference to legislators' habits of exempting themselves from many of the laws on civil rights, workers' safety and employment that are enacted for the rest of the nation.
But soon, under a measure passed quickly by the House last week and likely to be voted on by the Senate early this week, that practice may end.
Still, it is unclear if the changes encompassed in the Congressional Accountability Act -- the first item in the House Republicans' "Contract With America" -- will make much of a difference to the approximately 40,000 people on Capitol Hill.


Irish Prime Minister Names New Adviser on Northern Ireland
Prime Minister John Bruton of Ireland has chosen a former diplomat with a reputation for being unsympathetic to the Irish Republican Army and its representatives to be his chief adviser on Northern Ireland.
Mr.
Bruton has offered the position to Sean Donlon, 53, an aviation industry executive who is a former Ambassador to Washington.
He is a friend of Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, who is one of President Clinton's chief advisers on Northern Ireland.


Family Dollar Stores Inc.(FDO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Mob, Murder and Garbage: A Connection Is Reordered
On the morning of Aug. 10, 1989, two executives of a trash-collection company were shot dead in their office in East Northport, L.I.
To Federal and state officials who had been battling the Mafia's longtime control of garbage hauling on the Island, there was no doubt from the start that the killings were mob murders.
One victim, Robert M. Kubecka, had not only refused to go along with the extortionate price-inflating criminal cartel that law-enforcement officials said dominated the trash-hauling industry, but had also provided valuable aid to investigators pursuing corruption in the industry.


I.B.M. to Announce Changes In Executive Ranks Today
The International Business Machines Corporation will announce a major executive reshuffling today aimed at creating greater awareness of its software business and reconfirming its strategy to be a global competitor, industry executives said yesterday.
The management shifts follow the abrupt resignation last week of Ellen Hancock, a senior vice president of I.B.M.'s software solutions and networking systems divisions.
Ms.
Hancock, 51, was given responsibility for the software division eight months ago, but analysts said Louis V. Gerstner Jr., I.B.M.'s chairman and chief executive, had been displeased with the $11 billion division's performance.


New 3-Guard Rotation On Target for Knicks
Winning has become a hard habit for the Knicks to break.
New York did not play a great game last night.
But its opponent wasn't great either.
So when the Knicks compensated for spotty play with a team-record-tying 12 3-point shots, the Minnesota Timberwolves did what they usually do -- they lost.


Seaway Food Town Inc.(SEWY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Mintz and Pro Media Chosen by Ames
Ames Department Stores in Rocky Hill, Conn., has selected Mintz &amp; Hoke in Avon, Conn., and Pro Media Inc. in Needham, Mass., to handle the broadcast creative and media-buying portions of its account.
Both portions of the account, with billings estimated at $7 million, had been at W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Southfield, Mich., for the last three years.


Cherry Corp.(CHERB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


These Men Of Steel Are Almost Super
The American Football Conference hasn't seen a team like these new Steelers since the old Steelers.
But don't say it yet.
Don't say "Super Bowl" even after they whipped the Browns, 29-9, on Saturday to move within a game of The Game.
In their style, in their attitude, in the way they make the losers react, the Steelers do indeed resemble that Steel Curtain collection of the 1970's that won four Super Bowls.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY'S BUS SYSTEM STRUGGLES
After 20 years of losing riders, New York City's bus system has sharply deteriorated in quality because the fleet has aged, buses are wearing out and the two manufacturers under contract to provide new vehicles have failed to deliver, transit officials say.
More than 45 percent of the 3,600 buses in the fleet have now outlived their useful life and should be replaced, they say.
Moreover, chronic parts shortages keep buses sidelined for weeks, and labor strife and sabotage have increased in depots as managers press mechanics to work faster to keep the fleet running.
A1.


CHRONICLE
JOSEPH A. CALIFANO Jr. , the former Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare, has been told by his doctors to fend off autograph-seekers at a party tomorrow to celebrate the publication of his ninth book, "Radical Surgery: What's Next for America's Health Care."
His right arm is in a red cast, a result of his having ruptured a ligament while returning a shot in a tennis match in November.
"The doctor told me I would need three hooks, forever, to hold it together and three pins while it mends, and that I would be in a cast for 12 weeks," Mr.
Califano, who is president of the Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at Columbia University, said the other day.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Prescription drug campaigns aimed directly at consumers expanded rapidly during the last year.
PRESCRIPTION drug advertising to the consumer expanded briskly in 1994, as manufacturers pushed hard to make the public aware of different diseases and the medicines to treat them.
In the first nine months of 1994, direct-to-consumer advertising of prescription products jumped 42 percent from the corresponding period of 1993, to $187.4 million, according to Competitive Media Reporting, a company that tracks ad spending.


Cracks Appear in British Book-Pricing System
Just after Christmas, the publisher Hodder Headline irritated a good segment of the British book-selling world by withdrawing from the industry's long-established book-pricing system, thus allowing its books to be discounted for the first time.
For consumers in the United States, where best sellers and many other books are widely discounted, it might seem odd that it would be illegal to discount most books in Britain.
But under the British system, dictated by a publishers' accord known as the Net Book Agreement, British publishers are allowed to establish a fixed price for most books, and bookstores are forbidden to reduce that price through sales or discounts.


America West Puts Account in Review
America West Airlines has placed its account in review after 11 years with Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss in New York.
Billings were estimated at $18 million.
Rosenfeld, Sirowitz has not been dismissed and has accepted an invitation to participate in the review.


In Revising Police Shifts, Nassau Joins A U.S. Trend
The 12-hour workday is an idea whose time may have come, say Nassau County police officials and a growing number of law-enforcement agencies around the country.
Nassau County, with a patrol force of 2,100 officers, will be the largest police department in the nation and the first major department in New York State to experiment with 10- and 12-hour shifts.


INSIDE
Man Questioned in 6 Killings
The police questioned a man they called a suspect in the slaying of six people in Queens, but they were still unsure whether the attack was drug-related, officials said.
Page B1.
Emancipation on Capitol Hill
Often called "the Last Plantation" because Congress often exempts its staff from rules it passes, the House and Senate are working to end the practice.
Page B8.
A Chronicler for Gingrich
Speaker Newt Gingrich has not only appointed a supporter as the new House historian, he has also named her husband to record the events of the new Republican era.
Page A10.
Down to the Wire
Operating against a Tuesday deadline that would cancel the season, the National Hockey League and the players union will meet face to face today.
SportsMonday, page C1.


Small Company Finds Copland Piece In Compatible Size
What exactly is the problem with "The Tender Land," Aaron Copland's only full-length opera?
Partisans of the composer will claim that its continuing though not quite total neglect is the result of either malignity or ignorance.
But the piece has limitations, as Copland himself recognized.
He always insisted it was not a manifesto for American opera but rather a modest vehicle for student singers and small companies.
So the adventurous Bronx Opera Company's modest but handsome production, seen on Saturday night in the Lovinger Theater at Lehman College, was pleasingly apt.
Intended for television rather than the live stage, "The Tender Land" drew inspiration from Walker Evans's stark, gritty photographs from the 1930's.
Erik Johns's libretto, depicting the brief love affair between a drifter, Martin, and a farm girl, Laurie, rebelling against her tight-knit family, aims to celebrate the prairie experience and also expose its confining social roles.
Very little actually happens, but Copland was up to the task of carrying the audience along with stretches of tone painting.


Sex-Offender Disclosure Law Hitting Snags in New Jersey
At the sight of a visitor in their driveway, the two Ettinger children stopped playing and scurried for their house.
Their mother, Jana, emerged from the kitchen and explained that the fright of her children -- one a second-grader, the other a preschooler -- stemmed from the family's recent "stranger danger" talks about David Lewis, a convicted molester of high school wrestlers who recently returned here after nearly eight years in state prison.


English-Language Daily in Eastern Europe Shuts Down
The first English-language daily newspaper in Eastern Europe since the collapse of Communism has ceased publication after only six weeks, with the publisher conceding that the paper had failed to find enough readers in Prague.
The Bohemia Daily Standard, introduced in November with high hopes of appealing to English-speaking business executives, diplomats and travelers, closed on Dec. 21.


National Medical Enterprises Inc.(NME,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Swiss Battle For Big Bank Proves Costly
A battle for control of Switzerland's largest financial institution, the Union Bank of Switzerland, has entered a new stage, causing a loss of confidence in the bank and leaving investors with paper losses of $6 billion.
In the latest chapter of what many financial analysts call the messiest takeover fight in the country's history, Zurich, Switzerland's financial center, has been rocked since Christmas by the disclosure in a local newspaper of the identity of a major owner of Union Bank shares, Karl-Heinz Kipp, a retired German billionaire.
Mr.
Kipp reportedly backed management against an attempt to seize control of the bank by Martin Ebner, a Swiss financier.


St. John's Learns It's A Big East Out There
St.
John's wasn't supposed to be a contender for the Big East championship.
In this season where teaching will take priority over titles, the Red Storm figures to be a speed bump in someone else's road to the conference title.
Despite eight victories in its first nine games, that reality became evident here today when sixth-ranked Connecticut exposed the Red Storm's inexperience and lack of depth en route to a 98-78 blowout before 16,294 at the Hartford Civic Center.


Sports of The Times; On a Mission to Tame The Hype of the Storm
IT is a brawny conference, and a big country.
And there are even whole basketball-playing continents out there where Felipe Lopez's decision to stay home at St.
John's was no Big East Big Whoop-De-Do.
For Donny Marshall, who comes out of Washington state, it was just another chance for New York's publicity machine to create "a basketball god." For Ray Allen, an Army brat whose hometown is listed as Dalzell, S.C., it was incentive to prove that he may be the Big East's best pro prospect.
And for point guard Doron Sheffer, hailing from a village of 500 families outside Tel Aviv, it was an opportunity to take Lopez off the dribble on national television yesterday, let America know that Felipe Fever fades like F.M. radio as you leave New York in the rear view mirror.


Honoring Ron Carter in His Prime
Ron Carter isn't dead.
He isn't ill.
No major catastrophes have disturbed his life recently.
His bass playing is at its usual level -- extraordinary -- and he picks his engagements as a leader and as a sideman not from financial need but from a desire to immerse himself in the best of the new music.
At 57, Mr.
Carter is just fine.
Tonight, 30 or so of his friends, who also happen to be among the most accomplished players in jazz, are giving him a celebration at Merkin Concert Hall, simply because Mr.
Carter is of sound mind and body and a great musician.


Market Place; Policyholders play a role in the battle for Home Holdings.
BY the standards of corporate democracy, Wall Street style, the best merger deal is the one that most benefits shareholders and management.
But in the takeover battle now under way for Home Holdings, the parent of Home Insurance, there is another consideration.
In the world of insurance, policyholders count, too, and the basic mandate of state insurance regulators is to protect policyholders by making certain that insurers are solvent and able to pay their claims.


Treasury To Sell Bills
The schedule of Treasury financings this week has only today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
At the close of the New York cash market late Friday, traders said, the rate for the outstanding three-month bill was 5.72 percent, and for the six-month bill, 6.29 percent.


A Meditation on Death With Drums and Gongs
For nearly four minutes on Friday night, the audience in Avery Fisher Hall stood and cheered a composition's world premiere: not a standard response in contemporary musical life.
At least some of the enthusiasm for Joseph Schwantner's half-hour Concerto for Percussion and Orchestra could be attributed to the fact that the composition had none of the medicinal quality audiences have long associated with new music.
Despite the potentially aggressive character suggested by its title, it lacked any desire to shock or assault or sound "advanced."
Moreover, the New York Philharmonic, which commissioned the work, was in top form.
The soloist, Christopher Lamb, for whom it was written, was a virtuoso at turning accent and meter into shape and gesture.
Leonard Slatkin, who has long championed Mr.
Schwantner's music, gave this work as authoritative and committed a reading as it is likely to have.


A Family's Story Echoes the Land's
On New Year's Eve, when the Russians made their first vain attempt to storm Grozny, Usman Magomadov, 25, took his father's shift at the family's grain warehouse in the Chechen capital.
It was badly hit in the Russian bombing, and he drove the 15 miles to the family home here through the shelling and strafing to tell his father.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY  Oxford Inds Inc Phillips Pete Co TUESDAY  Core Inds Inc Standard Mtr Prods Unifirst Corp Mass Weyerhaeuser Co WEDNESDAY  CBI Inds Learonal Inc Southwestern Pub Svc USLife Income Fd Inc Walgreen Co THURSDAY  Idaho Pwr Co NWNL Cos  Rubbermaid Inc FRIDAY  Lubys Cafeterias Inc


Firstbank Puerto Rico (FBP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Day of Golf for the Clintons


At Home Abroad; The New South Africa
For many white South Africans, Joe Slovo used to be a hate figure: a white man who led the Communist Party and planned guerrilla war against the regime.
But when he died last week, newspapers printed respectful tributes to him as a negotiator who helped create the new Government and served as its Minister of Housing.
To visit South Africa today is an adventure in the suspension of disbelief.
Whites who used to bluster defensively about their country now ask eagerly, "How do you like the new South Africa?"


CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Evening of Standard Works, But Who Was Complaining?
New York Chamber Symphony 92d Street Y
It is good to know that the New York Chamber Symphony, with Seymour Rosen as its new manager, is putting its independent house in order during a time of transition in the performing-arts program at the 92d Street Y. The sturdy little band has filled a valuable role in its 18 years on the scene, with its often enterprising selection of repertory and guest artists.
Even its more routine programs are generally infused with appealing freshness and energy, as was the case on Saturday evening.


Carl H. Horowitz, Manufacturer, 58
Carl H. Horowitz, a retired manufacturer of children's wear, died on Saturday evening at Pompano Beach Medical Center in Pompano Beach, Fla.
He was 58.
The cause was cancer, said Dominick Sicolo, his companion and business partner.


JAZZ
Fooling at the Keyboard With Unpredictable Results  Kenny Werner Pianist The Knitting Factory
The best moments of the pianist Kenny Werner's show at the Knitting Factory on Thursday night came when he and his group tinkered with the conventional.
Mr.
Werner and his trio took apart two pieces, a swinging original of his own called "Jackson" along with "You and the Night and the Music," and reconfigured them with all sorts of nearly miraculous rhythm and tempo changes.


Moving Day for a Wolf


Race Recalls Christ's Baptism


Corrections
An article on Tuesday in the special Outlook '95 section of Business Day about Federal tax cut proposals misstated the position of the Clinton Administration on capital gains.
President Clinton has proposed no change from the present law, under which capital gains are taxed at a maximum rate of 28 percent; he has not proposed an exclusion of 30 percent of long-term capital gains from taxable income, a step that would lower capital gains taxes to a range of 10.5 to 28 percent.


For Whitman, A Political Star Adding Luster
Wedged between Alexander and Kemp and only coincidentally to the left of Dole and Gramm, buttons touting Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman for President are doing a brisk business this year at Political Americana, a Washington store that sells Presidential political memorabilia.
"Whitman is in with the pack," says Jimmy Warlick, the president of Political Americana and an amateur political prognosticator who has built his business largely around predicting who is politically hot with the public and who is not.
"Right now, Governor Whitman is doing very well. Her buttons are selling good. It's hard to tell whether people are buying them because they view her as a potential Presidential candidate or as a Vice-Presidential candidate, but they are buying them."


The Yeltsin Problem
When the Russian Foreign Minister defends Moscow's military assault against the breakaway republic of Chechnya by comparing Boris Yeltsin to Abraham Lincoln, it is clear Moscow is anxious about the small but savage confrontation in the Caucasus.
Andrei Kozyrev's desire to make the war more comprehensible to Americans is understandable.
Mr.
Yeltsin's mishandling of the Chechen rebellion is sure to strengthen those who want to end American assistance and return to a strategy of containing rather than befriending Russia.
That would be a mistake, but some recalibration of long-term American policy is warranted.
Recognizing that the brutality of the attack has undermined Mr.
Yeltsin, President Clinton has urged him to end the killing of civilians and accept an offer from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to help mediate a political settlement.
Moscow should not refuse.
Belatedly, Mr.
Yeltsin says he is trying to put the military on a tighter leash and end the indiscriminate bombing of Grozny, the Chechen capital.
Unfortunately, the army's sledgehammer approach has already dishonored the important principle that Moscow has a right to maintain the cohesion of the Russian federation, and in extreme cases like Chechnya, may use limited military force.


SHL Systemhouse (SHKIF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Cusac Industries Ltd., Vancouver, British Columbia, an initial public offering of 800,000 units (each representing convertible preferred shares and warrants).
Paulson Investment Co.


The Faces of Night, Many of Them Scary
NIGHT Night Life, Night Language, Sleep and Dreams  By A. Alvarez  Illustrated. 290 pages.
W.
W.
Norton &amp; Company. $23.
Think of night time, then associate freely, and you have some of the subjects covered by A. Alvarez in his new book, "Night: Night Life, Night Language, Sleep and Dreams." Darkness.
Sleep.
Dreams.
Freud.
Sex.
Violence.
Crime.
Police.
Fear.
Ghosts.
Fire.
Electricity.
Light.
Mr.
Alvarez writes about them all and more, and while such disparate subjects might have made for a disjointed book, the author engages us by doing early in "Night" what he did late in his best-known previous work, "The Savage God: A Study of Suicide," namely, introduce his personal involvement in his subject.


Nora Dunfee, 78, Actress and Teacher
Nora Dunfee, an actress who taught for many years in the graduate acting program of the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University, died on Dec. 23 at St.
Clare's Hospital and Health Center in Manhattan.
She was 78.
The cause was complications after a brief illness, the university's press office reported in a statement.


Nina Tikanova, 84, Dancer and Teacher
Nina Tikanova, a ballet teacher who had danced in the companies of Bronislava Nijinska, Ida Rubinstein and Boris Romanov, died on Wednesday at her home in Paris.
She was 84.
Born in St.
Petersburg, Russia, Miss Tikanova trained in France with the great Russian teachers Olga Preobrazhenska and Nicolas Legat.
George Balanchine invited her to join his first company, Les Ballets 1933, but she chose to join the Ballets Russes de Nijinska in Paris, where she became a leading dancer.


What to Expect in Washington Today
HOUSE -- As part of the "Contract With America," a Ways and Means subcommittee will hold a hearing on a proposal to increase the income retired people are allowed to earn before their Social Security benefits are reduced.
In addition, the Judiciary Committee will hold a hearing on a proposed constitutional amendment that would require a balanced budget.
SENATE -- The Governmental Affairs and the Budget Committees will vote on a bill barring Congress from imposing requirements on states unless it pays for them.
It carries the number of the first bill to be introduced in the Senate this year, S.1.


2 Parties Do Balancing Acts on Budget
The new leader of the Senate's 47 Democrats said today that he was "absolutely" willing to make a detailed proposal to balance the Federal budget by 2002, just as his party's leaders are demanding of Congress's new Republican majority.
Still, the Democratic leader, Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, did not say he would actually do so.
Instead, he and other Democrats indicated that they would not offer any budget-balancing plan until Republicans did.


Wide Right, and the Chargers Are Left Standing
In a weekend of playoff blowouts, the Miami Dolphins and the San Diego Chargers saved the best for last.
And Dolphins kicker Pete Stoyanovich saved one of his worst kicks for last.
Stoyanovich had made 8 of 10 field goals from 40 to 49 yards this season, but his try this afternoon with 6 seconds left from 48 yards missed the mark, wide right.
Thus, the Dolphins missed a chance to play in the Super Bowl at home.


Bridge
One of the lesser-known victims of Henry VIII was the Countess of Salisbury, whose son had severely criticized the king's behavior.
She was a lady of spirit and ran away from the executioner in the Tower of London -- unsuccessfully, alas.
But she was right in principle, as the diagramed deal illustrates.
It was played in September in a regional championship in Santa Clara, Calif.
Sitting South was John Atteridg of San Francisco, who bid optimistically to six hearts.
He knew that his Blackwood bid was dubious, in view of the club weakness, but was straining for a good result.


Domestic Partner Benefits Are a Matter of Law
To the Editor:
David Boaz's "Domestic Justice" (Op-Ed, Jan. 4) misses a crucial point about why many lesbians and gay men work hard to get employers to extend employment benefits to lesbian and gay as well as heterosexual domestic partners.


New Effort To Settle Data Issues
The top Republicans in Congress and Vice President Al Gore will stake out competing positions on Monday about the best way to rewrite the nation's 60-year-old telecommunications laws.
The Republicans and the Clinton Administration have made the issue a top priority this year, in part because they came within a whisker last autumn of passing a bipartisan bill intended to promote greater competition and encourage private investment in the so-called information superhighway.


Stalling on Social Security Makes a Worse Mess; Let Pensioners Work
To the Editor:
With regard to the coming problems of financing the Social Security system, it may be of interest that the system now calls for discrimination regarding the type of income received after age 65 and before 70 in determining the monthly payment, if any, a pensioner receives.


New Honda Engine a Threat to Natural Gas
The Honda Motor Company's announcement Friday that it had developed an engine that reduces tailpipe emissions by 90 percent could bolster several state governments' efforts to impose more stringent air-quality standards on auto makers and is also likely to hurt the natural gas industry.
The Honda engine is powered by reformulated gasoline, and thus far the only vehicles that could meet the aggressive air standards, adopted first by California and requiring "ultra-low emissions," were powered by natural gas.


President Clinton's Welfare Waffle
Everyone agrees that welfare needs reform; too many programs do far too little to boost recipients toward self-sufficiency.
But House Republicans do not just want to reform the system's operation.
They seek to demolish the core principle that any American who becomes truly needy is entitled to support.
It is dismaying, but unsurprising, that Speaker Newt Gingrich and his compulsive band of budget cutters would tear up the country's social safety net.
The shocker came last week when a timid White House seemed ready to acquiesce.


What That Gingrich Tribute to the Democrats Really Meant; No Prayer Day in 1787
To the Editor:
House Speaker Newt Gingrich in the conclusion to his Jan. 4 speech to Congress grandly quoted Benjamin Franklin's comments to the Constitutional Convention of 1787.
After that, Mr.
Gingrich told his colleagues, the Convention members "took a day off for fasting and prayer" before returning to their task.


Vietnam Said to Arrest 2 Protesting Buddhist Monks
The two most prominent dissident monks in Vietnam have been arrested after one went on a hunger strike last month to protest Government persecution of Buddhists, say human rights groups and other Vietnamese dissidents.
The arrests mark a sharpening of the Vietnamese Government's campaign to crush the Unified Buddhist Church, the dissident Buddhist faction that was once the predominant religious organization in southern Vietnam.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page last Monday about advertising aimed at women at home misidentified the advertising agency that created the campaign for Levi's Jeans for Women.
It is Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in San Francisco, not FCB San Francisco.
Because of an editing error, the article also misstated the position and the home base of Laurel Cutler.
Ms.
Cutler is executive vice president and director of strategic planning for all of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, not just the San Francisco office; she is based in New York City.


World Economies


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $100 milllion of notes due in 1997 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Callable in one year, the issue is prices at par to yield 8.08 percent.


Landowners Unite in Battle Against Regulators
In 1986, Gaston Roberge, a retired businessman from Scarborough, Me., thought he was about to wrap up the best investment of his life.
A developer offered him $440,000 for his empty 2.8-acre lot in Old Orchard Beach, near where Mr.
Roberge and his wife, Monique, once owned a seaside motel.
But when Federal officials were told of the deal, they declared the Roberge property a wetland protected under the Clean Water Act, and required a special permit for development.


No Headline
"The abolitionists didn't call off the protests because of John Brown." -- RICHARD LAND, of the Southern Baptist Convention, on anti-abortion protests.  [ A16:4. ]


Hulbert Aldrich, 87; Banking Executive Led New York Trust
Hulbert S. Aldrich, a former president and director of the New York Trust Company and a former vice chairman and director of Chemical Bank, died last Monday at South Bay Manor, a home for the elderly in South Kingstown, R.I.
He was 87.
The cause was viral pneumonia and complications, said Anne Hazard Aldrich, his daughter.


City Hall to Let Developer Save 2 Landmarks
A few steps from City Hall, two landmark buildings stand as exaggerated reminders of the way city government has long accommodated many of its workers: under roofs that leak and plaster that peels, and surrounded by dusty boxes in offices that are rarely cleaned.
The Giuliani administration plans to turn these buildings into symbols of a different kind, showcasing how public assets can be turned over to private business to everyone's advantage.


A HOSTILE HOUSE TRAINS ITS SIGHTS ON FUNDS FOR ARTS
The National Endowment for the Arts is preparing to fight for survival as House Republican leaders take aim at its budget and challenge its very existence.
The fight, likely to last throughout the year, turns on a fundamental question: What is the appropriate role of the Federal Government in financing arts?


In Croatia, Minds Scarred by War
A few months ago, a former Croatian soldier stormed into a bar in Osijek, opened fire on the crowd and killed four patrons.
Government officials were quick to assert that the killer was simply a run-of-the-mill psychopath, and that his murderous outburst had nothing to do with his military service.
"We are faced with far fewer psychiatric problems in our army than we might expect," asserted Vlado Jukic, the chief army psychiatrist, "because our soldiers are defending their own soil and fighting for their own freedom."


Tourism
Tourism accounts for more than $20 billion in economic activity each year, and spending by visitors generated about 268,000 jobs in the region in 1992, according to a study released last month by the Port Authority.
The report is the second part of the Port Authority's study of the economic impact of the arts and tourism on the New York-New Jersey region.
While tourism in the area is expected to continue to grow, the region is facing increasing competition for visitors.
Promotion seems to be helping in the tourism industry.
The state travel office budgets in New York and New Jersey for fiscal 1992-93 were $11 million and $5 million.
Visitor spending in 1992 generated tax revenues of $630 million in New York and $130 million in New Jersey.


BE Aerospace (BEAV,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Tumor on Quayle's Appendix Is a Rarity
The type of benign tumor of the appendix that was removed from former Vice President Dan Quayle in an operation last week is rare, and the finding apparently caught his doctors at Indiana University Hospital by surprise.
Before the operation, they said they thought he had an "old appendicitis."
It was the second time in a little more than a month that Mr.
Quayle's doctors did not diagnose his condition immediately.
In late November, Mr.
Quayle was sent home from the hospital's emergency room when his doctors thought he had walking pneumonia.
The next day he was admitted with blood clots in his lungs, a potentially life-threatening condition that left him severely short of breath.


DANCE
Celebrating 20 Years On an Independent Course  Annabelle Gamson St. Mark's Church
In 1974, having appeared in Broadway musicals and with various dance groups, Annabelle Gamson embarked upon an independent dance career.
On Friday night, she celebrated two creative decades with "Annabelle Gamson's 20th Anniversary Season," the program she offered as part of the Danspace Project.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; Are Cowboys' Hopes Hamstrung This Year?
EVEN with the weakness in his left hamstring that had been there for nearly three weeks, Emmitt Smith had started and hurried for 36 yards, including a 5-yard touchdown burst.
"Same ol' Emmitt," people were saying. "Nothing wrong with Emmitt."


Schnitzer Steel Industries(SCHN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


2 Would-Be Networks Get Set for Prime Time
The last time a company decided to start up a television network -- Fox Inc. in 1986 -- almost nobody thought it would work.
But now, when the A. C. Nielsen Company releases prime-time ratings, four networks are listed instead of three.
The Warner Brothers Network, also known as the WB Network, will show four new situation comedies on Wednesday nights beginning this week.
The United Paramount Network, or UPN, will start Jan. 16 with two nights of programming each week headed by the latest "Star Trek" descendant, "Voyager."


Violence by the Young: Horror, but Also Hope?
Tonight marks the kickoff of "Act Against Violence," a Super Bowl of a campaign by public broadcasting to rally the nation against the mayhem being inflicted on and by young Americans.
The hope is that public and commercial broadcasters, corporations, foundations, schools, community groups and viewers will pitch in to generate, publicize and raise money for innovative ways of getting youngsters back on track or keeping them from stumbling off in the first place.
Bill Moyers sounds the theme with "What Can We Do About Violence?" a four-hour look at oft-lamented conditions and at efforts around the country to deal with them.
Tonight's first two hours find him talking to youngsters and their keepers in Southern California and Dade County, Fla.


Davidson's First Call: There Will Be Hockey
John Davidson has endured a restless hockey-free fall and winter.
The MSG Network's Rangers analyst has golfed, attended his daughters' soccer games, helped with their homework, watched the world juniors championships, discovered "E.R." and agreed to call the International Hockey League all-star game if the National Hockey League season is not salvaged tomorrow.
On Thursday, a glum Davidson said: "If the season's canceled, I'm taking business or computer courses. This has been like Chinese water torture."


Surprising Elkington Beats Lietzke in Sudden Death
In a reversal that was as stunning as it was swift, Steve Elkington came all the way from six strokes behind to a sudden-death victory today in the Mercedes Championships.
Elkington shot a round of 67 over the soggy La Costa Resort and Spa layout and defeated Bruce Lietzke with a birdie on the second hole of sudden death.
Lietzke, who was also little more than an afterthought when play started, matched Elkington's 67 to finish at 10 under par.
His opportunity to win the tournament in regulation was squandered by a bogey at the 17th hole.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Dec. 13 misidentified an advertising agency that works for the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company, handling brands like Post-It notes and Scotch tapes.
It is Martin/Williams in Minneapolis, not the Martin Agency in Richmond.


The Danger of Executing the Innocent
Capital punishment is so fraught with the danger of executing innocent defendants that even its supporters worry about fatal miscarriages of justice.
In New York, which may soon become the 38th state to restore the death penalty, leaders of the bar who argue for more safeguards include, along with lawyers who oppose executions, many who favor or do not oppose them.
New York's Legislature needs to heed these calls for care, as do Congress and legislatures in states that already have executions.
A Congressional staff report cited 52 recent cases in which defendants had barely escaped execution only because civil rights lawyers and friends were able and lucky enough to discover evidence of innocence.


Poet Without Laurel
To the Editor:
In "Between the Art and the Artist Lies the Shadow" (Week in Review, Jan. 1) you refer to Philip Larkin as "the English poet laureate." Although many expected the more retiring Larkin to succeed Sir John Betjeman, the eventual choice was Ted Hughes.
In fact, Larkin lived in daily fear of being appointed poet laureate.
LILLLIAN W. GROSSMAN  Bronx, Jan. 2, 1994


Detroit's Cup Holders Runneth Over
There was a time when auto executives bragged like race car drivers about horsepower and torque, acceleration and braking distance.
These days, however, they are frequently boasting about a somewhat less macho subject: "surprise and delight" features, as some companies refer to the cup holders and colossal coat hooks, "pommel" grips, his-and-hers climate controls and other gizmos that are proliferating inside cars and light trucks.


Stalling on Social Security Makes a Worse Mess; Seek Cuts Elsewhere
To the Editor:
Your chart accompanying "Welfare Debate Will Re-examine Core Assumptions" (front page, Jan. 2) does make Social Security look like a logical candidate for cuts.


Beijing Journal; For the Rockers Now, China Is a Very Hard Place
Lu Fei, a rotund former drummer and opera singer who mustered out of the army and into China's rock music scene a few years ago, sighed recently and said what most young people in the country already know, "Rock-and-roll in China is sort of lost now."
Pulling on his Chinese cigarette at a Western hotel restaurant, Mr.
Lu, who manages a rock band named Stones, added: "Everything in China is kind of lost now, without an anchor. The music we do is for other people to explain because we don't really know what it means."


Stalling on Social Security Makes a Worse Mess
To the Editor:
In your Jan. 3 article on House Speaker Newt Gingrich's views on Social Security reform you quote from a C-Span interview in which he acknowledged that the Social Security program will need adjustments to remain solvent and prevent larger budget deficits.
This is a welcome change of heart for Mr.
Gingrich, who, with fellow Republicans as well as Democrats, effectively put Social Security reform off the table during the 1994 campaign.


Neighbor Held After Death Of Baby at Fire In Brooklyn
A Brooklyn man was arrested Saturday in an arson fire that led to the death of a 5-month-old boy.
The police said the man was a psychiatric outpatient who had previously been convicted of possessing stolen property.
The suspect, Patrick Pean, 23, was being held yesterday pending arraignment on charges of second-degree murder, arson and reckless endangerment.


Consumers Spending Freely, Confident About Their Jobs
Billy Belford, a nurse's aide in Portland, Ore., has big plans for 1995.
Feeling "pretty secure" about his job, Mr.
Belford, 22, is ready to spend some money.
"Jan. 20 is payday," he said. "That day I have an appointment to go look at a car."


Italian Leader's Empire To Sell 7 More Markets
A retail chain controlled by Italy's caretaker Prime Minister, Silvio Berlusconi, has agreed to sell seven large retail markets for a price said to be about $606 million, a move analysts say is intended to reduce debt and raise cash for modernization.
The stores, which are controlled by Standa S.p.A., a retailing arm of Mr.
Berlusconi's huge Fininvest holding company, will be acquired by a retail group controlled by the Benetton family, owners of Italy's largest textile company, and the Italian businessman Leonardo Del Vecchio, who has parlayed control of a leading eyewear company, Luxottica, into a major investment group.


An Eternity of Waiting For an Instant Hero
The ball was taking longer than Mark Seay expected.
The blitzing Miami defense produced added pressure on Stan Humphries, so when the quarterback of the San Diego Chargers released the decisive throw toward Seay, with two Dolphins closing in on the passer, the trajectory had to be higher.
"I don't know if it was me," Seay said, "but that ball just took forever."
He could afford to wait.
Seay was surrounded by nothing but green grass at the closed end of Jack Murphy Stadium, but his patience had to do with much more than that.
After everything Seay had gone through to reach this time and place -- the chance to catch the last-minute pass that could send the Chargers to the American Football Conference championship game -- he could deal with another instant or two of anticipation.


GTE's Venture With Nintendo
The GTE Corporation, which operates local telephone and cellular companies around the country, is joining with Nintendo of America to develop new video games.
GTE Interactive Media, a subsidiary in Carlsbad, Calif., that operates a large digital production center to develop games and other programming, said last week that it would collaborate with Nintendo.


Gary Kalkin, 44, Is Dead; Top Disney Studio Executive
Gary Kalkin, a top marketing executive at the Walt Disney Studios for the last 10 years who guided the campaigns for such blockbusters as "Beauty and the Beast," "Aladdin" and "The Lion King," died on Friday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 44.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Laurence Mark, a film producer.


Russia, Criticized by West, Defers Exercise With NATO
Russia has postponed peacekeeping maneuvers it was to hold with NATO next summer near St.
Petersburg, German officials said today.
Although Defense Minister Volker Ruhe strongly criticized the "unprecedented brutality" of the Russian attacks against the breakaway southern region of Chechnya, he said the peacekeeping maneuvers and other plans for military cooperation should eventually go ahead.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; Quest for Home From Thousands of Miles Away
FOR Dan Marino, the territory looked awfully familiar Sunday afternoon: a surmountable, but imposing, barrier standing between his Miami Dolphins and a coveted trip to the Super Bowl.
Marino has taken the Dolphins there once, following his second season in 1984, but they lost to the 49ers.
In the 1985 playoffs, they were beaten by the Patriots in the American Football Conference championship game.
In the 1990 playoffs, Miami defeated Kansas City in a first-round playoff game then lost badly to Buffalo.
And in the 1992 playoffs, Miami defeated the Chargers in a second-round playoff game but again lost to Buffalo, this time in the championship game.


Conrad Strasser, Opera Conductor, 44
Conrad Strasser, music director of the After Dinner Opera Company, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 44.
The cause was AIDS, said Richard Flusser, the company's director.


Will N.H.L. Lockout End in Fire Or Ice?
Facing a management deadline that will cancel the season at noon tomorrow, the National Hockey League and the N.H.L.
Players Association will meet in New York today to try to resolve their bitter 101-day dispute.
Underscoring the urgency of the situation, and the new developments that took place over the weekend, Gary Bettman, the N.H.L. commissioner, and Bob Goodenow, the executive director of the union, will lead their respective sides into the session.
Late yesterday, Goodenow suggested they meet today.


Would-Be Champion Tries to Void a Contract
FOR a while, it looked as though nobody would take on the job.
Gov.
George E. Pataki, loyal Republican, didn't want it.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, disloyal Republican, can't have it, and who else had the stature and soapbox to defend New York against Republican budget-cutting in Congress?
Enter the voluble, media-savvy Chuck Schumer, an obvious choice.
With a shrewdly timed and packaged attack last week on the "Contract With America," Representative Charles E. Schumer of Brooklyn and Queens (Chuck to friends) established himself as the loyal opposition on the home front, the city's protector against House Speaker Newt Gingrich and, not incidentally, a possible Democratic candidate for governor in 1998.


Swamp Or Desert, The 49ers Are Ready
They are the powers that be.
They rarely punt, aren't interested in Emmitt Smith's hamstring and have yet to even break out their secret weapon.
The San Francisco 49ers have been holding a place in line for the Cowboys, and they would have been offended if Dallas was not showing up for Sunday's National Football Conference championship.
Their head coach is already in the spirit.
George Seifert flicked off today's Dallas-Green Bay game at the end of three quarters, climbed into his running shorts and took a 35-minute jog in a downpour.
"That's the 'Fighting Duck' in me," he said, referring to his soggy days as an Oregon assistant.
For a coach who is zero for his last three conference title games, Seifert was unusually serene today.
But, based on the machinery in his locker room, it is easy to see why.


Carter to Announce Decision Today
The Heisman Trophy runner-up, KI-JANA CARTER, has scheduled a news conference today in State College, Pa., to announce whether he will stay at Penn State for his senior season or enter the National Football League draft.
Penn State Coach JOE PATERNO has recommended that Carter enter the draft this year, unless "he has compelling personal reasons to come back."
If Carter does decide to turn pro, he would go into the draft with the Heisman winner, RASHAAN SALAAM of Colorado, who has already announced he will enter the N.F.L.
Carter, a redshirt junior, is scheduled to graduate in June.
He ran for 1,539 yards and 23 touchdowns this season and his 7.8 yards a carry average was best among the nation's top 50 rushers.


If Cowboys Are Dead, What Team Is That in Dallas?
Sure, there were times late in the regular season when it looked as if the Dallas Cowboys weren't getting enough sleep.
They wobbled through the final weeks the way a party-goer struggles through the door after a rough New Year's Eve.
There were times when it seemed they didn't care.
Or that the edge that pushed them to two straight Super Bowls was gone.
They entered this divisional playoff game backpedaling, defensive and downright ornery.
Maybe they were just bored.
In retrospect, the way they blew out the poor Green Bay Packers today, 35-9, before a raucous sellout Texas Stadium crowd of 64,745, it appeared that Dallas was saving its energy for games that really mattered.


Seeking a Place in the Sun for Mondrian
For all of Piet Mondrian's influence over postwar art, architecture, design and printing, the organizers of a major retrospective of his works here seem strangely defensive about this reclusive Dutch abstract painter and his place in the history of art.
The Dutch now consider Mondrian to be one of their greats, in the same league as, say, Rembrandt and van Gogh.
Indeed, to mark the 50th anniversary of his death, the Netherlands declared 1994 to be Mondrian Year and organized a host of exhibitions, plays, concerts and television programs.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Consumer Borrowing . . .
Nov.
Tuesday  Producer Price Index . . .
Dec.
Wednesday  Consumer Price Index . . .
Dec.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Retail Sales . . .
Dec.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
With incomes, jobs and confidence increasing, the American consumer is still going strong.
Total consumer spending rose about 4 percent after inflation in 1994, faster than in all but two years in the 1980's.
But whether consumers will be able to sustain that pace is a matter of debate.  [ Page A1. ]


Fuller (H.B.) (FULL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Packers Come Up Small on Big Plays
In football as in life, certain maxims usually hold true:
*A good big man usually beats a good small man.


5 Hurt in Crash at Port Authority Terminal


That Special Magic Returns to New York
To the Editor:
Twenty years ago, New York was our cultural, gastronomic and shopping haven, as well as a place to visit favorite cousins -- a place we dreamed of being in more often.
Then the rest of the country became more sophisticated, and New York's pleasures became available in many places at lower prices and in friendlier settings.
New York lost much of its magnetism.
When we visited, we noticed dirt, noise and rudeness.


Katsin/Loeb Gets A Warner Account
The Warner Music Group, a unit of Time Warner, has selected Katsin/ Loeb in San Francisco as the first agency to handle advertising for Warner Active, its new CD-ROM publishing unit, which will distribute software, electronic games and other interactive multimedia products.
Billings were not disclosed.
David Archambault, vice president and general manager at Warner Active in Burbank, Calif., said Friday that Katsin/Loeb was awarded the account after a six-week review that began with 10 agencies and was narrowed to 2 finalists, Ground Zero in Venice, Calif., and Katsin/ Loeb.


The Bidding For Wireless May Pick Up
Craig O. McCaw's sharply higher bid last week in the Federal auction of airwaves for wireless telephone services has some analysts anticipating more surprises this week.
"My guess is that no one wanted to reveal their cards" before a 10-day holiday break in the auction, said Charla M. Rath, vice president of Freedom Technologies Inc., a Washington-based telecommunications consulting firm, adding, "The people who are predicting that the bids are going to remain low are probably wrong."


Peso Crisis Weakens Salinas Bid for International Trade Job
As President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon scrambles to overcome Mexico's peso crisis, former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari is working hard to salvage his own reputation and his shaky campaign to head the new World Trade Organization.
Mexico's economic problems, caused by an abrupt devaluation of the peso by more than 35 percent just three weeks after Mr.
Salinas left office, have cast a shadow over his reputation as an economic magician who transformed the country.
They also have raised doubts about whether the economic reforms during the six years of his administration were really as successful as they had been portrayed.


A Fleet in Decay: A special report.; New York's Bus Service Worsens With Little Help on the Horizon
After 20 years of losing riders, New York City's bus system has sharply deteriorated in quality because the fleet has aged, buses are wearing out and the two manufacturers under contract to provide new machines have failed to deliver, transit officials say.
More than 45 percent of the 3,600 buses in the fleet have now outlived their useful life and should be replaced, officials say.
Chronic parts shortages keep buses sidelined for weeks.


People
*
Lor Gold, chief creative officer at Jack Levy Associates, Chicago, was named to the additional position of president, succeeding Jack Levy, who continues as chairman and chief executive.
And Dianne Kowaleski, executive vice president for marketing services, was named to the new position of executive vice president and chief operating officer. *
David Yakir, senior vice president and director of the technologies department at N. W. Ayer &amp; Partners, New York, was named president at a new Ayer division, Blue Marble Advanced Communications Group, which will develop interactive communication products like CD-ROM's.


Red Cross Rolls Into Kabul


Anti-Abortion Tactics Debated By Nation's Christian Leaders
The killings of two workers at abortion clinics in Massachusetts 10 days ago has touched off a debate among some of the nation's more prominent Catholic and Evangelical Protestant leaders over whether opponents of abortion should pull back from sidewalk protests and turn instead to prayer within church walls.
The debate reflects a concern among some anti-abortion leaders that tensions over abortion have escalated to a point that some dramatic gesture must be made to defuse them.


Cut 34 Games, and Warm Up the Zamboni
If the National Hockey League and the Players Association come to a collective bargaining agreement by the deadline of noon tomorrow and end the 101-day labor lockout, the regular season will be shortened from 84 games to 50 games and will have only conference play.
The season is expected to begin on Jan. 16 and to end on May 6.
The Stanley Cup playoffs would end by July 1.


Unitrin Inc.(UNIT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Da Streetz Joins Roster on Tanqueray
The Schieffelin &amp; Somerset Company said yesterday that it had added to its agency roster Da Streetz, an agency in New York specializing in urban marketing, as consultants for advertising and promotional projects for Tanqueray gin aimed primarily at black consumers.
The billings were not disclosed.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League  MONTREAL EXPOS -- Signed Jerry Manuel, third base coach, for the 1995 season.
Announced that Luis Pujols, first base coach, will not be retained.
Signed Barry Manuel, pitcher, and Guillermo Velasquez, first baseman, to minor-league contracts.
Football  National Football League  CHICAGO BEARS -- Announced that Tony Wise, offensive line coach, has been given the additional title of assistant head coach.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Fired Chuck Knox, coach.
Arena Football League  CONNECTICUT COYOTES -- Signed Daren Williams, fullback-linebacker, and Russ Stange, lineman.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  BOSTON CELTICS -- Activated Dino Radja, forward, from the injured list.
Placed Acie Earl, center, on the injured list.
LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Placed Sedale Threatt, guard, on the injured list.
SACRAMENTO KINGS -- Waived Trevor Wilson, forward.
SEATTLE SUPERSONICS -- Fined Kendall Gill, guard, for failing to show up for practice due to a missed flight from Chicago.
Hockey  National Hockey League  ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Announced that Greg Parks, center, has elected to play for Krefeld of the German Elite League for the remainder of the season.


Another $124 Million Ordered in School Cuts
New York City's Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, has told school superintendents that the city's fiscal problems will force him to cut another $124 million from the budgets this school year, leaving school officials reeling from seemingly endless budget cuts.
"This new cut is very large and very problematic, coming as it does in the middle of the school year," the Chancellor's spokesman, John Beckman, said yesterday.
"Obviously, we have a great deal of discussing to do with the city on budgetary issues."


Rebels Vow to Fight On as Russians Shell Capital
The sky above Grozny suddenly becomes so dense and black that it seems that a huge thunderstorm must be gathering.
But it is the work of the Russian forces: the Lenin oil refinery took another big hit today, sending another column of oily black smoke, thick with flames, pushing up into the darkening sky.
Russian artillery continued trying to reduce the presidential palace to rubble.
Although the Chechen president, Dzhokar M. Dudayev, is widely reported to have left the palace for refuge elsewhere, it is the symbol of Chechen secessionism, and the Russians seem to want to raise their flag over the ruined shell.


The Writer As Genre Customizer
It must be difficult for Jack Logan, who performed on Saturday night at CBGB, to decide what songs to play in concert.
After all, he has more than 700 of them.
Mr.
Logan, who is 35, has been making music with friends as a leisure activity since his high school days.
But he wasn't taken seriously until recently, when Medium Cool Records released "Bulk," a two-CD set that compiles just 42 of his songs.
The concert on Saturday progressed naturally through the different aspects of Mr.
Logan's songwriting, moving from pop to punk to country to blues.
Like the band NRBQ, Mr.
Logan's group seemed like the ultimate bar band, grinding out a varied and virtuosic all-American strain of rock-and-roll.
Mr.
Logan's longtime collaborator, Kelly Keneipp, tinkled on the keyboards as Dave Philips spiced each song with either slow-burning guitar lines or inventive solos.


The WNYC's Are Too Valuable to Sell
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has put a hold on his plan to sell New York City's public radio stations, but still wants to unload its public TV channel.
That would be a mistake.
The TV station provides important community and ethnic programming and generates revenues to support the radio stations.
The only real gain would be a one-shot infusion of revenues that would do almost nothing to resolve the city's long-term budget problems.
The radio stations -- WNYC-AM and WNYC-FM -- are National Public Radio's main outlets in the city and its suburbs, with 5 percent of the total N.P.R. audience nationwide.
The city subsidy last year was $1 million -- a flyspeck in a $32 billion budget.
It helped support the radio stations; the television station, WNYC-TV, turns a profit.
The total budget for all three is $17 million, most of which comes from listener contributions and foundations.


Observer; Art, Debt, Slumber
The instant people start talking about the deficit my eyelids droop, and off I go in the arms of Morpheus.
The same goes for the late Kenneth Clark's famous 5,000-hour-long documentary, "Civilisation," which was a Christmas present.
I try hard to watch some every night.
It's supposed to be good for you, just as cutting the deficit and eating boring food are supposed to be good for you.


Chargers Are Hoping to See Another Two Dream Finishes
The Chargers woke up yesterday morning and pinched themselves.
Yes, Sunday really did happen.
They did make three turnovers to none for the Miami Dolphins.
They did drive inside the Miami 3 three times and scored only 6 points.
They did gain their first lead with only 35 seconds left in the game when Mark Seay was open -- wide open -- on an 8-yard touchdown pass.
They did flub the next kickoff and give Dan Marino and the Dolphins' offense the ball at the Miami 38.
And they did allow the Dolphins to move too quickly to the San Diego 30.


A Dispute Turns On a Light Bulb: Read Lilco Bills
FOR 30 years, Steve Karathanos was a faithful customer of the Long Island Lighting Company, paying his bills promptly, never questioning what he was charged to illuminate the chandeliers or operate the air-conditioners or pump sea water into the vast lobster tanks of his beachfront restaurant, Steve's Pier 1.
The indecipherable numbers and abbreviations on his electric bill, which in peak months came to as much as $11,000, Mr.
Karathanos left to the meter readers.
His expertise was clam bisque, not energy.
Who has time to double-check the kilowatt hours when there is a party of 24 waiting in the Queen Elizabeth Room?


U.S. and Israel See Iranians 'Many Years' From A-Bomb
The United States Defense Secretary, William J. Perry, said today that Washington and Israel were "both very much concerned" about Iran's potential nuclear threat, but that the Iranians were still "many, many years" from developing an atomic bomb.
Ending a two-day visit to Israel tonight, Mr.
Perry agreed with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin that 7 to 15 years was "a reasonable estimate" of how long it might take Iran at its present pace.
That estimate was longer than the five years or less forecast recently by some senior American and Israeli officials, who said the fundamentalist Islamic Government in Teheran was closer to producing nuclear weapons than previously believed.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
The Nadir for Lakers  Clyde Drexler, in his first home game since he went public with his request to be traded, made six of seven 3-pointers and scored 31 points as Portland handed the Los Angeles Lakers their most lopsided loss ever, 129-83, last night.
Drexler missed his first 3-pointer, then made six in a row.
He scored 16 points in the third quarter when Portland turned an 11-point lead into a blowout that emphatically ended the Lakers' five-game winning streak.


Market Place; Grand Union Expected To File for Chapter 11
Competition has backed the Grand Union Company into a corner.
And the supermarket chain is now expected to choose an immediate, but it hopes quick, bankruptcy-law filing to get out.
The company based in Wayne, N.J., operates 241 supermarkets in the Northeast, one of the most competitive markets in a business that is cutthroat just about everywhere.
Sensing its financial straits, competitors like A.&amp; P., Stop and Shop, Shop 'n Save and Shop Rite have gone for its jugular vein, opening new stores and renovating existing stores in markets that Grand Union dominates like the New York and Albany metropolitan areas.


By Design; Jeans That Shine and Stretch
Stretch satin jeans are body-conscious and shiny, which makes them doubly fashionable.
And they fit right into the current craze for disco dressing.
Bloomingdale's practically sold out of Betsey Johnson's black satin jeans at holiday time, but the store now has other stretch satin jeans in colors.
They're meant for southern resorts, but who says you can't wear pink or white satin to go dancing anytime?
And pastels are perfect for spring.


Grand Met Makes $2.6 Billion Offer for Pet Inc.
Pillsbury Inc. wants to capture what grocery marketers call the Yellow Wall: the formidable frontage in store aisles devoted to the taco shells, sauces and beans of the Old El Paso brand.
Yesterday, Pillsbury's parent, Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., offered to buy Pet Inc. of St.
Louis, the maker of both Old El Paso and Progresso soups, for $2.6 billion, or $26 a share.
The friendly deal, if it goes through, will introduce the Yellow Wall to the Jolly Green Giant, a trademark that Pillsbury owns, and the company will become an instant contender with strong brands in two of the strongest categories on supermarket shelves: the ever-more-mainstream Mexican-food category and ready-to-serve soups.


Romario to Return
ROMARIO, one of the forwards who led Brazil to the World Cup championship, will move from Barcelona to Flamengo as soon as the transfer fee is deposited.
KLEBER LEITE, chairman of the Rio de Janeiro club Flamengo, said that Romario's contract will be for two years and that the club can't transfer him.
Romario has scored only 4 goals after leading the Spanish league last year with 30. (AP)


Gingrich Dismisses New Historian As Holocaust View Raises Furor
Speaker Newt Gingrich tonight dismissed the historian of the House of Representatives -- whom he had appointed just weeks ago -- after learning that she had once helped to deny Federal financing of an educational program about the Holocaust on the ground that it did not present the views of the Nazis and the Ku Klux Klan.
Mr.
Gingrich made the announcement this evening after he learned of the evaluation by Christina Jeffrey, which had outraged many Jewish groups when it became public in 1988.
He acted this evening after House Democrats called upon him to dismiss her.


Corrections
A chart on Friday about the peacekeeping operations of the United Nations carried an incorrect credit.
The information was provided by the United Nations, not Dun &amp; Bradstreet.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.52
3.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.87
5.72
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.42
6.29
3.18
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.87
7.85
5.64
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.88
7.86
6.24
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.73
8.72
7.20
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.89
6.90
5.51
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Singapore Judge Orders U.S. Scholar and Paper to Stand Trial
Putting aside protests from the Clinton Administration, a Singapore judge ordered today that an American scholar and an American-owned newspaper be tried on criminal contempt charges involving an opinion article that criticized "intolerant regimes" in Asia.
The State Department has formally protested the contempt charges brought against the scholar, Christopher Lingle, and The International Herald Tribune, which published an article by Mr.
Lingle on Oct. 7 in which he noted that some Asian governments use "a compliant judiciary to bankrupt opposition politicians."


Vincent Knoll, 55, Executive And Couture Director at Saks
Vincent Knoll, vice president and director of couture for Saks Fifth Avenue, died on Saturday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center after collapsing on Fifth Avenue.
The cause was apparently a heart attack, said Jaqui Lividini, public relations director of Saks.


Laurence R. Goodyear, Lawyer, 82
Laurence R. Goodyear, a Buffalo lawyer who was active in civic affairs, died last Thursday at his home in Buffalo.
He was 82.
He suffered a short illness, his family said.


Gingrich Dismisses New Historian As Holocaust View Raises Ire
Speaker Newt Gingrich tonight dismissed the historian of the House of Representatives -- whom he had appointed just weeks ago -- after learning that she had once helped to deny Federal financing of an educational program about the Holocaust on the ground that it did not present the views of the Nazis and the Ku Klux Klan.
Mr.
Gingrich made the announcement this evening after he learned of the evaluation by Christina Jeffrey, which had outraged many Jewish groups when it became public in 1988.
He acted this evening after House Democrats called upon him to dismiss her.


Suspect in Clinic Shootings Pleads Not Guilty
Shackled, handcuffed and wearing a bulletproof vest under his navy-blue blazer, John C. Salvi 3d pleaded not guilty today to state charges that he murdered two people and injured five others in shootings on Dec. 30 at two abortion clinics here.
A few miles from Brookline District Court, with increased security, the two clinics, Planned Parenthood and Preterm Health Services, opened their doors to patients, without incident.
It was the first time Preterm Health Services had received patients since the shootings, in which its receptionist died.


France's Elite Newspaper Is Changing, Discreetly
It is a measure of Le Monde's established place in France's political and intellectual world that as soon as the daily newspaper said it would change its design to make its pages more readable, it felt the need to reassure readers that it would not change that much.
It has kept its word.
Just two weeks after the 50th anniversary of its founding, the new Le Monde appeared on the stands today with the same logo and size as before, carrying its customary cartoon on the front page as well as inside pages of news and analysis uninterrupted by any photographs.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Reject Challenge to Law on Harassing Hunters
The Supreme Court refused today to hear a constitutional challenge to a Montana law that makes it a crime to interfere with hunting.
Every state but Hawaii has a version of a hunter harassment law, as these statutes are known.
In several states, the laws have come under constitutional attack as interfering with the free speech rights of anti-hunting advocates to go into the field to try to dissuade hunters from firing their guns.


New Measurements On Age of Universe
In the continuing efforts to solve one of the foremost problems in cosmology, the velocity at which the universe is expanding, recent findings have yielded a fast rate, implying a relatively young and small universe.
The results are perplexing because they suggest a universe 8 billion to 12 billion years old, which is younger than the oldest stars.
Another approach to the problem, based on measurements of distances to a certain type of supernova, or exploding star, has consistently produced slower expansion rates, suggesting a universe that may be 15 billion to 20 billion years old.
Such estimates are necessarily imprecise because the age also depends on the average density of matter in the universe, which is another cosmic unknown.


Q&amp;A
Survivors
Q.  Why didn't whatever killed the dinosaurs kill everything else, too?


Considering a Balanced-Budget Amendment


Japan Scales Back a Fiber Optic Connection Plan
Japanese government and industry, having second thoughts about one of the country's most ambitious technology projects, have quietly scaled back a plan to extend optical fiber to every home in the nation, officials said today.
The plan, which was estimated to cost $400 billion, had raised fears in the United States that Japan would take a lead in telecommunications, and added urgency to the Clinton Administration's push for developing a so-called national information infrastructure.
But in Japan, as in the United States, earlier utopian visions have been clouded by doubts about whether every consumer will need or want the cornucopia of multimedia services that could be delivered by high-capacity networks.


One Last Face-Off As Time Runs Out
National Hockey League Commissioner Gary Bettman and the players' association's Bob Goodenow, the key officials in hockey's labor dispute, were still meeting early this morning in Manhattan, trying to negotiate a settlement, end a lockout that has lasted 102 days and save a season that was never allowed to start.
Bettman and Goodenow met in face-to-face talks for the first time since Dec. 6.
Bettman and the team owners have set a deadline of noon today for a new collective bargaining agreement.
Without one, they have said, they will cancel the season.


Planned Parenthood Ad Misleads on Robertson
To the Editor:
The Jan. 5 full-page advertisement by Planned Parenthood distorts the beliefs and comments of the religious broadcaster Pat Robertson.


Vallone Urges City Hall to Take More Control of Schools
Saying that City Hall must have more control over the schools, the City Council Speaker yesterday urged that the city take over more than $1 billion in services like food programs and transportation from the Board of Education.
The Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, also called for expanding the seven-member board to nine, with two members appointed by the Council to assure that it has influence on the board.
It is now made up of appointees from the Mayor and the five borough presidents.


Schmidt Again Puts Up Big Numbers
For 18 years, Michael Jack Schmidt of the Philadelphia Phillies set new standards in power and defensive prowess at third base while seeking perfection.
The introspective and erudite Schmidt may have never reached that unattainable plateau in his mind, but today he achieved a level of another kind: election to the Hall of Fame with the largest number of votes ever cast for one player.
Schmidt, winner of three National League most valuable player awards, 8 home run titles and 10 Gold Gloves, was elected in his first year of eligibility by the Baseball Writers Association of America.
Of the record 460 ballots cast in the largest election in association history, Schmidt was named on 444.


Sports of The Times; For Deion, It Must Be The Money
DEION SANDERS surely understands that there are hazards to his brand of celebrating, such as earlier this season when he intercepted a pass against the Falcons at the end of the second quarter and raced down the sidelines, looking over his shoulder and taunting the opposition bench, and cakewalking into the end zone, where he embarked on a little soft-shoe, and in the process pulled a groin muscle.
It put him out of the game for the entire second half.


Bilingual Education Puts Hispanic Children in the Mainstream; English Spoken Here
To the Editor:
Barbara Mujica's "No Comprendo" (Op-Ed, Jan. 3) is right to question non-English education programs, and look at the isolation immigrants feel and even engender.


So Where's the Turnpike?
About 700 people who thought they were going to Newark ended up here instead this afternoon when their international flights were diverted because of power problems at Newark International Airport.
Four Continental Airline flights -- from London, Paris, Madrid and Frankfurt -- arrived at Bangor International Airport about 1 P.M.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies  Pet agreed to be acquired by the parent of Pillsbury, Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. of Britain, for $26 a share, or $2.6 billion.
The acquisition would help Pillsbury go head-to-head against Campbell Soup in Mexican foods and ready-to-serve soups.  [ Page D1. ]


Centura Banks Inc.(CBC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rowland Asks For Repeal Of Pay Raises
After a campaign that promised not to scapegoat state workers for Connecticut's fiscal troubles, Gov.
John G. Rowland today effectively declared war on state employee unions, urging legislators to reject raises awarded by arbitrators last year but not yet in effect.
Mr.
Rowland said he would not be able to deliver on his central campaign pledge -- to phase out the state income tax over five years -- unless the Legislature went along with him and rejected the raises.


In Canada, 99 Haitians Learn Police Work From Mounties
Max-Antoine Fleurentin was three years old when his parents fled Haiti for a better life in Montreal.
He returned once, when he was 7, and now at age 25 the former political science student is about to go back again in the first wave of officers of a new Haitian civilian police force.
"We want to change things, help bring democracy, and reduce the fear that people have of the police," said Mr.
Fleurentin, one of 99 expatriate Haitians completing three months of boot camp at the Royal Canadian Mounted Police academy.


Pazienza and Duran To Square Off Again
Their last bout may have ended in a controversial decision last June, but when VINNY PAZIENZA and ROBERTO DURAN meet again for a supermiddleweight pay-per-view rematch at the Atlantic City Convention Center on Saturday night, the outcome will be clear-cut, both boxers predicted yesterday.
"I'm going to make this kid pay," is the way Duran, 43, put it at a news conference in New York.
Speaking through an interpreter at Scores, the East 60th Street club owned by the bout's promoter, MICHAEL BLUTRICH, Duran was philosophical about his loss last June, only the 10th in a 104-bout career.
"I thought it was a very bad decision," he said, "but what can you do about it?"


Two Jockeys Honored
The Hall of Fame jockeys EDDIE ARCARO and JOHN LONGDEN have been named recipients of 1994 Special Eclipse Awards for their long and outstanding racing careers, the Thoroughbred Racing Associations announced yesterday.


Trial for 12 Opens In Plot for Bombing New York Buildings
The biggest and most complicated terrorism trial ever to come before an American court got under way in lower Manhattan yesterday morning with a Federal District Court judge directing prospective jurors to fill out a 19-page questionnaire, asking them, among other things, if they have any opinions of Arabs or knew that the World Trade Center was bombed in 1993.
All 12 defendants in the case, including the Egyptian-born religious leader Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, were in their places at several defense tables as the first 100 prospective jurors filed into the courtroom.
Indeed, there are so many defendants and lawyers in the trial that the courtroom has been modified, with a special defense section carved out of an area that usually accommodates three rows of spectator seats.


Moten's Late 3-Pointer Gives Syracuse the Edge
Syracuse 61, Villanova 60
Lawrence Moten's first 3-pointer of the game came with 6.6 seconds to play and gave No. 8 Syracuse a 61-60 victory over Villanova last night in Syracuse.
It was the 11th straight victory for Syracuse (11-1, 4-0 Big East), which won despite a 6-minute scoreless spell in the second half.


Hal Riney Wins Pepsi-Starbucks Job
The Pepsi-Cola Company in Somers, N.Y., and the Starbucks Coffee Company in Seattle said yesterday that they had selected Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco as the first agency to handle advertising for their new Pepsi-Starbucks Coffee Partnership, which will begin selling ready-to-drink coffee-based beverages in the spring.
Though the billings have not been determined, they could reach $15 million to $20 million.


Lawyer Says Woman Recants Sex Charges
A young woman who accused Representative Mel Reynolds, Democrat of Illinois, of sexually assaulting her in 1992 when she was 16, has recanted and wants the charges against him dropped, a lawyer who says he represents the woman said today.
The announcement came at a pretrial hearing in Cook County Circuit Court.
The young woman was not present when Reginald Turner, identifying himself as her new lawyer, made the statement.


Distinctive Ideas at Top Speed
The Silesian Dance Theater, a modern-dance company founded by Jacek Luminski in Bytom, Poland, just three years ago, is already remarkably original.
Considering that the former Communist bloc countries had until recently favored ballet and frowned upon modern dance as a form of individual expression, Mr.
Luminski's small troupe might be expected to imitate American or Western European models.
But as the company's New York debut demonstrated over the weekend at the Kaye Playhouse, a distinct signature emerges from Mr.
Luminski's approach to both form and content.


County's Crisis Is Conservatives' Lab
Orange County, in bankruptcy, has become the laboratory that some conservatives have always hoped for.
Because the taxpayers wouldn't stand for it, the county cannot turn to tax increases to help cover a $2 billion loss from a risky investment portfolio that went bad.
That means the county will need to reduce the size of government -- a long-held conservative goal -- well beyond anything done elsewhere.


On My Mind; Journalists As Performers
For the American press it has been a fun few days, with Connie Chung to kick around.
And the press, print and electronic, was also able to get a delicious dividend -- the glow of showing that it could so be real critical of journalistic practice.
Ms.
Chung says she thought everybody would know she was being playful when she told Newt Gingrich's mother that her answer about what he said about Hillary Rodham Clinton would be "between you and me." After all, not only were the mike and camera lights on but earlier in the interview Ms.
Chung and Mrs.
Gingrich had jokingly "whispered" an exchange about Mr.
Gingrich being born a Yankee and Ms.
Chung said she wouldn't tell anybody.


Harper Likes The Giants
Dallas wide receiver Alvin Harper, who is an unrestricted free agent at season's end, said today he hopes the Giants will be one of the teams interested in him.
"They have a good, young team that I think in a couple of years will be great," he said.
"I think Mike Sherrard is a good player. If the money was right, I would go there. I think the Giants have a great organization."
Harper will be one of the more sought-after free agents and though the chances of him joining the Giants are slim, he seems to be interested.
Harper and Sherrard would make a formidable twosome but the problem with that picture is money.
Harper is looking for about $2 million a year.
Giants General Manager George Young could not be reached for comment late today.


CHRONICLE
DAVE BARRY made fun of opera in his nationally syndicated newspaper column and did penance on Sunday by appearing in an opera.
After writing, "Opera can kill you" in his Oct. 10 column, he was invited by the Eugene Opera in Eugene, Ore., to play the corpse of the wealthy Buoso Donati in Puccini's comic one-act opera "Gianni Schicchi," the Associated Press reported yesterday.


Cowboys Are Swaggering While Limping
Listen to Dallas wide receiver Alvin Harper, talking about Deion Sanders, the most talented cornerback in football.
"Basically I don't think about him at all," he said.
"He's a great cornerback but even great cornerbacks get beat. This is the N.F.L. Everyone gets beat on this level. He's not invulnerable. He will get beat. Either I will beat him or Michael will beat him."


Feeling Poor in a Rich Economy
Like matter and antimatter that coexist in the universe, two economies appear to exist side by side in the U.S.
One economy has generated stagnant earnings for the average American over the past 20 years, producing a frustration that turned against the party in power last November.
The second economy is measured in buoyant statistics: Production has grown steadily for four years, unemployment has fallen to levels as low as any during the past 20 years, and consumer confidence has risen to record levels.
Even beleaguered cities like Detroit and Chicago have achieved fiscal stability.


49ers' Special Play: Swim Deep, Then Cut Just After Noah's Ark
There is mud outside their locker room and mud in their eye, flung by Dallas.
The San Francisco 49ers dealt with the elements today -- some real, some imagined by Nate Newton -- and they were not the least bit distracted.
While the Cowboys were verbally abusing them halfway across the country, the 49ers today were more concerned about their own swamp.
It has rained here incessantly for eight days, and the immediate forecast is for more of the same.
With their practice field practically turned to quicksand, Coach George Seifert has decided to ship the team to Phoenix.


Former Chemist for the City Charges Manipulation of Drinking Water Tests
Senior New York City environmental officials have skewed the results of tests on drinking water by ordering that samples not be taken from some sites that might be contaminated, a chemist who resigned from the city's Department of Environmental Protection last month says.
The chemist, Thomas Georgian, who was operations chief of the city's water quality laboratory for the last two years, said he still thought the overall quality of the city's water was "relatively high."


No Headline
President Clinton has turned to Senator Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut to head a Democratic Party that is divided and debt-ridden after a devastating showing in the November elections, White House officials said tonight.
The officials said the President settled on Mr.
Dodd as chairman of the Democratic National Committee because he would be a spirited and articulate spokesman who could help revive the party.
But in a departure for the Democrats, officials said, Mr.
Dodd will stay in the Senate and serve part time as chairman, with the daily operations overseen by another official, most likely Donald L. Fowler, a veteran committee member from South Carolina.


Total Systems Services Inc.(TSS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sony Computer Puts Account in Review
The Sony Computer Entertainment of America division of the Sony Corporation said yesterday that it had begun a review on its account, to create advertising for a new video game system that will compete with those marketed by Nintendo and Sega.
The billings were estimated at $40 million to $50 million.


In Brooklyn Heights, Residents Describe Siege of Tow Trucks
In Brooklyn Heights, nearly everyone has a story about the tow trucks.
Karen Gordon, 38, who lives on Clark Street, said she recently saw a friend pull into a no-parking zone with her car all packed for a vacation.
The woman put on her flashers and ran into her house for what seemed like a matter of seconds.
"When she came out, they had the car hooked up," she said.


Arrest in Killings of 6
The police arrested a Jackson Heights man and searched for his uncle and another suspect in the killings of six people Saturday in Queens.
Officials said the man told them the attack followed a nightclub fight, but investigators were concentrating on drug dealing or money laundering as possible motives.
Article, page B3.


Northwest Freed From Capital Requirement
Northwest Airlines got a break on an i.o.u. yesterday, reaching another milestone in its rise from near-bankruptcy in 1993 to one of the industry's healthier competitors.
The airline said it was no longer required to raise $235 million in new equity or subordinated debt by mid-1996, an action that had been part of an agreement with labor leaders, bankers and creditors that helped the carrier avert a bankruptcy filing in August 1993.


BanPonce Corp.(BPOP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SOCCER REPORT
United States
Tab Ramos, an integral part of the United States midfield in the last two World Cup tournaments, especially last summer, is the first player to sign with Major League Soccer.


Bilingual Education Puts Hispanic Children in the Mainstream; Wrong Scapegoat
To the Editor:
Re "No Comprendo" (Op-Ed, Jan. 3): It is unfortunate that Barbara Mujica, a professor of Spanish at Georgetown University, is ill informed about bilingual education.


Chess
The Russia I team repeated as the gold medal winner of the World Chess Olympiad, held Nov. 30 to Dec. 17 in Moscow.
The team -- led by Gary Kasparov and including Vladimir Kramnik, Yevgeny Bareyev, Aleksei Dreyev, Sergei Tiviakov and Peter Svidler -- topped 122 countries by amassing the winning score of 37-19 in the 14-round event.
That was not a surprise, although the competition gets tougher every year as chess and chess training intensifies all over the globe.
It was not expected, however, that Bosnia and Herzegovina would capture the silver medal with a 35-21 tally.
Moreover, Russia II, a young squad allowed to compete as a courtesy to the host country, also surprised by tying with England for third place with 34 1/2 points.
Russia II got the bronze medal on tie-break points.


Conservative Party Leader Picked to Run Port Authority
Gov.
George E. Pataki has picked George J. Marlin, a Conservative Party leader with no experience in public-sector management, as executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
If the choice is approved by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey, who oversees the authority with Mr.
Pataki, it would represent a sharp departure from the appointments of past directors, who have had significant administrative experience before their selections.


After Missed Calls, Shula Misses Instant Replay
Bring back the instant replay.
That was Don Shula's response yesterday to a couple of bad calls during the Miami Dolphins' 22-21 playoff loss to the San Diego Chargers on Sunday.
"There were some missed calls out there that really affected the outcome of the ball game," said Shula, the Dolphins coach, whose sentiments were echoed by the Chargers' coach, Bobby Ross, who said he, too, would like to see the instant replay rule return.


You Are Not Alone: Trial by CD-ROM
"IT's hard to tell your son that the CD he got from Santa doesn't work," Brad Gellert, a fellow Compuserve subscriber, wrote in response to a request here two weeks ago for acounts of CD-ROM problems.
The popular children's reading program he had bought required 256 colors. (The names of the programs at issue here are not given, as they may well work on other computers.)


Experts Begin a Hard Look at Air Safety
Trying to restore public faith in air travel, hundreds of airline officials and government regulators gathered today for what the Transportation Secretary called a "ruthlessly honest self-evaluation" of the state of airline safety.
But while the Secretary, Federico F. Pena, said that air travel was exceptionally safe and even pledged that "we will not settle for anything less than zero accidents," the chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board, an independent agency, said that some important questions -- like airline management, oversight by the Federal Aviation Administration and safety management -- were not on the conference's agenda.


Treasuries Fall as Price Data Are Due
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday as investors worried that inflation reports due this week would continue to suggest that rising interest rates had not yet slowed the economy.
To subdue future inflation, the Federal Reserve, which raised short-term interest rates six times last year, may continue ratcheting rates up this year.


CHRONICLE
No sooner had the last ad in a series promoting Ikea's winter sale appeared on Thursday in 25 newspapers on the East Coast, including The New York Times, than the authors of romance novels began sending furious E-mail messages to one another.
The source of their unromantic fury was the advertisement's claim: "By the time our next sale rolls around, you'll be reading novels at the beach. (You know, the trashy romance kind.)"


Stocks End Day Mixed; Inflation Data Awaited
Stock traders stayed on the sidelines yesterday in advance of the Labor Department's release of the December Producer Price Index today and the Consumer Price Index tomorrow.
The price data will go far in calming or alarming traders over the course of inflation, the economy and the interest-rate policy of the Federal Reserve.
The Fed's policy-making meeting is scheduled to begin Jan. 31.


Brian Gettings, 61, Official Who Helped To Draft RICO Law
Brian P. Gettings, a former United States Attorney who helped draft national anti-racketeering legislation, died on Wednesday at his home in Annandale, Va.
He was 61.
The cause was throat cancer, said Harvey B. Cohen, a fellow senior partner in the Cohen, Gettings, Dunham &amp; Harrison firm in Arlington, Va.


Gingrich Dismisses New Historian As Holocaust View Raises Ire
Speaker Newt Gingrich tonight dismissed the historian of the House of Representatives -- whom he had appointed just weeks ago -- after learning that she had once helped to deny Federal financing of an educational program about the Holocaust on the ground that it did not present the views of the Nazis and the Ku Klux Klan.
Mr.
Gingrich made the announcement this evening after he learned of the evaluation by Christina Jeffrey, which had outraged many Jewish groups when it became public in 1988.
He acted this evening after House Democrats called upon him to dismiss her.


John P. Mackin, 54, Benefits Executive
John P. Mackin, a senior vice president and director of the government division of the Segal Company, a New York-based employee benefits consulting firm, died on Friday at his home in Croton-on-Hudson.
He was 54.
The cause was cancer, said Martin E. Segal, the company's chairman emeritus.


Tetovo Journal; Dervish Holy Ground Is Macedonia Battleground
Deception finally got the Albanian dervishes of this mountain land back inside their monastery here last March, decades after Communist officials seized the place and turned it from an overgrown ruin into a tourist attraction complete with museum, restaurant, hotel and casino.
"This was once our richest monastery in Europe, and the second largest in the world," said Tahir Emini, acting head of Tetovo's dervishes, who belong to the Bektashi sect.
Dervishes are Islam's closest counterpart to Christian monks.


4 Palestinian Officials Call for Halt to Israeli Talks
In a sign of internal dissent, some leaders of the Palestinian Authority called today for a suspension of negotiations because of Israeli settlement activity in the occupied West Bank.
But even as they spoke at a public meeting in Jericho, Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, and Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel met in the Gaza Strip and reported progress in their talks on expanding Palestinian self-rule.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the appointment of Christina Jeffrey as historian for the House of Representatives misstated her title at Kennesaw State College in Georgia.
She is an associate professor of political science, not an assistant professor.


Man Falls to Death, Apparently a Suicide


Emmis Broadcasting (EMMS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Exploring New Soapboxes for Political Animals
THE personal computer has become the modern equivalent of the soap box, reference library, bully pulpit and town hall, allowing anyone with access to a modem and a phone line to participate in politics to a degree never before possible on such a scale.
The convening of the 104th Congress last week appears to have accelerated the phenomenon of electronic democracy, which has been spreading along with the personal computer.
Electronic democracy is far from perfectly democratic, given the high relative cost of computer equipment, phone service and information fees.
Recent demographic surveys of the Internet reveal an electronic citizenry that is predominantly white, male, educated and well to do.
But there are countless resources available to those who want to make the effort to keep tabs on the new Congress, a new Governor or a new City Council.
Computer-based communications allow individuals and grass-roots activist groups to be almost as politically connected as lobbyists and political action committees.


METRO DIGEST
TRIAL OPENS IN TERRORISM PLOT
The biggest and most complicated terrorism trial ever to come before an American court got under way in lower Manhattan with a Federal District Court judge directing prospective jurors to fill out a 19-page questionnaire, asking them, among other things, if they had any opinions of Arabs or knew that the World Trade Center was bombed in 1993.
A1.


Asteroid or Comet? Clues to an Orbiting Object
EVER since its discovery in 1977, Chiron had puzzled astronomers and defied classification.
Was this reddish interplanetary traveler an asteroid or a comet, or something in between?
Chiron was first thought of as an asteroid, though its orbit in the outer reaches of the solar system lay beyond the usual region of these rocky mini-planets, which is between Mars and Jupiter.
In fact, because this object was traveling between the orbits of Saturn and Uranus, it was named after the centaur Chiron, son of Saturn and grandson of Uranus in Greek mythology.


Kotite Interviews Jet Aides
The Jets' new coach, Rich Kotite, began interviewing the Jets' current assistant coaches yesterday, a process he expects to take three days.
Kotite will be ready to start choosing his assistants by the end of the week, he said.
Kotite has apparently made up his mind to bring in several of his assistants from the Eagles, who dismissed him last month.
Still, he spoke to six of Pete Carroll's former assistants.
They were among 12 assistant coaches under Carroll, who was dismissed last week.


As the Nets Burn, Beard Keeps Fiddling
With seven losses in their past eight games, the Nets will have a new backcourt Tuesday night when they play the Detroit Pistons at the Palace in Auburn Hills, Mich.
Kenny Anderson will return to the lineup after missing two games with the flu and Chris Morris will replace Rex Walters at shooting guard.


Antipoverty Checks Only Create Dependency; What Landslide?
To the Editor:
"The Gingrich Paradox" (editorial, Jan. 5) expresses some doubts about the genuineness of House Speaker Newt Gingrich's suddenly discovered bipartisanship.


Hibernia Corp.(HIB,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Mother of 4 Finds Help And Sheds Long Misery
Not long ago, he followed her home from church and discovered where she had moved to escape his abuse.
But he stopped at the corner, and Sonia K. believes he will not come any closer to her new apartment and the life she has begun there.
She was 13 when they emigrated from Belize together, leaving their families and childhoods behind.
She loved him then, and said she would follow him anywhere.
A year later, they had a baby daughter, and it seemed all the world was within their grasp.


Merck's Ex-Chief Joins Tiny Biotech Company
P.
Roy Vagelos, who retired as chairman and chief executive of Merck &amp; Company in November, has been named chairman of Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc., the biotechnology company said yesterday.
The appointment delighted investors in the tiny company, which is based in Tarrytown, N.Y., and specializes in the discovery and development of biotechnology-based compounds to treat neurodegenerative diseases like Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, commonly known as Lou Gehrig's disease.


Deadly Chain-Reaction Crash


For Baboons, Rising to Top Has Big Cost In Fertility
SHE had been poor and she had been rich, and everybody believed the vaudeville star Sophie Tucker when she assured them rich was better.
Wealth, fame, success, status: these are the glorious bonbons of life, out of reach to most, perhaps, but desirable to nearly all.
Who can doubt the plentiful benefits that come with being at the top?
Who but . . . a baboon?
A long-term study of female olive baboons living in Gombe National Park, Tanzania, has revealed that while the high-ranking individuals in a group do indeed reap many nutritional and reproductive rewards from their status, they also pay a few unexpected costs.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: David A. Summers; Out of the Mines and Into the Lab
DEEP underground, surrounded by the constant coolness of rock and the sound of seeping water, miners cleave the earth with a powerful tool.
Above ground in metal-fabricating factories, carpet-making companies and food-processing plants around the nation, similar tools carve away carefully and precisely, without benefit of a blade.
Deceptively simple in principle, this tool, the high-powered water jet, together with its relatives using other fluids, has come to play a role in countless aspects of modern technology.
And one of its leading champions, Dr.
David A. Summers, a 50-year-old mining engineer from England, is constantly searching for new applications in mining and elsewhere.


Time Warner in Japanese Cable Venture
Time Warner Inc., U S West Inc. and two Japanese companies announced today that they would invest a total of about $400 million to enter the relatively undeveloped cable television business in Japan.
Time Warner, the second-largest cable company in the United States, and U S West, a regional Bell telephone company, will be teaming with the Toshiba Corporation, the computer and electronics company, and the Itochu Corporation, a major trading company.
The companies already are partners in Time Warner Entertainment, the Time Warner division that owns the company's cable systems in the United States, as well as Home Box Office and Warner Brothers.
U S West owns 25 percent of Time Warner Entertainment, while Itochu and Toshiba each own 5.6 percent.


Peter Cook, Madcap British Performer, Dies at 57
Peter Cook, one of the four creators of the ground-breaking satiric revue "Beyond the Fringe," died on Monday at the Royal Free Hospital in London.
He was 57 and lived in London.
The cause was a gastrointestinal hemorrhage, his family said.
He had entered the hospital on Jan. 3.


Yeltsin's Crisis: Fear, and Hope, for Democracy
As the deadly war in Chechnya drags on, Russia is clouded with rumors, conspiracy theories and dark predictions about who is running the Kremlin and whether democracy can survive.
Some Russians warn that a right-wing coup by Kremlin hard-liners is imminent.
Others, mostly liberals, insist that such a coup has already occurred and that the President is either in complicity with it or not in control.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about AIDS research at Johns Hopkins University misstated the age of the patient being studied.
She is a woman who has remained healthy since contracting H.I.V. 13 years ago; she is not a 13-year-old girl.


Colgate in $1.04 Billion Acquisition
Moving to reduce debt and improve its recently lowered credit rating, the American Home Products Corporation announced yesterday that it had agreed to sell its Kolynos toothpaste, dental floss and mouthwash businesses in South America to the Colgate-Palmolive Company for $1.04 billion.
American Home Products, a health care and consumer products company, said the money would go primarily to repay debt.
The company borrowed most of the $9.7 billion it paid to acquire American Cyanamid last year, and analysts said American Home might try to cut debt further by selling other businesses.


Cultural Groups Mobilize To Take On the New Congress
Alarmed by growing attacks on Federal support for the arts, cultural groups around the country are mobilizing to press their case directly to the avowedly hostile House Republican leadership.
Their message: The arts don't cost; they earn.
The effort to sell the arts as not just balm for the soul but as a boon to local economies drew representatives of some 50 national arts and humanities groups to a meeting last week in Washington, where they formed a new "cultural advocacy" coalition.
Another group set up a 900 telephone number to raise money for messages to Senators and Representatives.
The chairman of the President's Council on Arts and the Humanities, John Brademas, said yesterday that he would make his own appeal later this week.


Daniel Guido, 63, Police Official In Nassau, Suffolk and Yonkers
Daniel Guido, who had headed the police departments of Nassau, Westchester and Suffolk counties as well as those of Yonkers and Stamford, Conn., died on Saturday at J. T. Mather Memorial Hospital in Port Jefferson, L.I.
He was 63 and lived in Dix Hills, L.I.
The cause was complications from cancer, said a son, Robert, of Huntington, L.I.


Tons of Cocaine Reaching Mexico in Old Jets
In a daunting new turn in the traffic of Colombian cocaine into the United States, smugglers are buying old passenger jets, taking out the seats and using the planes to fly huge amounts of the drug into Mexico, American and Mexican officials say.
Traveling at night with their lights off, the Boeing 727's and French-made Caravelle jets are believed to be carrying as much as six tons or more of cocaine on a single flight.


Threatt on Injured List
The Los Angeles Lakers placed guard SEDALE THREATT on the injured list yesterday because of a stress fracture in his right foot.
Threatt, 33, has played in 26 games this season, averaging 10.0 points and 4.1 assists.
He hasn't played since Dec. 30. (AP)


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  RUSSIANS CLOSING IN  Russian troops were closing in on the presidential palace in the capital of a secessionist region, though defenders said the Russians would have to destroy it first, while civilians tried to cope and survive.
A1


INSIDE
Marlin Choice to Head Port
Governor Pataki has picked George J. Marlin, a Conservative Party leader with no experience in public sector management, to head the Port Authority.
Page B6.
Rowland vs.
State Workers
Connecticut's Governor urged legislators to reject raises for state workers awarded by arbitrators last year but not yet in effect.
Page B1.
Mexican Market Tumbles
The Mexican stock market posted its worst loss in more than five years, 6.65 percent, as investors reacted to the plan to bolster the peso by raising rates and borrowing.
Page D1.
Top Baboon, at a Price
Dominant female baboons reap substantial rewards, but they also run a much increased risk of fertility problems.
Science Times, page C1.


Proposition 16 Is Delayed For One Year
The National Collegiate Athletic Association affirmed its stricter set of requirements for the eligibility of freshman athletes today, although implementation of the new rules, scheduled to take effect in August, was delayed one year.
In a complex sequence of alternatives offered at the 89th convention, delegates upheld the new rules, which were originally passed in 1992 when they were listed as Proposition 16.
The maneuvering was the latest in a 12-year conflict over the use of standardized testing that has been found by critics to be culturally biased but is used to determine eligibility.


COMPANY NEWS;
A California judge yesterday set aside a $1.2 billion patent infringement judgment against Honeywell Inc., saying that a patent that Litton Industries had argued was violated was not valid.
John M. Leonis, Litton's president and chief executive, issued a statement saying, "Litton believes the court is in error in its findings, and we will be reviewing the court's action and anticipate filing an appeal in the U.S. Court of Appeal for the Federal Circuit."


Executive Changes
BOWATER INC., Greenville, S.C., appointed Arthur D. Fuller senior vice president, and, effective March 1, president of its new Bowater newsprint division.
GFT USA CORP., New York, a unit of Gruppo GFT, named Wayne M. Markowitz senior vice president and chief financial officer.


With Ratings Slipping, CBS Reaches for Youth
CBS has seen its prime-time fortunes slide this television season, and Peter Tortorici, the president of CBS Entertainment, says he knows why.
"What we're missing is identity," Mr.
Tortorici said today during an interiew after a news conference he held here at a semi-annual gathering of reporters who cover the television industry.
"We don't have a signature show right now. We're missing something that you look at and say, 'O.K., CBS equals that.' "


Republicans Asking Telephone Companies for a Quick End to Turf Fight
Senior Republicans in the House and Senate vowed today to pass legislation by July to deregulate the telecommunications industry, and they told local and long-distance telephone companies to resolve their feud about entering each other's markets or face a decision imposed from above.
In something akin to a "good cop-bad cop" routine at a hearing of the Senate Commerce Committee, hawkish Republican senators argued that Congress should set a firm date -- like Jan. 1, 1998 -- when all segments of the communications industry would be free to compete in any market.


A Tribute to King At Lincoln Center
"Tracks: A Celebration of the Triumph and Spirit of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.," a one-woman show with film and music, will be presented today and tomorrow at 7:30 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
Featured in the production is Yolanda King, King's eldest daughter; the writer and director is Ron Stacker Thompson.


U.S. Buys The Peso, Yet Bolsa Takes Dive
The Mexican stock market suffered its worst loss in more than five years today, as investors reacted negatively to the decision by Mexican authorities to raise short-term interest rates sharply and begin using an $18 billion international credit line to bolster the peso.
The stock market -- formally the Bolsa de Valores -- dropped 149.88 points, or 6.65 percent, to close at 2,104.05.
It was the exchange's worst single-day loss since October 1989.
Nothing that happened last year -- including the rebellion in Chiapas state, two high-visibility political assassinations or the uncertainty of a presidential election -- affected the stock market as much as the peso crisis seemed to today.


Corrections
A theater review on Saturday about John Kelly's "Pass the Blutwurst, Bitte" at La Mama Annex misidentified the creator of the show's filmed sequences.
As a separate listing of credits reported, the filmed parts were by Anthony Chase; Huck Snyder was responsible for the furniture and props.


Agents Won't Handle Strikebreakers
Major league baseball clubs in search of replacement players need no longer call agents asking if they have any to offer.
The Players Association's executive board is in the process of voting to decertify any agent who represents a replacement player.
The board, which is expected to announce its decision today, will take the action by amending the regulations governing the union's agent-certification program.
The union certifies agents to represent players and can decertify them for various practices.


Sex Harassment Case Draws Swift Action
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission is known for its backlog of cases and long delays before it begins investigating workers' complaints of racial, age, sex or other discrimination.
The agency rejects nearly three of four sexual harassment complaints it receives, and even when it does investigate a case, only a small portion of the workers who bring complaints obtain favorable results.


No Cluster Bombs for Turkey
An American company wants to sell cluster bombs, which do not discriminate between destroying tanks and killing innocent civilians, to Turkey.
Given Ankara's punishing tactics in its war against Kurdish rebels in southeastern Turkey, these bombs are likely to be misused.
The State Department should refuse to license the sale.
Turkey denies it wants to use the bombs in its war on the Kurdistan Worker's Party, or P.K.K.
As a NATO ally it would normally be entitled to receive such deadly exports, which are used in air strikes against tanks.
Yet Turkey is in no imminent danger of tank attack from anyone.


Let's Privatize Congress
It is great news, this idea of selling a House office building now that the Republicans are dissolving so many committees and firing their staffs.
But I wouldn't be surprised if this is only the opening wedge for a campaign to privatize Congress.
Yes, let the free market openly raise its magnificent head in the most sacred precincts of the Welfare State.
The compelling reasons for privatizing Congress are perfectly evident.
Everybody hates it, only slightly less than they hate the President.
Everybody, that is, who talks on the radio, plus millions of the silent who only listen and hate in private.


Balanchine's Head to the Dancers' Feet
George Balanchine's "Divertimento No. 15" aspires to the somewhat chill perfection of its Mozart score.
The ballet requires virtuoso dancing of a sort that is more sustained and monochromatic sheen than bursts of sparkling fireworks.
Margaret Illmann, a guest dancer, got off to a rocky start in a performance with the New York City Ballet on Friday night at the New York State Theater.
But by the ballet's central pas de deux, performed with Lindsay Fischer, Ms.
Illmann had regained the distinctive warmth and wit that seems to smooth all the choreographic difficulties that confronted her.


Synovus Financial Corp.(SNV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bilingual Education Puts Hispanic Children in the Mainstream
To the Editor:
Barbara Mujica's view (Op-Ed, Jan. 3) that bilingual education has failed to mainstream foreign-born students is not supported by the evidence.
Neither is her inference that children of Hispanic immigrants are not growing up speaking English.


Accounts
*
SNCF, Paris, has retained BDDP France, Paris, on the French railway's account after a review, which is mandated every four years.
The billings were estimated at $30 million.


Suspect Is Held in 6 Killings As Police Seek 2 Other Men
The police arrested a 20-year-old Jackson Heights man and searched for his uncle and another suspect yesterday in connection with the murders of four women and two men in a Queens apartment early Saturday morning.
The suspect in custody, Saul Angulo, said the shootings followed a fight he had with two of the victims at a nightclub, and that he and two other men had intended to kill only one of the victims, law-enforcement officials said.
Police investigators, however, said they were concentrating on drug dealing or money laundering as possible motives for the crime.
But they said they have not ruled out the possibility of robbery or a personal dispute.


Aides Say Clinton Will Choose Dodd To Lead Democrats
President Clinton has turned to Senator Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut to head a Democratic Party that is divided and debt-ridden after a devastating showing in the November elections, White House officials said tonight.
The officials said the President settled on Mr.
Dodd as chairman of the Democratic National Committee because he would be a spirited and articulate spokesman who could help revive the party.
But in a departure for the Democrats, officials said, Mr.
Dodd will stay in the Senate and serve part time as chairman, with the daily operations overseen by another official, most likely Donald L. Fowler, a veteran committee member from South Carolina.


Man Sentenced to Prison in Officer's Death
A 24-year-old man convicted of shooting an undercover narcotics detective to death and trying to kill another during a "buy and bust" operation in an East Village store two years ago was sentenced yesterday to 55 years to life in prison.
In pleading for a minimum sentence, Mel Sachs, the lawyer for the defendant, David Degondea, contended that his client did not know that Detective Luis Lopez and his colleagues were police officers when they burst into a silk-screen store at 114 East First Street on March 10, 1993, with guns drawn.
In July, Mr.
Sachs filed a civil suit in Manhattan seeking damages for injuries that Mr.
Degondea claims he sustained from beatings by the police after his arrest.


A Sexual Harassment Case Draws Swift Action From an Agency
After a decade of secretarial work with contractors, most recently earning $20,000 a year on the site of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum here, Jacqueline M. Lia says that she was accustomed to sexual innuendo, lewd jokes and video pinups on office computer screens.
But nothing prepared her for Lance Carson.
There was, for example, the visit that Mr.
Carson, a union steward, paid to her office trailer last Jan. 21, two days before her 28th birthday.
"He told me, 'I don't have a red ribbon, but here's my birthday gift,' " Ms.
Lia said.
And then, she said, he exposed himself and asked her to perform oral sex.


'Secrets' Land A Reporter In Chinese Jail
A Chinese journalist who was tried in secret and sentenced in November to six years in prison is being punished for reporting a sensitive but open secret about who rules China, court documents show.
The 50-year-old journalist, Gao Yu, was arrested on Oct. 2, 1993, as she prepared to leave China for an academic year at Columbia University.
She had written a series of articles earlier that year reporting that President Jiang Zemin, General Secretary of the Communist Party and Commander in Chief of China's armed forces, does not have ultimate power as long as other "senior comrades" like Deng Xiaoping are alive and that China's Parliament remains a rubber stamp for decisions made by the Communist Party's governing Central Committee.


Corrections
A chart of major financial indicators atop the Business Digest yesterday misstated the changes for the last week in some editions.
The Dow Jones industrial average finished the week up 32.97 points, at 3,867.41, not up 28.93 points.
The dollar finished the week up 1.79 Japanese yen, at 101.37 yen, not up 0.69 yen.
The February crude oil contract was 9 cents lower, at $17.67 a barrel, not 23 cents higher.
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond closed down 1 basis point, at 7.86 percent, not down 6 basis points. (A basis point is one-hundredth of 1 percent.)


Takeover Report Spurs Lotus Shares
Shares of the Lotus Development Corporation shot up yesterday after a trade publication reported that the company was holding discussions with AT&amp;T about a possible acquisition.
The shares jumped as much as 7.5 percent, before settling at $42, up $2, in Nasdaq trading.
The activity was set off by a report in PC Week that said that talks between AT&amp;T and Lotus toward an acquisition were under way.
The report also noted that Lotus was close to signing a deal with Nippon Telegraph and Telephone in Japan to sell Lotus Notes, its groupware software, on a commercial N.T.T. network, much like the deal Lotus signed with AT&amp;T last year.
Groupware is a type of software that lets groups of workers collaborate on a common document by tracking the document's location and its history of revisions.


All Angles Covered, From Tamales to Turnovers
Here's what overdosing on watching sports does for you.
After a full day of National Football League playoffs on Sunday, my biggest thought was this: Can Fox's John Madden really eat 50 tamales in a sitting?
That's what he said when he espied tamales being served at a Texas Stadium tailgate party.
This sofa yam needs a rest -- or some mildly spiced enchiladas, so my tender stomach won't scream too much.
Some other random thoughts on Sunday's Fox and NBC telecasts:


South Pole Ready for Internet Revolution
One night last week, a stunning demonstration of the revolution that is changing the way astronomers work occurred in the computer room at the domed headquarters of the American scientific station here.
Outside the cavernous dome, the midnight sun was shining over the featureless polar ice desert and the thermometer hovered near minus 30 degrees Fahrenheit, but inside the crowded computer room, a dozen computers available to pole residents were all in use.


MOTOROLA INC. (MOT,N)
Motorola Inc. reported a 51 percent increase in fourth-quarter net income yesterday, well exceeding analysts' expectations, as the company continued to post strong sales of computer chips and wireless communication devices.
"Motorola is enjoying the benefits of the expansion of wireless communications into consumer markets," said Gary L. Tooker, the company's vice chairman and chief executive.


Patterns
Eyes on Escada
When a company is taking in $900 million in annual revenues, tinkering with the formula can seem a bit like diffusing a bomb.
And when a designer has parlayed an image based on originality and independence into cult stardom, teaming with a commercial brand can be equally risky.


Curtain Falls on Opera Radio Show; Listeners Mobilize After the Loss of Their Favorite 'Fanatic'
There was something downright operatic about the love affair between Stefan Zucker and his listeners, who for the last 12 years tuned in to his quirky and outrageous opera show on the Columbia University radio station, WKCR-FM.
Aficionados would cut short their Saturday evenings to hear Mr.
Zucker's conversations with the world's great tenors and such eccentric listener-participation features as "Booing: True Confessions" and "Name That Voice."


Mastercard to Develop On-Line Standard
Joining a stampede of companies that hope to profit from shopping on computer networks, Mastercard International said yesterday that it would develop standards for its cards to be used on the Internet.
Mastercard, an association of banks that is based in New York, said it would use the technology developed by the Netscape Communications Corporation of Mountain View, Calif., a specialist in software for the Internet, the global web of computer networks.


Threats at 4 Abortion Clinics
The police on Long Island stepped up patrols at four abortion clinics today after signs were posted outside the clinics over the weekend warning that anyone in the vicinity was risking "injury or death."
The signs were found taped to outside walls near the entrances to clinics in Lindenhurst, Garden City, Hempstead and Levittown.


Promises of Miracles: News Releases Go Where Journals Fear to Tread
SCIENTISTS rarely make exaggerated claims when reporting their results in the scientific literature because it is poor etiquette and likely to provoke the scorn of their peers.
But news releases are a different matter.
When speaking to the public, some scientists, in conjunction with their institution's press office, are willing to make much bolder claims for their work.
A recent announcement from a respected scientific institute in California seemed to promise a cure for cancer: a single injection of either of two proteins had been found to cut off the blood supply to many kinds of tumors, causing them to shrink away while leaving normal tissue to thrive.


Erhardt Aims to Keep Steelers on the Run
Ron Erhardt's football career has taken funny bounces.
He has gone from being a 60-year-old forgotten man on the Giants to the wise offensive coordinator of the Steelers.
The Steelers are the team with the best record in the American Football Conference and are favored to win the A.F.C. championship game against the San Diego Chargers on Sunday and advance to the Super Bowl.


Police Lose by Routine Denial in Abuse Cases
To the Editor:
Re your Jan. 5 news article on the death due to asphyxiation of a man in New York City police custody: Wouldn't it be admirable if just once, Phil Caruso, head of the Patrolman's Benevolent Association, said that there might be some signs of excessive force used instead of offering the usual denial?


Helene Curtis Industries Inc.(HC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


U.S. Effort to Return Farm Land to Natural State Wins Praise
WITH the Endangered Species Act under assault by political conservatives and property-rights advocates, another federally sponsored approach to saving wild creatures' habitats has quietly won broad praise and is being widely promoted as a successful alternative.
It is the Conservation Reserve Program, a provision of the 1985 farm bill that pays farmers to take land out of production and return it to something approaching a natural state.


Indiana Will Test Knicks' Changes
The way Pat Riley has been playing with his guard rotation provides more than a little insight into his coaching philosophy: If something works, go with it.
Reggie Miller surely knows how Riley feels.


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


New Leaders for the Police Department


State of the State Message Salutes a Year in the Life
New Jersey state government is slimming down just as the economy is adding jobs in private business, and Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman accepted credit for both developments in her State of the State Message, whose text was released here today.
In a document that could just as well have been called "The State of My Administration," Mrs.
Whitman offered no new initiatives and no surprises; instead she devoted a 30-page booklet to her administration's still sometimes vague plans to wring savings and better services out of state and local government.


Champion International Corp.(CHA,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
HALLIBURTON CO., Dallas, said its energy services unit had signed contracts valued at a total of $500 million over 10 years with three companies -- Andersen Consulting, I/Net and the Power Computing Corporation -- to handle its information technology operations.
OWENS-CORNING FIBERGLAS CORP., Toledo, Ohio, completed an agreement to sell the assets of its Tank division to Fluid Containment Inc., a new company formed by several private investors, for an undisclosed amount.


Heavy Rains Bring Flooding in Northern California


Southwestern Public Service Co.(SPS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Real Debate on Drug Legalization Is Overdue
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal's "Cruelest Hoax" (column, Jan. 3), on drugs, attacks the Soros Foundations for supporting "pro-legalizers." We have financed groups with different viewpoints on drug issues so as to promote a debate.


SAMSUNG PLANS A SEMICONDUCTOR PLANT IN UNITED STATES
Samsung Electronics, the South Korean company that is the world's largest producer of computer memory chips, said yesterday that it planned to build a semiconductor plant in the United States.
Samsung said it would decide on the site for the plant this year.
It plans to begin production by 1998, concentrating on memory chips.
Building a semiconductor factory in America would represent the first major expansion outside of Samsung's manufacturing base in Korea.
One reason for building the plant could be insurance against lawsuits accusing the company of dumping chips in the United States at less than the full cost of production.


Antipoverty Checks Only Create Dependency
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert's "Reckless Journey" (column, Jan. 4) contains three major errors that have been consistently promoted by liberals:


Three White Bowls and Rows of Watermelons
Poppo Shiraishi lined the stage of the Joyce Theater with rows of watermelons.
There were three white porcelain bowls at the front.
But Mr.
Shiraishi's "Untitled," performed by Poppo and the GoGo Boys on Saturday night as part of the Altogether Different festival, was not the social commentary or solemn ritualizing one might have expected.
Instead, the new full-evening piece is a feast of gorgeous, warming color and light, a smooth-flowing pageant of images that add up to a powerful and sometimes comical dream.
Two crooked-limbed dancers dressed like giant crimson poppies perform an Isadora Duncan-style dance.
At one point, the stage is shared by a young man in a business shirt, tie and white shorts, a woman dressed like a rust-colored netsuke figure and a tiny, very pale ballet butterfly in lilac bloomers and a yellow-green bandeau.
Six sprites in green, orange and yellow tank suits and caps caper through sulphur-colored light.
There is a chorus of what appear to be watermelon priestesses.


Playfully Meditating On Exile's Many Levels
EAST, WEST  By Salman Rushdie  214 pages. Pantheon Books. $21.


NEWARK AIRPORT IS CLOSED AS CREW CUTS POWER LINES
Newark International Airport was crippled, then shut down, and air travel in the Eastern United States was seriously disrupted today after a construction crew driving piles for a new garage accidentally crushed high-voltage underground electrical cables serving the airport's three passenger terminals.
Several hundred of Newark's passenger flights were canceled and the travel plans of tens of thousands of people were ruined after the mishap cut off electricity to the three terminals at about 8:30 A.M.
Some passengers flying from Europe to Newark ended up in Bangor, Me.; others took unexpected detours on domestic trips, landing at La Guardia and Kennedy airports and being bused here to pick up cars and meet their families.


Historical Honesty in the House
There is no way to force members of Congress to speak the whole truth when they rise to declaim on the floor of the Senate and House.
But a little-noticed rules change approved by the House last week at least protects the integrity of the Congressional Record, the official chronicle of each day's proceedings.
The change owes much to the persistence of Representative Bob Walker.
The Pennsylvania Republican has worked hard to end the ancient tradition that allows members to edit history by altering the transcript before it is printed.
Beyond diluting the Record's value, the discrepancies between the printed record and the actual proceedings have begun to make Congress look foolish.
Americans can now see and hear for themselves on C-Span what the legislators are saying.


Boxer Shorts for More Than Laughs
Major fashion cities are littered with the corporate corpses of designer labels that didn't survive the demands for talent, connections and marketing.
One remarkable thing about the fashion business is that anyone who wants to make money is drawn to it.
So imagine the antipathy that Joe Boxer must inspire in certain circles.


Court Backs Wal-Mart On Pricing
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. was found not guilty of predatory pricing by a sharply divided Arkansas Supreme Court today.
In a 4-to-3 decision, the court, the state's highest, reversed and dismissed a lower court's finding in favor of three pharmacists in Faulkner County, Ark., who had complained that Wal-Mart, the nation's largest retailer, priced some pharmaceuticals and other goods below cost in an attempt to force their stores out of business.


Corrections
A report in the Currents column of The Home Section on Thursday about a new line of furniture made of fallen and diseased trees cleared from New York City parks reversed the identities of the two men shown in the photograph.
The furniture's designer, Chris Lehrecke, was in the background; Dan Bishop, the sawyer with whom he works, was in the foreground.


Plagiarism Suit on Parallel Tales of Arab Wives
Was a best-selling book about a woman's tormented marriage into Saudia Arabian royalty lifted from an unpublished autobiography of a woman who married unhappily into the Kuwaiti elite?
That contention underlies a suit filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan that alleges significant similarities between the two works and points out that both writers used the same agent.
At the center of the suit, which seeks damages of more than a million dollars, are two books published as nonfiction: "Princess: A True Story of Life Behind the Veil" and its sequel, "Princess: Sultana's Daughters," both by Jean P. Sasson.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; 3 Executives Quit Saatchi, Citing Ouster of Chairman
Contending that the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company was being run not by advertising executives but by shareholders in the wake of the ouster of Maurice Saatchi, three of the company's most senior executives -- all longtime confederates of his -- angrily resigned yesterday.
In resignation letters notable for their unusually vituperative tones, the executives -- Bill Muirhead in New York and David Kershaw and Jeremy Sinclair in London -- attributed their abrupt departures to deep dismay over the Dec. 16 deposal of Mr.
Saatchi, the former chairman.
His removal came after large institutional investors convinced the company's board that his management style and lavish perks were damagingly disruptive.


No Headline
"I am surprised at the way people seem to perceive me, and sometimes I read stories and hear things about me and I go 'ugh.' I wouldn't like her either. It's so unlike what I think I am or what my friends think I am." -- HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON.  [ A1:1. ]


Oh, When Debussy and Berg Were Mere Youths!
There is a dark side to the use we make of juvenalia.
So to make sure that the manifestly good things about Dawn Upshaw's Sunday song recital at Alice Tully Hall will all be said, this lingering ugliness should be disposed of at the outset.
With James Levine to play the piano parts and an eager audience to listen, Ms.
Upshaw offered an afternoon of youthful beginnings: Claude Debussy and Alban Berg writing music at the ages of 22 to 26.
Twelve items from the so-called Vasnier Songbook represented Debussy's ties to an older woman who was most probably lover as well as patron.
Berg's Four Songs from the turn of the century constitute his second published opus.
Not far from them are the Seven Early Songs, which the composer rescued, reassembled and even orchestrated in 1928. (By then "Wozzeck" had been written and "Lulu" was under way.)


Braving the Cold in Hope of a Job


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Air Products and Chemicals Inc., Allentown, Pa., is selling $100 million of 8.35 percent senior notes due in 2002 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The notes are priced at 99.988 to yield 8.352 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A+ by Standard and Poor's Corp. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Mia Hamm Honored
MIA HAMM of the University of North Carolina was honored yesterday as the outstanding woman college athlete of the year, the first soccer player to win in the award's 18 years.
Hamm's 26 goals, 16 assists and 68 points led women's college soccer for the third straight season.
She is the leading scorer in N.C.A.A. history with 103 goals, 72 assists and 278 points. (AP)


Hillary Clinton Asks Help In Finding a Softer Image
Saying that she is eager to present herself in a more likable way, Hillary Rodham Clinton said today that she had been "naive and dumb" about national politics and was to blame for the failure of the health care overhaul plan last year.
She said that she is sometimes shocked by the harsh way she comes across in news reports -- as a woman that she herself would not particularly want to know.
And at a White House lunch, she asked a group of women who write about the First Lady's social functions, style, gossip and personal advice how she could better make the public see her in the sympathetic, more complicated way in which she sees herself.


Former Housing Secretary Won't Be Charged in Investigation
After a five-year investigation, an independent prosecutor has decided not to bring charges against Samuel R. Pierce Jr., the head of the Department of Housing and Urban Development in the Reagan Administration and the central figure in the influence-peddling case, people following the case said today.
They said investigators had found no evidence that Mr.
Pierce had ever profited from any instances in which his aides steered grants to former H.U.D. officials and politically influential consultants.


To Execute the Innocent Scorns Decency
To the Editor:
On Jan. 5 Texas executed a man whose innocence the prosecutor conceded.
The Supreme Court twice failed to intervene because only three justices thought it unconstitutional to allow a state to execute a man innocent of the crime for which the state put him to death.


Bonds Gain on Modest Inflation Data
Prices of Treasury securities rose yesterday, aided by a Government report that producer inflation rose only modestly last year and by a firming of the dollar in world currency markets.
The price of the 30-year benchmark issue rose 6/32 of a percentage point, to 95 27/32 , for a yield of 7.86 percent, down from 7.88 percent on Monday.
Bill rates declined sharply, with a three-month bill off by nine basis points, to 5.73 percent, and a one-year bill down five basis points, to 6.73 percent.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Clinic Violence Sets Off Push For Wider Abortion Training
THE anti-abortion violence that has helped cause a critical decline in the number of places where women can go to end unwanted pregnancies has also inspired a ground swell of activism among doctors and medical students intent on reversing the trend.
"We have been making progress," said Dr.
Wendy Chavkin, editor of The Journal of the American Women's Medical Association, which devoted its December issue to the shortage of doctors willing to provide abortions.
"The most recent shootings have not weakened our resolve."


State Dept. May Absorb 3 Independent Agencies
Secretary of State Warren Christopher has proposed a reorganization of the State Department that could consolidate three major independent Government agencies under his authority, senior Administration officials said today.
Under the proposal, which Mr.
Christopher and Deputy Secretary Strobe Talbott presented to Vice President Al Gore last week, the agencies -- the Agency for International Development, the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and the United States Information Agency -- could lose their statutory authority and financing and be merged into the State Department.


Schmidt Casts Cooperstown Vote for Rose
PETE ROSE was the first person to tell MIKE SCHMIDT he was a future Hall of Famer.
Now Schmidt, who was voted into the Hall on Tuesday, wants Rose to join him in Cooperstown -- at least for his induction on July 30.
"Pete mentioned the Hall of Fame to me in 1980 when we were teammates in Philadelphia," Schmidt said at a news conference in Manhattan yesterday.
"That's the first time it really dawned on me that I might be in there some day."


Letters and Checks Pile Up at Records Office
Some people are in no hurry to open their mail, but on receiving a check, most waste no time in cashing it.
City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi said yesterday that one city office routinely waited weeks or months to do either.
When auditors from the Comptroller's office went to the Department of Health's Division of Vital Records last October, they found 12,545 mailed requests for birth or death records, along with $272,000 in attached checks, sitting untended in cardboard boxes, according to a report released by Mr.
Hevesi yesterday.
Fewer than half had been opened, the report said, and those that had contained uncashed checks to the city that were months old.
Photographs of letters and uncashed checks accompanied the report.


Pope Starts Tour Today To Australia And Asia
Defying signs of physical weakness and ill health, Pope John Paul II plans to embark on Wednesday on his longest trip in three years, an 11-day, 20,800-mile visit to Asia and Australia that seems more than ever to raise the question: What drives him to such grueling odysseys?
The journey to the Philippines, Papua New Guinea, Australia and Sri Lanka will be the 63d foreign tour John Paul has undertaken since he assumed the papacy in 1978.
It will also be the most arduous since a 10-day tour of Brazil in 1991 and the first since mounting signs of infirmity -- including two bouts of surgery -- forced him to cancel a visit to the United States last October.


AT LUNCH WITH: Gina Lollobrigida; A Body of Work That's Not Just a Body
EVERY man in the room is straightening his tie and squaring his shoulders.
Forget the wives, the kids, the plates of steaming linguine.
It's a Saturday afternoon on the Upper East Side at Gino Italian, where the sauces are as red as the wallpaper, and Gina Lollobrigida has just walked in, prompting the sort of pandemonium she did in the 1960's, back when her movies were banned in Burma and her surname wound up in a French dictionary as slang for "a landscape with a lot of hills."
Mario Laviano, an owner of the restaurant, presses Miss Lollobrigida's right hand to his lips, overcome with nostalgia.
"I once waited on her as a young man," he says, "and believe me: my plates, they shake."


Colombian Cleared in Kidnapping Case
RENE HIGUITA, the outstanding Colombian soccer goaltender who was imprisoned for seven months on a charge of failing to provide information to authorities while acting as a mediator in the release of a kidnapping victim, has been cleared of the charge.
Although prosecutors made the decision two weeks ago, the announcement in Bogota was not made until yesterday.
The action came just before Coach HERNAN DARIO GOMEZ included Higuita in his list of players for the Colombian soccer team that is to participate in the U.S.A. 95 Cup and the America Cup next summer.


Deadline Passes But Players Get New Offer
The deadline was dead, but the possibility of a hockey season was still alive last night when the National Hockey League offered yet another "final" collective bargaining proposal to its locked-out players' union.
Only one issue -- the age when veterans would be eligible for free agency -- divided the sides, and only two years of it were in dispute.
The proposal came after two days of intense negotiations and two conference calls among divided and emotional team owners.
Gary Bettman, the N.H.L. commissioner, presented the revised offer to Bob Goodenow, executive director of the N.H.L.
Players Association, at a meeting in Manhattan.


Italian Leaders Still Wrestling Coalition Crisis
Three weeks after the resignation of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, Italian leaders this week are inching toward a formula for an interim government to lead the country out of its political stalemate.
But even the appointment of a new Prime Minister-designate, which is expected to be announced by President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro before the week is out, is unlikely to put an end to a crisis that has already taken its toll on financial markets and led to a further weakening of the Italian lira.


Executive Changes
DILLON, READ &amp; COMPANY, New York, named Tamara A. Baum managing director and Raul Esquivel and Jerry Treppel senior vice presidents.
FITCH INVESTORS SERVICE INC., named Frank S. Rizzo executive vice president, public finance.


Moscow Reaches for Moral High Ground as Truce Fails
With its ground troops tightening their grip on the besieged city of Grozny, Russia today declared a 48-hour cease-fire, but it collapsed within hours.
The reprieve to battle-weary combatants in Grozny, the Chechen capital, was scant.
But the politically battered Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, seized on the cease-fire declaration to try to win back some of the international and domestic support that has drained away during the brutal month-old Russian military operation.


Minlend Out for Miami Game
The bad news for St.
John's after Sunday's 20-point wipeout by Connecticut was the loss of junior forward Charles Minlend, the team's leading rebounder and second-leading scorer, to a one-game suspension for fighting.
The good news is that the game Minlend will miss at Alumni Hall tonight is against Miami.
Since joining the league two years ago, the Hurricanes have posted the worst records in the Big East.
Miami has never won a conference road game, and after consecutive losses to Seton Hall and Georgetown this season, the string is at 29.


INSIDE
'One Never-Ending Storm'
Thousands fled their homes as torrential rains continued to batter California, spreading from the wine country to Los Angeles.
Page A12.
No Charges in H.U.D.
Inquiry
After a four-year investigation, a special prosecutor decided not to charge a former housing secretary, Samuel R. Pierce Jr.
Page A17.
Airport Blackout Dispute
A dispute erupted over whether buried electrical cables at Newark Airport that were accidently ruptured had been clearly marked.
Page B5.
New Air Safety Plan
A two-day emergency conference on airline safety ended with 70 recommendations for major changes in equipment and training.
Page A12.


A Promise of More Tax Cuts for New Jersey


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
It's the modern-day commuter's nightmare.
You settle into your train seat, ready to savor 36 glorious minutes of peaceful reading time, and the person next to you pulls out a pocket phone.
Farewell, serenity; hello, investment strategies at full volume.
But when this happened to me last night, it had a marvelous twist: after telling his wife what train he was on, the man with the phone asked what was for dinner.
Then, in solemn tones, he instructed, "Pouilly Fuisse, I'd think, or Pouilly Fume." These crucial wine instructions complete, he hung up (well, the cellular equivalent).
. . .


Foreign Affairs; Japan Fatigue
Here is a little-known fact for you: In the 1930's, three-quarters of the cars in Japan were Fords.
World War II and 50 years of Japanese protectionism reduced that to zero, but Ford is now spearheading a resurgence of U.S. car sales in Japan.
Ford boosted its Japan sales by 198 percent this year by improving quality, acquiring 300 showrooms, letting Japanese auto writers drive across America in a Taurus and even sponsoring the Hiroshima professional soccer team, which won the national championship with the Ford logo on its jerseys.
Last year Ford sold out its allotment of Mustangs for Japan in two months.
This is not a Ford commercial.
But the Ford example is worth highlighting because it comes at a time when so many other U.S. businesses are giving up on Japan, saying that it is just too expensive and aggravating to keep trying to break into the closed Japanese market.
Better, they argue, to focus sales -- and U.S. trade diplomacy -- on more open emerging markets in Indonesia, Malaysia, China and India.
They call this "Japan Fatigue," and it is a virus that has infected large segments of the U.S. business community and Government.


Hartmarx Corp.(HMX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Mower in Accord With Western Media
Eric Mower &amp; Associates in Syracuse has formed an alliance with Western International Media, the large media services agency that was recently bought by the Interpublic Group of Companies.
"We now have the media clout of any one of the big 10 national advertising agencies," Eric Mower, chairman and chief executive of Mower, said on Monday, "and we expect to achieve significant cost economies for our clients as a result."


A Battle for Influence Over Insatiable Disks
The consumer electronics industry is racing toward a technical standard for a new generation of silvery disks that could become a universal storage medium for the information age.
And yet, even though an industry decision is expected by the end of the month, no one knows which of two competing technologies will be adopted.


Corrections
An article last Wednesday about Western European reaction to fighting in southern Russia misstated the given name of a spokesman for the French Foreign Ministry.
He is Richard Duque, not Roland.


'Other Woman' In Royal Affair Plans Divorce
The woman widely believed to have been the mistress of Prince Charles on and off for nearly 25 years is to be divorced from her husband, the couple's lawyers announced today.
The news of the impending divorce of Camilla Parker Bowles and her husband, Andrew, immediately set off a blast of speculation in newspapers and radio and television that the next step, if romance is to follow logic, would be for the heir to the British throne to divorce Diana, the Princess of Wales, from whom he separated in December 1992.


Clinton Has Tough Plan on Refusal to Work
Donna E. Shalala, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, told Congress today that the Administration would support separating children from their parents in some cases in which the parents repeatedly refused to work while receiving cash welfare benefits.
Dr.
Shalala made the statement while testifying for more than two hours before the House Ways and Means Committee, which plans to recommend a comprehensive bill to revamp the nation's welfare system.


First Bank System Inc.(FBS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Formerly Homeless, Cleaning the Streets


Historian's Dismissal
The former House historian's supporters said Newt Gingrich was aware of her statements about an educational program on the Holocaust that he cited in dismissing her.
But he denied knowing of them.
Page A19.


Short Course in Racism On a College Campus
"Higher Learning," John Singleton's caustic film about the racial and sexual prejudices that color life on a microcosmic college campus, turns out to be an inadvertent example of the same small-mindedness it deplores.
Everyone here, from beer-swilling white fraternity boys to rap-loving black students harassed by the campus police, can be judged at face value.
Everyone is exactly what he or she seems.
So a bow-tie-wearing professor (Laurence Fishburne) is supercilious but wise.
Surfer-girl blondes are airheads and casual racists.
Lesbians are sensitive and kindly, but radical feminists may show up at consciousness-raising rallies dressed as nuns.
Nice guys wear condoms.
Bad guys rape their inebriated dates.
Really bad guys say things like: "We're white in America. What more do you need, man?"


Carnegie Hall Seeks $75 Million
Anticipating cuts in government support for the arts and continuing increases in presentation costs, Carnegie Hall is establishing a $75 million endowment fund to help pay for its programs and operation.
The preliminary phase of the endowment campaign, relying largely on board members, has raised $35 million.
The hall hopes to raise the remaining $40 million by the 1998-9 season.
The income from the endowment will not make Carnegie Hall financially independent by any means.
Hall officials estimated that it would generate about $4 million a year.
Carnegie's budget this year was $26 million, about 3 percent of which came from government sources.
Next year's budget is expected to be just under $30 million.


Duke and Ament Receive '94 Honors
NORM DUKE, 30 of Edmond, Okla., and TONY AMENT, 25, of Garfield, N.J., were the big winners yesterday as the Professional Bowlers Association announced its awards for the 1994 player and rookie of the year respectively. (AP)


Kathleen Tynan, 57, a Novelist And Her Husband's Biographer
Kathleen Tynan, a writer best known for her biography of her husband, the critic Kenneth Tynan, died yesterday at King Edward VII Hospital in London.
She was 57 and lived in London.
The cause was cancer, said Leon Wieseltier, the literary editor of The New Republic, a friend and the executor of Mrs.
Tynan's estate.


Kansas City's Widely Debated Desegregation Experiment Reaches the Supreme Court
Long before the sun rises, Alex Ruthmann boards a 5:15 A.M. school van for a nearly two-hour, 70-mile trip, past furrowed and dormant fields in rural Butler to the Paseo Academy of Visual and Performing Arts in a working-class neighborhood here.
The academy is a sparkling $23 million high school that is unrivaled in Missouri.


Changed Man or Not, Tom Snyder's on Late
In the 1970's, there were a couple of guys who turned traditional talk-show etiquette on its head.
One was Stanley Siegal.
The other was Tom Snyder, who, as it happens, has had his subsequently flagging career gloriously revived.
Coming off a talk series on CNBC, he is now the host of CBS's new "Late Late Show" immediately after David Letterman, who years ago replaced Mr.
Snyder in the slot immediately after Johnny Carson.
Ain't show business grand?
Mr.
Snyder returns amid much palaver that he is a changed man, someone who realizes that, hey, it's just a job, not a life.
He is supposedly less brash.
But Mr.
Snyder has always been less brash than goofy, unable to resist an off-the-wall insight, usually accompanied by his own delighted laugh.
Happily, he hasn't changed much.
He's grayer and even a bit thinner but still unexpectedly prickly.
His first anecdote on his first CBS show was about a broadcast-center security guard who had the nerve not to recognize him.
Then he took a swipe at Mr.
Carson, who, unlike Mr.
Letterman on Monday night, never plugged his show in all their years at NBC.


Sony Is Overhauling Its Film Studios
After a year of staggering losses and management turmoil in its movie business, the Sony Corporation of Japan has begun overhauling its studio operations to prove that it can indeed make money in Hollywood.
And one of the first steps has been to shift much of the oversight of the business out of Southern California and into New York under the direction of Jeff Sagansky, the former president of CBS Entertainment whom Sony hired four months ago.


Overachiever; Well-Connected Civil Servant Fails Repeatedly, but Succeeds
When Andrew P. O'Rourke first ran for Westchester County executive in 1983, Vincent Natrella eagerly offered to serve on his campaign, marshaling volunteers and going door-to-door on his behalf.
Several years later, Mr.
Natrella rose to become chairman of the Westchester Conservative Party, and his endorsements of Mr.
O'Rourke helped propel the Westchester Republican to re-election victories in 1989 and 1993.


Postal Service Won't Do as Model of Efficiency
To the Editor:
The three-cent increase in the cost of a first-class stamp should tell us something more than that we are constantly paying more for less and worse service.
It should tell us how to act in the face of demands for more efficient and less costly service and in the face of cries for balanced budgets.


Turning In the Paintbrush for Bikes
Of all the new shows crowding the television schedule this month, none have more sustained energy and promise than CBS's "Double Rush." Robert Pastorelli, formerly Eldin the house painter on "Murphy Brown," stars as Johnny Verona, a lovable lug who owns a Manhattan bicycle-messenger service.
Back in the 1960's, Johnny was a rock musician who dreamed of being a legend yet turned down a lucrative contract because the rest of his group wasn't included in the offer.
He still has a heart of gold, along with some treasured photographs taken with Eric Clapton and Pete Townshend and a Fender Stratocaster guitar once owned by Jimi Hendrix.


The Neediest Cases; Fears the Safety Net for Poor Is Fraying
As politicians engage in a vociferous battle over welfare reform, others are airing their opinions in a subtler fashion.
In letters to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, dozens of donors have criticized plans to cut government funding for social service programs.
Fearing that the nation's safety net for the poor is fraying, many have increased their gifts to the fund.
"We have doubled our contribution this year because it seems the neediest ranks may swell, judging by the harsh rhetoric of some politicians," wrote Jim and Jackie Perry of Wilton, Conn., who sent $200.
"With all the talk of reducing the budget deficit, it seems that those who need help the most may be the hardest hit by cuts in funding for shelters, soup kitchens, counseling and job training."


Developments in Congress
HOUSE -- Alan Greenspan, the head of the Federal Reserve Board, offered Republicans a painless way to cut the budget: changing the way the Government calculates inflation.
He told a joint meeting of the House and Senate Budget Committees that the Consumer Price Index now exaggerates annual inflation by 0.5 to 1.5 percentage points, leading to higher payments for Social Security and Government pensions and lower revenues from those taxes that are pegged to inflation.
Correcting those estimates, Mr.
Greenspan said, could save the Federal Government $150 billion over five years.
Republicans welcomed his suggestion, but it did not distract Democrats from demanding that Republicans "show us the fine print," as Representative Richard A. Gephardt, Democrat of Missouri and House minority leader, put it.


Don't Exaggerate Iranian Nuclear Threat
To the Editor:
"Iran May Be Able to Build an Atomic Bomb in 5 Years, U.S. and Israeli Officials Fear" (news article, Jan. 5) contains no new information and relies on biased Israeli sources.


It's Time for the Real Reggie to Step Up
Reggie Miller pulled a ski cap on his head, slipped a pair of goggle-like sunglasses over his eyes and lowered himself onto the scorer's table yesterday morning at Madison Square Garden.
"Good to see you guys again," he said, greeting familiar members of the local basketball news media with his carefully crafted innocent smile.
Was Miller looking superstar cool, or was he preparing for a more anonymous tour of New York City streets?
Hard to say about this guy, a trash-talking, crowd-baiting, show-biz natural out of Los Angeles who often responds to the inevitable crowd in front of him by disclaiming, in effect, "Aw shucks, I'm just an Indiana country boy."


Pippen's Triple-Double Conquers Magic
Bulls 109, Magic 77
Scottie Pippen had 26 points, 11 assists and 10 rebounds last night as the host Chicago Bulls defeated Orlando, 109-77, snapping the Magic's four-game winning streak.


Clinton Goes To Heartland To Push Plan For Education
With red-white-and-blue bunting and all the hoopla of a campaign, President Clinton came to this snow-dusted prairie town in the Land of Lincoln today to rev up his political engine and pitch his proposed tax breaks for college and vocational education as the key to future prosperity for working Americans.
A couple of dozen cornfields from the Iowa border -- where the 1996 Presidential caucuses are slightly more than a year away -- Mr.
Clinton returned with feeling to the winning themes of 1992, when he preached a moderate "New Covenant" of tax relief for the middle class, welfare reform and personal responsibility long before the House Republicans' "Contract With America" became the rage in Washington.


Governor Whitman at Year One
Christine Todd Whitman's first year as Governor of New Jersey has been marked by tax reduction and national celebrity.
With her fellow Republicans in control of both houses of the Legislature, she had no trouble starting the tax cuts she promised.
With her fresh appeal, she campaigned far and wide for Republican Congressional candidates last fall and got herself far-and-widely mentioned as potential for "national office."
On those counts she had a good year, but she has yet to undertake many initiatives that would entail serious controversy.
She has, in large part, ducked the hard work of cutting popular programs and relied too much on one-shot budget gimmicks to pay for popular tax cuts.


Corrections
An article on Monday about President Clinton's choice of Senator Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut as chairman of the Democratic National Committee referred incorrectly to the history of a part-time chairmanship.
Senator Dodd's double role indeed has a precedent: in July 1960, Senator Henry M. Jackson of Washington was elected chairman and served part time until the inauguration of President John F. Kennedy, in January 1961.


Finger-Pointing Begins Over Severing of Airport Cables
A dispute developed today over whether the path of buried electrical cables at Newark International Airport had been carefully marked before a pile-driving machine ruptured them Monday, knocking out power to three terminals and forcing the airport to close for nearly 24 hours.
The Port Authority, which owns and operates the airport, and the electrical company that services it both said that the path of the three underground cables had been clearly delineated with orange spray paint and orange stakes on two occasions in December.
Both argued that the company working on the site and the Hertz Corporation, which had hired the company to help build a parking deck for rental cars, were responsible for insuring that the lines were not damaged during construction.


Foreign Affairs; Japan Fatigue
Here is a little-known fact for you: In the 1930's, three-quarters of the cars in Japan were Fords.
World War II and 50 years of Japanese protectionism reduced that to zero, but Ford is now spearheading a resurgence of U.S. car sales in Japan.
Ford boosted its Japan sales by 198 percent this year by improving quality, acquiring 300 showrooms, letting Japanese auto writers drive across America in a Taurus and even sponsoring the Hiroshima professional soccer team, which won the national championship with the Ford logo on its jerseys.
Last year Ford sold out its allotment of Mustangs for Japan in two months.
This is not a Ford commercial.
But the Ford example is worth highlighting because it comes at a time when so many other U.S. businesses are giving up on Japan, saying that it is just too expensive and aggravating to keep trying to break into the closed Japanese market.
Better, they argue, to focus sales -- and U.S. trade diplomacy -- on more open emerging markets in Indonesia, Malaysia, China and India.
They call this "Japan Fatigue," and it is a virus that has infected large segments of the U.S. business community and Government.


International Paper Co.(IP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


People
*
Diane Cimine was named executive vice president and chief marketing officer at the Outdoor Advertising Association of America, Washington, succeeding Gordon Hughes, who joined the American Business Press, New York, as president and chief operating officer.
Ms.
Cimine was previously acting director for media at Philip Morris U.S.A., New York.


Transit Police Chief Says He Will Retire
Chief Michael O'Connor of the transit police, an ardent opponent of the Giuliani administration's plan to merge New York City's three police forces, said yesterday that he would retire later this month.
Chief O'Connor, a 29-year veteran of the transit police, said the expected merger of the transit and housing police with the New York City Police Department did not push him to retire.
Rather, he said he was leaving to take a new job as head of security for the Alliance for Downtown New York, a newly formed business improvement district in lower Manhattan.


Greenbrier Cos.(GBX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Avoid Sanders? Irvin Wouldn't Dare
It was only a question, but Dallas wide receiver Michael Irvin looked as if he had just been slapped.
First there was shock.
Then disbelief.
Then something that resembled outrage.
Irvin's indignation actually started with the Chicago Bears.
On the way to a 44-15 loss to the San Francisco 49ers last week, Chicago did a strange thing, or a smart thing, depending on your perspective.
Not once did the Bears throw to Deion Sanders's side of the field.
It was as if Sanders, the 49ers' cornerback, had a force field around him that magically kept away all of Chicago's plays.
Or maybe the Bears were just scared to go there.


Sports of The Times; Those Rinks Could Have Been Filled
THERE should have been nine games in the National Hockey League tonight.
Three in the New York area.
Three in Canada, the homeland of hockey.
Nine loud, colorful evenings of athletic aggression on ice.
Instead, there is only the gaping emptiness of the past three months.
The owners sent the players yet another final offer last night, many hours past the fail-safe deadline of noon.
Once on the brink of great success in the United States, the N.H.L. is now trying to avoid the stigma of being the first major North American league to ever cancel an entire season.


'Vigilante' Attack in New Jersey Is Linked to Sex-Offenders Law
Two men who knew that a recently paroled sex offender was living here because of the community notification provision in "Megan's Law" have been charged with assault in a case that prosecutors are calling the first instance of vigilantism under the new law.
The two men, a father and son, broke into the house where the parolee, Michael Groff, 25, was asleep on a living room floor at 2:47 A.M.
Sunday, Warren County authorities said.
But several people were staying at the house, at 318 Lincoln Street, and one of the intruders began beating a man he mistook for Mr.
Groff, said John J. O'Reilly, the County Prosecutor.


Loving Paris, Meal by Meal
EARLY winter is the best time to be in Paris.
The tourists have gone home and Parisians joyfully reclaim their streets, strolling down the new, improved Champs-Elysees clutching spice cakes and chocolates.
There may be a nip in the air, but the people who sit sipping aperitifs at the outdoor cafes don't seem to notice.
The streets are clean and everybody -- or is this my imagination? -- seems to be smiling.
Paris has always been my favorite city.
The air smells delicious, and there is a great restaurant on almost every street.
I love the beauty of the buildings and their human scale, the streets named for poets, the sense that there is history on every corner.


METRO DIGEST
'MEGAN'S LAW' LINKED TO ASSAULT
Two men who knew that a paroled sex offender was living in Phillipsburg, N.J., because of the community notification provision in "Megan's Law" have been charged with assault in a case that prosecutors are calling the first instance of vigilantism under the new law.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


At Newark International, Air Travelers' Tales of Woe
Crabby, baggy-eyed or just relieved to be home, travelers returned to Newark International Airport today, bringing tales of vacations thrown into disarray, of unwelcome detours to distant cities, of missed flights, missing baggage and misinformation.
Their descriptions of the hours after the severing of power cables shut down the airport on Monday show how trouble in one airport can quickly ripple across the nation and even around the world.
From Miami to Los Angeles to Copenhagen, passengers were stranded and airlines turned to emergency plans typically used during snowstorms.


Maxxim Medical Inc.(MAM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Peace Corps Joining With Private Relief Agency to Aid Refugees
The Peace Corps and the International Rescue Committee, a private relief agency, are joining forces to work with refugees and displaced people worldwide, leaders of the two organizations said this week.
The collaboration signals a new direction for both groups and for the first time puts the Peace Corps, an agency of the United States Government, under the direction of another organization.
The unusual partnership also reflects the rapidly changing character of the world's most urgent needs, as dozens of small conflicts uproot millions of people and create civilian emergencies on a scale not seen since World War II.


Keith McDaniel, 38, Principal Dancer With Ailey Troupe
Keith McDaniel, a principal dancer with the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater and on Broadway, died on Jan. 2 at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 38.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Matt Tapscott.


Extra Time for PACT 95's Damaged Yacht
The PACT 95 America's Cup team has received an extra two days to prepare for the start of the Citizen Cup Defender Selection Series.
Race officials said that the syndicate from Bangor, Me., skippered by KEVIN MAHANEY, will race America
on Sunday rather than on Friday, as originally planned.
The two-day reprieve is intended to give PACT 95 time to take its new 75-foot cup yacht, Young America, on sea trials off San Diego.
The boat was severely damaged last week when a tornado swept through its San Diego racing compound.
The yacht has undergone round-the-clock repairs to enable it to begin sailing Friday.


A Pioneer in Manhattan Merges Three Cuisines of China
AS a 30-year fixture in the New York food scene and one who has introduced many regional Chinese foods to the American palate, Michael Tong has seen his native cuisine evolve from the days of chop suey and egg rolls to a vast multiregional buffet.
Mr.
Tong, who owns Shun Lee Palace on East 55th Street and Shun Lee on West 65th Street, is most at home working the front of his restaurants, cosseting customers with exotic dishes and engaging urbanity.


Council Panel Seeks to Delay Fire-Box Plan
Responding to the Giuliani administration's plan to begin dismantling fire-alarm boxes throughout the city, a City Council committee passed a bill yesterday that would create a three-month moratorium for removing the boxes, so the Council could review the plan.
But the Fire Commissioner, Howard Safir, said the Fire Department would press ahead with its plan to dismantle the boxes beginning Sunday.


Duke's Krzyzewski Out for Several Weeks
MIKE KRZYZEWSKI was released from Duke University Hospital yesterday after being treated for back problems, but he isn't expected to coach the Blue Devils for several weeks.
Krzyzewski, 47, had surgery on Oct. 22 to repair a displaced disk.
Last Friday, after a checkup, he was admitted to the hospital and missed last Saturday's game against Georgia Tech, the first game in 20 years he has missed as coach.


Singapore Chain Seeks Plaza Hotel Stake
A hotel chain based in Singapore that has bought two Manhattan properties in the last year is in discussions to invest in the Plaza Hotel, which is controlled by the developer Donald J. Trump, executives familiar with the talks said yesterday.
The chain, CDL Hotels, agreed to a memorandum of understanding with a group of banks that controls 49 percent of the Plaza, the 815-room landmark Manhattan hotel, through a $300 million mortgage, the executives said.


Bankers Trust Rating Is Cut
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation yesterday knocked the Bankers Trust New York Corporation from its lofty status as one of the few bank holding companies with a double-A rating, citing the unsettled trading markets for bonds, currencies and derivative products.
The rating agency lowered the senior debt rating for Bankers Trust from AA- to A+.
The rating for the company's main bank subsidiary, the Bankers Trust Company, was lowered from AA to AA-.


U.S. Forces Stand High in Readiness
To the Editor:
In opposing your sensible editorial of Dec. 27, Representative Floyd Spence ("U.S. Military Has Real Readiness Problem," letter, Jan. 5) is in diametrical contradiction to the findings of the Congressional Budget office.
In its March 1994 paper "Trends in Selected Indications of Military Readiness 1980-1993," the Budget Office finds that:


Market Place; An apparent miscalculation at Saatchi and Saatchi sends its share price into a tailspin.
ON its face, the ouster of Maurice Saatchi as chairman of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. was a miscalculation of stunning proportions by the disgruntled institutional shareholders who engineered his removal.
Far from bolstering the stock, which after spiraling downward for years had begun showing signs of life, Mr.
Saatchi's departure has set off turmoil within the company, driving the shares down to new lows and leaving big shareholders in an even deeper hole.
Last month, just before Mr.
Saatchi stepped down as chairman of the advertising agency holding company, the shares traded in London at 150 pence each and the American depository receipts, which represent three shares, sold on the New York Stock Exchange for $7.25.


CHRONICLE
JOAN FINNEY, a Democrat, decided not to seek re-election as Governor of Kansas last year, but it was clearly not a move that pleased her calico cat Jesse.
Jesse refuses to leave Cedar Crest, the executive mansion, in Topeka, even though the new Governor, BILL GRAVES, a Republican, and his wife, LINDA, moved in over the weekend, before the inauguration, on Monday.
"During the transition from Governor Finney to Governor Graves, there was lots of activity in the mansion and traffic in and out for inaugural festivities," Mike Matson, communications director for Governor Graves, said yesterday.
"The cat got scared and hid."


Majority Backs Cigarette Rules, Poll by Tobacco Industry Finds
The lobbying arm of the tobacco industry released a poll today with a finding that runs counter to its position: a majority of Americans think increased Government regulation of cigarettes is important.
But the organization, the Tobacco Institute, drew a different message from the numbers.
It said that the poll had found that "a solid majority of Americans oppose expanding the Federal Government's regulation of cigarettes."


Speaker Vallone's Education Proposal
Responsibility for public education in New York City is diffuse enough without heading down the path suggested by City Council Speaker Peter Vallone in his State of the City message.
Mr.
Vallone wants the central Board of Education expanded from seven to nine members, with the Council picking the extra two members.
That would only worsen the existing clutter of appointing powers.
Each of the five borough presidents now appoints one member, and the mayor appoints two.
It is a formula for diffuse authority and little accountability.
This page has long advocated giving the mayor, who is responsible to voters, more control over the board through additional appointments.
It makes little sense to further fragment the board by inserting the City Council.
Any change in the board would have to be approved by the State Legislature.


New York Students Excel in Science Contest
More than a quarter of the semifinalists -- 84 of 300 -- in the prestigious Westinghouse Science Award national school competition are from New York City schools, school officials said yesterday.
The finalists are to be selected on Jan. 24, and winners will be announced in Washington in March.


Merrill Cites Warning to Big County
In a belated effort to defend itself against the heavy criticism it has received since Orange County, Calif., declared bankruptcy last month, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company released letters yesterday showing that it had warned the county as early as 1992 about the risks that its ill-fated investment fund was taking.
The letters were to the Orange County treasurer, Robert L. Citron, whose management of the county's investment fund led to more than $2 billion in losses and touched off the county's bankruptcy and current financial crisis.


Don't Exaggerate Iranian Nuclear Threat; Not to Worry?
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 5 news article on Iran's nuclear program reminds me a lot of what was so often wrong with past Central Intelligence Agency estimates, and as a C.I.A. deputy director, I saw a lot of them.
Those estimates often said:


Wine Talk
THERE is a relationship, probably undefinable, between a country's wine and its food.
The better the wine, the closer that relationship will be.
French wine holds its own with Italian pasta, Greek fish and American steak, but the rapport between fine French food and the best French wine is unassailable.
Great Tuscan cooking demands a great Chianti or a brunello.
In California, the best meals call for a fine cabernet.


Americans Say Gains Won't Come Quickly
An agreement to open a range of Japanese financial markets to foreign competition was not greeted with unbridled enthusiasm by American money managers yesterday, even though the accord gives them access to more than $1 trillion of pension fund assets.
Even as they expressed pleasure that the agreement to open Japan's private and public pension funds to foreign firms had finally been reached, representatives of some of the nation's largest brokerage firms, mutual fund companies and investment banks said enacting the agreement could prove even more difficult than the negotiations that produced it.


What's So Special About Clinic Violence?
To the Editor:
"Curbing Violence at Abortion Clinics" (editorial, Jan. 4) shows your apparent view that a woman's now settled legal right to an abortion is somehow uniquely sacred.


Rangers, Islanders Looked To Settle
At least two of the three metropolitan area teams, the Rangers and the Islanders, were in favor of accepting the players' latest proposal for a new labor agreement, which was voted down yesterday by the National Hockey League's board of governors.
The Rangers, the defending Stanley Cup champions, have long been in favor of getting the season under way.
And as Don Maloney, the general manager of the Islanders, put it last night: "We were in favor of playing, no question about it."


Battered Bunch of Nets Can't Beat Their Match
Ice packs, surgical tape and blank stares littered their locker room tonight.
Amid the aftermath of another deflating loss, someone offered this blunt assessment:
"No intensity. No enthusiasm. Dead. Just a dead team."


Star Banc Corp.(STB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Plots Thicken as Battles for No. 1 Begin
While Pete Sampras is looking to tighten his stranglehold on the pinnacle of men's tennis by reprising his 1994 Australian Open victory and fend off the frightening apparition of a suddenly clean-cut Andre Agassi, Steffi Graf is already sidelined by injury and incapable of defending her sole Grand Slam crown of last year, a predicament that has left her No. 1 ranking vulnerable.
So begins this year's tennis soap opera.


Park Electrochemical Corp.(PKE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


When the Play of Light Is the Work of Art
In her life as in her work, Jennifer Tipton has embraced the light.
There are no curtains, shades or shutters on the windows in her home, a Chelsea apartment that doubles as her studio.
On sunny days, light streams in, and at night a high wattage street lamp shines its artificial glow through the wide front window.
No matter how bright the sunlight, Ms.
Tipton does not wear sunglasses.
Sitting in her apartment on a recent afternoon, she recalled one lighting designer who wore sunglasses indoors at work, because they made it easier for her to focus.
"I focus looking into the light," Ms.
Tipton said.
"It's like a sailor wanting to feel the ropes, and not wearing gloves. I don't want anything between my eyes and the light." When she is lighting a dance or a play, she hates to sit in a booth behind glass.
In other words, she is tactile even with such intangible artistic material.


American Medical Holdings Inc.(AMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Computer Data Systems (CPTD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Book Notes
Cuomo Weighs a Book
What's Mario Cuomo going to do next?
Maybe he's going to write a book.


Capital's Virtual Reality: Gingrich Rides a 3d Wave
All kings have their courts.
When Bill Clinton came to power, the capital glittered with the opinions of his Hollywood crowd.
There was Barbra Streisand talking about Thomas Jefferson; there was Harry Thomason talking about the White House travel office; there was Cristophe talking about cutting and shaping.


Murray N. Rothbard, Economist And Free-Market Exponent, 68
Murray N. Rothbard, an economist and social philosopher who fiercely defended individual freedom against government intervention, died on Saturday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
A resident of Manhattan, he was 68.
The cause was a heart attack, said a friend, Lew Rockwell.


70 Changes Urged to Insure Airline Safety
A two-day emergency conference on airline safety ended today with 70 recommendations for sweeping changes in equipment and training.
But many of those recommendations have been made before, and industry experts and government regulators alike agreed that one problem is that the Federal Aviation Administration has been slow to act in the past.
The recommendations were made by about 950 experts summoned to Washington by Federico F. Pena, the Secretary of Transportation, after five air crashes late last year.
They ranged from improving pilot and maintenance training to faster installation of new technologies, including de-icing equipment and radar to avoid runway collisions.


Will Saatchi Lose Tories' Account?
The uproar over the ouster of Maurice Saatchi as chairman of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company may have endangered an important account.
Bloomberg Business News reported yesterday from London that the Conservative Party in Britain, a longtime client of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi flagship agency, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide, was reviewing the status of its account.
Bloomberg also reported that an unnamed former vice chairman and treasurer of the party said the Conservatives would try to end their multimillion-pound contract with the agency and withdraw the account.


Let's Put Christmas Trees Back in the Soil
To the Editor:
To the lover of hikes in pine forests, the sight and smell of dead pine trees littering New York sidewalks after Christmas has a sense of ritual tragedy that is inconsistent with the best ecological spirit of our times.


Thieves Steal Gems
Five armed men wearing ski masks forced a limousine carrying two jewelers off a Queens highway last night and escaped with what the victims said was $5 million in diamonds and other precious gems, the police said.
A police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Frances Haimeck-Moadinech, said the two jewelers were riding from the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan to Kennedy International Airport when their limousine was forced off the road near Queens Boulevard and 65th Place about 6:15 P.M.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 6
Dec. 30
Jan. 7
1995
1994
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.9
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.4
3.3
Gasoline stocks
211.1
210.2
228.1
Distillate stocks
143.3
143.7
141.9
Crude imports, daily
7.3
7.3
6.4
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.3
1.5
Crude stocks
329.3
329.6
334.0
Crude production, daily
6.7
6.7
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
95.9
95.0
89.6
Source: American Petroleum Institute


How To Ruin NATO
Challenge any historian to name an alliance more successful than NATO.
There is none.
Yet in every decade since the 1950's, throngs of foreign-policy experts have asserted that NATO faced some new crisis.
Now comes the crisis of the 90's -- the fragility of democracy in Eastern Europe and Russia, and the loss of a common enemy -- and therefore, it is said, NATO must admit Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary and other nations of the former Warsaw Pact.
This remedy may seem all the more urgent as Russian forces keep inflicting wanton destruction on Chechnya.
Americans who question the wisdom of this eastward expansion fear that it might cause Russia to refurbish its military and expand westward.
But this is only half the problem.
Far from solving an alleged crisis, expanding NATO now would fatally weaken it.
The Atlantic alliance must not become a chain letter -- some Ponzi scheme that escapes bankruptcy only by signing up new members.


For Judge Ito, a Question of How High to Set the Evidence Hurdle
For the last six months, tales of how O. J. Simpson manhandled Nicole Brown Simpson during and after their marriage have been the stuff of quickie books, rumors, talk shows and the tabloid press.
But beginning on Wednesday morning, that evidence will be squarely before Judge Lance A. Ito, who must decide whether a newly sequestered jury hears any of it.
As several days of what will certainly be contentious and revealing hearings on the subject begin, some propositions are clear.
First, several people are poised to testify that they saw Mr.
Simpson either threaten Mrs.
Simpson, abuse her in some fashion or stalk her.
Second, such evidence is clearly relevant to a case in which the Simpsons' stormy relationship is central.


Republicans in House Begin Hearings in a Search for 'Billions' in Fiscal Fat
Flashing a machete, a bowie knife and a tool for skinning alligators, Representative Robert L. Livingston today formally began the Republican effort to reduce the size and cost of the Federal Government, promising major spending cuts as he presided at the opening meeting of the House Appropriations Committee.
"We are looking for billions," he declared, first in this year's budget and then in the budget for the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1.


Oh, That No. 1! UMass Wins in Overtime
Massachusetts 81; St. Bonaventure 76
Marcus Camby scored 7 points in overtime as top-ranked Massachusetts scored 10 of the game's last 11 points to escape with an 81-76 victory over scrappy St.
Bonaventure last night at Olean, N.Y.


New Editor at Food &amp; Wine
Dana Cowin, executive editor of Food &amp; Wine magazine, has been promoted to editor in chief.
She replaces Mary Simons, who has stepped down.
Ms.
Cowin joined Food &amp; Wine six months ago, after having worked at Conde Nast Publications as managing editor of Mademoiselle and HG.
Ms.
Simons filed a complaint early last month with the Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission asserting that she had been discriminated against because of her age and sex.


Storms Pound California; Destruction Spreads South
Torrential rains flooded California without letup today, sending rivers surging over their banks, closing highways and railroads and forcing thousands of people to evacuate areas threatened by rising waters and mudslides.
Tonight, President Clinton issued a disaster declaration for 24 counties in California
After battering Northern California for days, the brunt of the warm winter storm swept south.
In some places, officials said, the deluge was the worst in 30 years.


Vineyards Survive Flooding
FLOODING after a week of rain has driven hundreds of people from their homes in Northern California, but it has done little damage to vineyards in Napa and Sonoma counties.
"You can't drown a grapevine," said Harvey Posert, the director of communications for the Robert Mondavi Winery at Oakville in the Napa Valley.


No Headline
"This is one of the worst floods I have ever seen. First we had that terrible fire and now the land won't stop sliding. It's like Victoria Falls was coming through here." ROD STEIGER, who lives in Malibu, Calif.  [ A12:4. ]


Kohlberg, Kravis Ousts Borden Chief Executive
Quickly consolidating its control of Borden Inc., Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company yesterday ousted Ervin R. Shames, Borden's chief executive for little more than a year.
His replacement, an aggressive marketer from the Kohlberg, Kravis roster of managers, is C. Robert Kidder, former chief executive of Duracell International Inc.
Mr.
Kidder, 50, is a longtime consumer-products executive and a Kohlberg, Kravis loyalist.
But he will face a formidable challenge at Borden, which has racked up $1 billion in losses in recent years in a succession of restructurings.


To Earn Subsidies, Must Art Be Useful? Must It Be Sweet?
"All art is quite useless," wrote Oscar Wilde, but of course he never encountered the National Endowment for the Arts, which is predicated on the premise that the arts are the most useful thing in the world.
They solve social problems, they keep people happy, they make communities shine with enthusiasm and, best of all, they inject a shot of money into sagging economies.
The arts establishment in the United States operates on a nearly messianic certainty that the arts are not merely good, but good for you.
Is it really so?
Surely the economic impact of the arts is real.
The explosion of interest in culture in the United States over the last generation has turned the arts into a potent industry.
Study after study shows the multiplier effect of arts dollars, sowing prosperity all through the economy.
The Metropolitan Museum is now the most popular tourist attraction in New York, where big exhibitions fill not only its own coffers but also those of hotels and restaurants.
People clamor to get seats for major events at Lincoln Center and Carnegie Hall.
The arts are for everyone, and everyone seems to be for the arts.


POLYGRAM UNIT BUYS INTERNATIONAL TELEVISION
Polygram Filmed Entertainment said yesterday that it had acquired the International Television Corporation Entertainment Group for $156 million, giving it ownership of a large library of films and television shows.
Among the titles included is "The Prisoner," the 1960's British television series, which has achieved near-cult status in the United States and around the world.
Polygram said it intended to make a movie version of the program and other International Television titles.
The seller was Montagu Private Equity, a subsidiary of the HSBC Corporation, which acquired International Television in 1987.
The deal also includes International Television's distribution and television syndication division.


Allen Iverson Show Is Nearly Pre-empted
The Allen Iverson show, this was not.
Anyone expecting to see the next Isiah Thomas when Georgetown played Seton Hall tonight had to be somewhat disappointed as the heralded Georgetown freshman moved tentatively, shot infrequently, turned the ball over five times and looked to be just another player in a garish blue uniform for most of the game.
Fortunately for Iverson, the other players in blue were not so skittish.
Maybe the Hoyas will remember this as the night they proved to be more than the skinny point guard with the bundle of newspaper clippings.
With Iverson so erratic and Othella Harrington struggling in limited playing time, Georgetown had to reach deep into its bench to corral an 80-68 victory over the Pirates before 11,541 fans at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Collective Bancorp Inc.(COFD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Site Proposed for Dioxin-Tainted Sand
Backing off a much-criticized plan to dump 150,000 tons of dioxin-tainted sand a half mile off Coney Island, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is now proposing to deposit the material in an underwater pit three miles from Staten Island.
Federal and state officials say that the proposal is environmentally sound and that it has the support of the Environmental Protection Agency.
"This method, from an engineering and environmental standpoint, is effective in isolating this material," said Peter Shugert, a spokesman for the Army Corps of Engineers.


Men's Gymnastics Is Taken Off the Mat
Men's college gymnastics, which had faced the loss of its national championship event after 56 years, earned a reprieve today.
Delegates at the 89th National Collegiate Athletic Association Convention overwhelmingly supported a proposal to extend a moratorium on the elimination of championships for sports that do not involve a minimum of 40 participating schools.
With the dwindling number of men's varsity gymnastics programs at 32, according to Richard Aronson, executive director of the National Association of Gymnastics Coaches, the sport was facing the possibility that the 1995 championship was going to be its last.


Researcher Reports Evidence of a New Type of Hepatitis Virus
A Federal scientist said today that his team had found preliminary evidence of a new virus that is believed to cause a new type of hepatitis.
The newly reported virus can apparently be transmitted through blood transfusions, said the scientist, Dr.
Harvey J. Alter of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda.
He disclosed the finding at a scientific meeting on blood transfusions.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DILLON INVESTORS L.P., Columbus, Ohio, a private investment partnership, said it planned to acquire the 90 percent of Citadel Holding Corp., a savings and loan institution holding company, it did not already own for about $24 million, or $4 a share, in cash.
PHOENIX RESOURCES COS., Oklahoma City, an oil and gas exploration and production company, said it had been awarded the right from the Egyptian General Petroleum Corp. to drill for oil in Egypt's South Khalda block.


EXX
Class A shares of EXX Inc. surged yesterday after it reported a preliminary tripling of both sales and profit for the fourth quarter.
The company, which makes toys based on the Mighty Morphin Power Rangers, will release final figures in March.


After Two Seasons in Pinstripes, Abbott Tells of the Ups, Downs and Outs
He was supposed to be the ace of the pitching staff.
He was supposed to be a smooth left-hander who tormented opponents at Yankee Stadium.
He was supposed to turn every neighborhood in the Bronx into another section of his fan club.
He was special before he arrived and was supposed to become really special once he did.
But Jim Abbott was merely ordinary and now he is gone.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about Congressional debate over a balanced-budget amendment misstated the extent of its support among Democrats.
While Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Senate minority leader, supports such an amendment, he is not alone.
Others, including Senator Wendell H. Ford of Kentucky, agree with him.


Suspect Told Police He Found Firebomb in Bag
The paper bag was crumpled up on the floor in the subway car when he first saw it.
He looked in and saw two jars containing what looked like chicken soup.
Suddenly, it just "went up." And he was on fire.
That is the account Edward J. Leary gave detectives as he was being arrested in the firebombing that injured 40 people on a crowded subway train in Manhattan three weeks ago, according to a court document released yesterday.


My Passer, My Friend, My Prey
Bart Oates never met a quarterback he didn't like, or try to sabotage.
He dumped the kitchen sink on Kent Graham, wrapped Dave Brown in steel tape and short-circuited Phil Simms's Jaguar.
He would snap the football to the passer one day, haze him the next and buy him dinner the next.
The Giants never had a more loyal, durable or diabolical center, but, in the end, they tricked him back.


World News Briefs; Egypt Dooms 2 Militants For Assault on Writer
Two militant Muslims were condemned to death today by a military court for their role in the attempted murder of Naguib Mahfouz, the Egyptian writer and Nobel Prize laureate.
The court sentenced two other defendants to life imprisonment for their involvement in the stabbing attack on Mr.
Mahfouz outside his Cairo home on Oct. 14.
Three of the 16 defendants were acquitted and 9 others received sentences ranging from 3 to 15 years.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  MEXICAN MARKETS PLUNGE  Mexico's rescue plan is failing to calm its markets.
Mexican stocks plunged, dragging down other Latin American markets.
The peso continued to weaken.
A1  TOKYO ACCORD FOR WALL ST.
Wall Street firms will be allowed to compete in Japan for the right to manage pension funds under an accord reached between the United States and Japan.
A1


H.M.O.'s Are Changing the Face of Medicare
Just as the ads had promised, it sounded too good to be true.
Over muffins and coffee at the Jericho Diner in Mineola, L.I., about 25 elderly men and women listened as Paula Cardozo, a sales manager with Oxford Health Plans, described the benefits of joining her health maintenance organization for people on Medicare.
The breakfast in late December, one of at least 50 held by Oxford each month at diners around New York City, was part of a huge new push by for-profit H.M.O.'s in several parts of the country to enlist the elderly.


Regional Chinese fare, from a master. C3


Caruso Planning to Retire As Head of Police Union
Phil Caruso, who vigorously defended the prerogatives of police officers during three mayoral administrations, said yesterday that he would not seek re-election as president of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association when his four-year term expires in June.
Mr.
Caruso, 60, said through a union spokesman, Joseph Mancini, that he would retire after 15 years as head of the state's largest law-enforcement union -- and after 37 years as a police officer -- to spend more time with his family.


Laidlaw Inc.(LDW.B,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


It's Time to Mind Your E-Manners
IN the pre-computer days of fountain pens and monogrammed stationery, Amy Vanderbilt and Emily Post offered advice about which fork to use and how to R.S.V.P.
Now their successors are offering advice on when to throw in an emoticon, why "spamming" is a no-no and when to use abbreviations like IMHO and BTW.
It is the brave new world of netiquette, or etiquette on the Internet and its commercial on-line cousins.
Already, President Clinton has been accused of a violation.
In an E-mail exchange with the Prime Minister of Sweden last year, he fired off a message IN CAPITAL LETTERS.
The on-line equivalent of shouting, that is frowned upon.


Personal Health
IN recent decades the egg, like Humpty Dumpty, has had a great fall.
Since the mid-1940's, concern about cholesterol and heart disease has sent per capita consumption plummeting from more than 400 eggs a year to only 235 in 1992, according to the latest figures available.
But after a half-century of hard knocks, 1995 may be the year that the egg, unlike Humpty, gets put together again.
After three decades of blanket dietary advice to keep daily cholesterol intake below 300 milligrams and to limit egg consumption to four yolks a week, some experts on diet and heart disease are considering a more individualized approach that would allow a large portion of the population to eat more eggs, as well as other foods, like shrimp, that are relatively high in cholesterol but low in fat.


U.S. May Ease Economic Curbs On North Korea This Month
As part of an effort to get North Korea to dismantle its nuclear weapons program, American officials said today that they planned to ease some economic restrictions against North Korea in the next two weeks.
In addition, the officials said they planned to urge nations in Europe, the Middle East and Southeast Asia to help finance new power plants for North Korea.


Region News Briefs; Paterson City Council Averts Service Shutdown
The City Council here voted a $9 million temporary appropriation for January tonight, averting a threat by the Mayor to shut down virtually the entire government except emergency services.
Last week, after the Council defeated a January appropriation, Mayor William J. Pascrell Jr. ordered the city to stop processing all employees' insurance claims, cancel all non-emergency zoning and building inspections and told maintenance divisions to stop ordering spare parts for disabled vehicles.


Once Principal, but Now Barred From All Schools
Nearly a year after a white principal's opposition to interracial dating thrust the eastern Alabama town of Wedowee into racial turmoil and the Federal courts, black parents and the local school board have tentatively reached a broad agreement that bars the former principal from school grounds during class hours.
The agreement, which also addresses racial fairness in school policies, was reached late Monday.
Lawyers with the the Justice Department's civil rights division and lawyers for black parents were scheduled to go into Federal court today to argue that the district should dismiss the principal, Hulond Humphries.


Rowland's Gamble; His Term Just Begun, the Governor Takes On Public-Employee Unions
Less than a week after taking office, Gov.
John G. Rowland has staked his campaign promise of an income tax cut on his ability to push legislators to reject 10 arbitrated awards granting pay raises to 21,000 state employees.
It is a gamble that could pay off with large savings for the state.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Mexico's rescue plan failed to calm its markets.
Stocks plunged, and the peso continued to weaken.
Mexican officials sought additional funds in Japan and Britain and there were indications more U.S. help might be needed.  [ Page A1. ]


Beating Horror by Becoming Wise
CHILDREN AND FOOLS  By Erich Fried  168 pages. Serpent's Tail. $14.99
We cannot escape history but some of us do manage to outwit it. (Outwit in what the dictionary calls the archaic sense, meaning not just to outsmart but also to surpass in wisdom.) This is what Erich Fried has done in "Children and Fools," a collection of 34 stories.
Not one is longer than 10 pages.
Some are perfect tales; some are not.
But nearly every one is a small monument to literary and emotional virtuosity. (What is emotional virtuosity? The linking of pure generosity and utter clarity.)
Fried died in 1988.
He was an Austrian Jew born in 1921, and he fled to England in 1938 after his father was killed by the Gestapo.
To be exact, as Fried would say, his father's stomach was kicked in during an interrogation.
The work of surviving and outwitting history began five and a half weeks before that death:


Tele-Metropole reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; South African Air gets results from a much-debated commercial.
AN airline commercial that forsook conventional paeans to the miracle of flight for an extraordinary celebration of the miracle of birth has stimulated some of the most furious debate ever to rage over an advertisement.
Agency and client are ecstatic, declaring they'd gladly do it all again because the spot accomplished its goals -- and then some.


High Court Restricts Admissibility of Statements by Accusers
Overturning a child abuse conviction, the Supreme Court today made it harder for prosecutors to bring witnesses before a jury to testify about what the ostensible victim told them about the events in question.
The Justices ruled, 5 to 4, that if the prosecution seeks to use such testimony to counter evidence that the accuser had a reason to lie, the court can admit only those statements made before the motive to lie arose.


Gingrich Knew of Comment By Historian, Her Aide Says
Speaker Newt Gingrich, who dismissed the House historian on Monday over her comments about an educational program on the Holocaust, knew about those statements before he hired her, an assistant to the former historian said today.
But Mr.
Gingrich said he did not know about the comments made by the former historian, Christina Jeffrey, in 1986.


Where's the Cheese? All Over the Menu
AMERICANS are eating more cheese than ever, most of it spread on pizza, draped over hamburgers or shredded on tacos.
Until now, this passion for cheese had not evolved into a demand for a cheese course, European style, at dinner.
It did not even ride the coattails of serious wine drinking.
Today, however, more than 20 restaurants in New York City, and many more around the country, are setting out lavish cheese trays as courses in their own right, or are serving plates of assorted cheeses, some made at American boutique dairies, as appetizers and desserts.


RESULTS PLUS
SKIING  Austrian Wins Super-G  Renate Goetschl of Austria won the World Cup super-G in Flachau, Austria yesterday, by a hundredth of a second over Katja Seizinger of Germany in the closest three-way finish in a women's race in 25 years.
Goetschl, taking advantage of clearing conditions with a late starting position, finished in 1 minute 21.67 seconds.
Spela Pretnar of Slovenia was third, 2-hundredths of a second back.
In 1969, Berni Rauter of Austria beat Marilyn Cochran and Karen Budge of the United States by 1-hundredth of a second in a giant slalom at Waterville Valley, N.H. (AP) TENNIS  Rosset Is Upset  Richard Fromberg upset top-seeded Marc Rosset of Switzerland, 6-4, 6-4, yesterday to join his Australian Davis Cup teammates, Todd Woodbridge and Mark Woodforde, in the second round of the New South Wales Open in Sydney, a warm-up event for the Australian Open, which begins Jan. 16 in Melbourne.
Rosset underwent finger surgery last month.
Woodbridge beat Joern Renzenbrink of Germany, 6-3, 6-2, and Woodforde defeated Daniel Vacek of the Czech Republic by 6-2, 6-2.
Second-seeded Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine beat Richey Reneberg of the United States, 6-4, 6-3. (AP) SLED-DOG RACING  Jacobson Holds Lead  Kathy Jacobson kept her lead this morning in the 500-mile John Beargrease Sled Dog Marathon along Lake Superior's North Shore.
Jacobson was the first musher to make it to the midway point, arriving at the Grand Marais, Minn., checkpoint at 5:56 P.M.
Monday, still running all 12 dogs.
She set off again at 11:31 P.M.
Jamie Nelson arrived next, trailing Jacobson by about three hours and leaving at 2:41 A.M. yesterday. (AP) WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  Virginia Beats Duke  At Charlottesville, Va., Wendy Palmer scored 19 points last night to lead six players in double figures as No. 9 Virginia beat Duke, 78-62, in the Atlantic Coast Conference.
The Blue Devils (12-2 and 3-1) trailed throughout the game and got no closer than 10 points in the second half.
Virginia (11-2 and 4-0) led by 45-33 at halftime.
Duke had a 40-27 rebounding advantage, but turned the ball over 24 times.


In Chechen Capital, the Fighting Rages Despite All Efforts to Stop It
The Chechen sniper's nest, on the 11th floor of a windowless, shrapnel-dotted building that overlooks the presidential palace, was as good a place as any today to watch a declared 48-hour cease-fire announced by the Russians rapidly fall apart.
It was unclear who broke the cease-fire, which began at 8 A.M. and was effectively over by 10 A.M.
Even some Chechen civilians agreed that some of their loosely organized guerrillas were bound to get itchy, and there were some in this city without power, water, gas or heat who hadn't heard about the cease-fire at all.


CRISIS IN MEXICO DEEPENS DAMAGE IN LATIN MARKETS
Any hope that the Mexican Government's austere economic recovery plan and an international loan package would calm the nation's financial markets seemed to evaporate today as the stock market here plunged and the peso flirted with a new low against the dollar.
The damage in Mexican financial markets carried over to other Latin American stock exchanges, with some losses exceeding 8 percent


NEW JAPAN ACCESS FOR WALL STREET
The United States and Japan reached a broad accord today to open a range of Japanese financial markets to foreign competition, allowing American investment firms for the first time to vie for the right to manage nearly a trillion dollars in Japanese pension funds.
The accord was reached just hours before Japan's first Socialist Prime Minister, Tomiichi Murayama, landed here for a meeting with President Clinton on Wednesday.


Fulfilling a Resolution With Updated Fajitas
FAJITAS may no longer be on the cutting edge, as they were 10 years ago, but they are still delicious.
With a nip and a tuck here and there, they can fit perfectly into a New Year's resolve to eat less fat.
Beef Fajitas
6 ounces flank steak  8 ounces whole onion or 7 ounces chopped ready-cut onion (1 2/3 cups)  16 ounces whole yellow and red peppers or 14 ounces ready-cut chopped peppers (4 cups)  1 teaspoon ground cumin  1/8 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper
4 whole wheat no-fat tortillas, if available, or white-flour tortillas  1/2 small avocado to yield 4 small slices  1/2 cup nonfat yogurt  Salsa (see recipe).
1.
Grind beef and saute in its own fat in a medium-hot nonstick skillet.
Stir often to break up.
2. Chop whole onion and add to beef, cooking until onion softens.
3.
Chop whole peppers and add to onion with cumin.
Continue cooking until all the vegetables are soft.
Season with salt and pepper.
4.
Wrap two tortillas in aluminum foil and heat in toaster oven for 3 to 5 minutes at 400 degrees.
5. Chop avocado.
6.
To assemble, spoon 1/4 of beef mixture down the center of each heated tortilla.
Top each with 1/4 of the yogurt, 1/4 of the avocado and a couple spoonfuls of salsa.
Roll up and serve.
Heat remaining two tortillas while eating the first two and repeat the filling with remaining ingredients.
Serve any extra salsa on the side.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 650 calories, 30 grams fat, 95 milligrams cholesterol, 580 milligrams sodium, 40 grams protein, 60 grams carbohydrate.
Salsa
12 ounces ripe plum tomatoes  Several sprigs cilantro to yield 3 tablespoons, chopped  1 large clove garlic  1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar  1/8 to 1/2 teaspoon hot-pepper flakes.
1. Wash, trim and cut tomatoes into small chunks.
2. Wash and chop the cilantro; mince the garlic.
3. Combine all ingredients in a small bowl.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 50 calories, 1 gram fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 12 milligrams sodium, 2 grams protein, 9 grams carbohydrate.
Game Plan  Prepare beef and filling through Step 4.
Prepare salsa.
Finish beef and roll up tortillas.


Foz do Iguacu Journal; Smuggling, Yes, but Darker Crimes Are Disowned
At a crowded farewell dinner recently for the Palestine Liberation Organization delegate to Brazil, talk at the head table kept circling back to the faraway Middle East.
"We don't have any Palestinian organization in Brazil in favor of Hamas," said Ahmad Sobeh, the delegate, referring to the Palestinian militant group and dismissing a question about radical inroads among the 25,000 Palestinians living in southern Brazil.


Malcolm X: Reopening The Files
"Brother Minister: The Assassination of Malcolm X" does not inspire confidence when it begins with video clips from MTV and "A Current Affair" proclaiming that this film will deliver a bombshell.
The revelation in question, made public long before the film had a New York theatrical booking (it opens today at the 57th Street Playhouse in Manhattan), is neither definitive nor shocking enough to live up to its tabloid fanfare.
On the other hand, "Brother Minister" includes a wide range of information and cogently suggests that an inquiry into the killing is overdue.
The film makers, Jack Baxter and Jefri Aalmuhammed (who was a consultant on Spike Lee's "Malcolm X"), have assembled an array of scattershot evidence suggesting various conpiracy theories.
Working as recklessly as Oliver Stone without the stylistic firepower, they make their most flame-fanning contention with the thought that Louis Farrakhan may have been part of the impetus behind Malcolm X's murder.


Dowd Is Named a Columnist
The appointment of Maureen Dowd as an Op-Ed page columnist of The New York Times was announced yesterday by the paper's publisher, Arthur Sulzberger Jr.
Ms.
Dowd, a member of the Washington bureau of The Times and a columnist for The New York Times Magazine, will move to her new post around midyear.
"Maureen Dowd has long been one of the most original reporters and compelling writers in American journalism," Mr.
Sulzberger said.
"She has shone in all her roles at The Times, both in New York and in Washington. I know she will be an important, fresh voice on our Op-Ed page."


Payless Cashways Inc.(PCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.52
3.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.87
5.72
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.42
6.29
3.18
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.87
7.85
5.64
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.88
7.86
6.24
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.73
8.72
7.20
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.89
6.90
5.51
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Grasping the Obvious
As Washington peers into the abyss of deep cuts in domestic programs favored by the Republicans, the Defense Department has somehow become untouchable, taking a place alongside Social Security and Medicare in the pantheon of sacrosanct Federal enterprises.
How the Pentagon achieved that protected status at a time of diminishing military threats to the United States says more about the weakness of politicians than the weakened state of American defenses.
It is both bad budget policy and bad defense policy.
Purely as a budget issue, inoculating the Pentagon against spending cuts places an unbearable burden on domestic programs to absorb the savings necessary to balance the budget, or even move toward significant deficit reduction.
The Defense Department budget this year is $252 billion.
If Social Security, Medicare and defense are exempted from cuts, then at least 30 percent of every remaining program would have to be trimmed under the House Republicans' plan to balance the budget by 2002.
Both parties deny the obvious: whatever else they do to balance the budget and pay for tax cuts, they surely must go after defense spending.


Businesses Face the Facts of Curbs on Smoking
After months of fighting it, businesses have begun dealing with the reality of the smoking law signed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday.
Frank's, an Italian steakhouse in Manhattan's meatpacking district, is moving around the corner to a new space with enough room for a segregated smoking lounge.
Chanterelle, the elegant TriBeCa restaurant, says it deeply regrets not being able to allow a practice it thinks it has been able to control, but will comply with the law and refer all complaints to City Hall.


Seagate Technology Inc.(SGAT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Sylvia B. Seaman, 94, a Writer and a Suffragist
Sylvia Bernstein Seaman, a writer and one of the last active members of the suffragist movement, died on Sunday at her home on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
She was 94.
The cause was breast cancer, her family said.
She published a book about that disease 30 years ago, "Always a Woman: What Every Woman Should Know About Breast Cancer," the first by someone outside the medical profession.
"It was considered daring at the time," she later said, "but it changed attitudes, I think."


Eye as Body's Clock Isn't a New Finding
To the Editor:
You state (news article, Jan. 5) that Boston researchers have demonstrated for the first time that the human eye "independently registers light impulses that regulate the body's internal daily clock."


Staff Builders Inc.(SBLI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


CHRONICLE
It may not be high season for awards presentations, but still the ceremonies go on.


Train Kills Man in Tunnel
A man was struck and killed by a train in a subway tunnel between 59th and 72d Streets in Manhattan about 5:30 P.M. yesterday, causing a disruption of evening-rush service on the southbound Broadway IRT lines, the transit police said.
The police said the victim was 25 to 30 years old.
A spokesman, Lieut.
Robert J. Valentino, said there was no indication of any crime.


Early Gains in Stocks Pared in Late Trading
The stock market rallied early in heavy trading yesterday only to retreat for just a small gain at the end of the session, despite a Government report indicating scant inflation at the wholesale level.
An inflation-is-coming comment from a Federal Reserve official helped depress stocks, as did the continuing turmoil in Mexico, whose troubles spread to depress markets throughout Latin America, including those of Brazil and Chile.


CHRONICLE
JONATHAN M. TISCH, president and chief executive of Loews Hotels, has been chosen to receive the 1995 New Yorker for New York Award from the Citizens Committee for New York City.
It will be presented at the organization's 20th-anniversary celebration on Feb. 14 at the Waldorf-Astoria.


Japan Tastes Once-Forbidden Fruit: U.S. Apples
Grabbing the last five apples from the counter, Yaeko Murase turned away disappointed from the empty carton that a few moments earlier had sparkled with red and golden American apples.
The succulent Japanese fruit on the next display didn't even get a glance.
"I wanted to buy the red ones, but they ran out," said Mrs.
Murase, 58, a retired restaurateur who used to offer Japanese apples as dessert.
"I wanted to buy 20 American apples."


Jazz Harpist Hears a Different Drummer
DAPHNE HELLMAN, the jazz harpist, opened the door to her East 61st Street town house welcoming the caller to her home and life.
It is a life that recalls the Katharine Hepburn genre: a stunning heiress, headstrong and original, sets about doing exactly what she wants with oblivious defiance of conventions and, of course, gets away with it and has a great time.
Ms.
Hellman, a slender 79-year-old with sensational cheekbones, who has recently taken up Rollerblading, led the way into her sunlit parlor.
Her two black Pomeranians yelped.
Her caged birds sang.
There were throws on the couches, and books lay turned over to mark their place.
The room was just messy enough to be perfectly inviting.
The walls were covered with photographs of her children and paintings and drawings by artist friends like Saul Steinberg and Al Hirschfeld.
At the center of everything were two golden harps.


National Commerce Bancorp (NCBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Starks Is Unconscious as Knicks Leave Miller Speechless
Before the game, there was anticipation.
During the game, there was excitement.
After the game, there was anger.
But what the Knicks will remember most about last night is the sparkling way they played.
Using a razor-sharp offense, the Knicks beat the Indiana Pacers, 117-105, at Madison Square Garden in a game that featured a team record-tying eight 3-pointers by John Starks.


Photos Show Iraqis With Stolen Kuwaiti Arms
The United States offered the Security Council pictures today to prove that when Iraqi troops moved toward the Kuwaiti border last October they were armed with advanced equipment stolen from Kuwait during the Persian Gulf war.
The presentation, complete with detailed lists of captured equipment still believed to be in Iraqi hands, was Washington's opening salvo in a review of sanctions imposed on the Government of President Saddam Hussein.
Under a 1991 Security Council resolution, Iraq must return stolen Kuwaiti property before sanctions are lifted.


IP Timberlands Ltd.(IPT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ted Hawkins, 58, Blues Writer And Singer on Brink of Fame
Ted Hawkins, a country and blues songwriter, singer and guitarist known for his piercing songs of sorrow and joy, died on Dec. 29 at the Centinela Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 58 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was a stroke, said his manager, Nancy Meyer.


As Parties Skirmish Over Budget, Greenspan Offers a Painless Cure
As Democrats kept demanding that Republicans spell out their plans for cutting the budget, the head of the Federal Reserve Board offered them an initially painless way to do it: changing the way the Government calculates inflation.
Alan Greenspan told a joint meeting of the House and Senate Budget Committees that the Consumer Price Index now exaggerates annual inflation by 0.5 to 1.5 percentage points.
That leads to higher payments for Social Security and government pensions and lower revenues from those taxes that are pegged to inflation.


Food Notes
From Gascony, With Love
More than 100 French chefs armed with bottles of Armagnac, slabs of foie gras and vats of cassoulet will descend on New York in early February.
They are coming from Gascony, in southwest France, to celebrate the 10th anniversary of D'Artagnan in Jersey City, the premier foie gras dealer in the United States.
The company's owners, Ariane Daguin, a native of Gascony, and George Faison, have planned a week of festivities, including the arrival of the chefs in full Gascon regalia on Feb. 4, a soiree on Feb. 6 for 1,000 in Grand Central Terminal (with such diversions as bobbing for prunes in Armagnac) and a progressive black-tie dinner on Feb. 7 that will be open to the public.
The chefs will spend the week cooking in French restaurants all over town.


New Tax Cut Is Promised By Whitman
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman promised a third round of tax cuts in her first State of the State address today, but she opened at least a semantic crack in her no-new-taxes pledge by saying she needed to renew an expiring vehicle surcharge to keep a state transportation fund afloat.
Mrs.
Whitman also beat a temporary retreat on her vaunted school voucher plan for Jersey City by postponing for another year the measure, which had been meeting increasing resistance among legislators.
The Governor appointed a study team to examine the idea until next year, when, she promised, she will move ahead with the program to give parents a free, subsidized choice of public or private schools in the city.


The Steelers' Towel Is Not for Crying
Art Rooney, cigar in his right hand, stares out at his beloved city.
It is, of course, a statue of the Steelers' late owner just outside Three Rivers Stadium.
Rooney, though, is not on a pedestal.
The Rooney family wanted him to be among what he used to call his "Pittsburgh guys." So he is sitting in a chair, close enough to fans to sit down next to him.


A Lesson for Mr. Gingrich
Small-town cronyism is passable in small towns but dangerous when transplanted to Washington.
The Clinton Administration has learned that time and again.
Newt Gingrich is learning it too.
A few days ago, Mr.
Gingrich's choice for historian of the House of Representatives announced that she and her husband were coming to Washington, not just to serve Congress and the American people, but to "chronicle" the day-to-day adventures of her patron.
Within 24 hours, Christina Jeffrey, a Friend of Newt from Kennesaw State College in Georgia, was dismissed for having helped to deny Federal funds to an educational project on the Holocaust because it did not present the Nazi and Ku Klux Klan points of view.


First Empire State Corp.(FES,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Looking Beyond Fields of Play
The reform movement in intercollegiate athletics began here 12 years ago.
Yesterday, the movement got a taste of its own medicine when the Rainbow Coalition unveiled a plan to steer black recruits away from schools with poor records of minority hiring.
During a two-hour meeting with National Collegiate Athletic Association officials, and at a subsequent news conference, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, the executive director of the coalition, said his group planned to correct the glaring imbalance between the number of African-American football and basketball players and the number of black administrators by establishing an index.


Corrections
A chart last Wednesday about parking-rule suspensions this year in New York City misstated the days of the week for Rosh ha-Shanah, when alternate-side rules are suspended.
The holiday, on Sept. 25 and 26, falls on Monday and Tuesday, not Tuesday and Wednesday.


Officer Is Charged With Lying to a Grand Jury
A New York City police officer was indicted yesterday on charges that he lied to a Federal grand jury investigating allegations that a team of officers regularly planted drugs and guns on suspects in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan.
The indictment was the first to come out of a three-year investigation into the activities of an undercover unit in the 34th Precinct that was known on the street as Local Motion.
Federal authorities said that more indictments were possible.


HOME HOLDINGS INVESTORS FORM COMMITTEE ON DEAL
Investors in bonds issued by Home Holdings Inc. have formed a committee and hired a New York law firm, Anderson Kill Olick &amp; Oshinsky, to represent their interests in the insurer's proposed combination with Zurich Insurance Group.
In a letter last week to directors of Home Holdings, the bondholders said a plan by Home's parent company, Trygg-Hansa A.B. of Sweden, to form an alliance with Zurich in Europe and to liquidate Home while Zurich issued new policies for selected Home customers, was not satisfactory.
Some of Home's policyholders also say the agreement with Zurich leaves them less well off than if Home were to stay in business.
Both groups prefer an offer from Fund American Enterprises Holdings of Norwich, Vt., to inject new capital into Home and allow it to continue in business.


Producer Prices Stay Low, With Gain for '94 Only 1.7%
Despite hefty cost increases for many industrial materials, the prices of finished goods rose only modestly in December, the Government said today.
For all of 1994, the advance in the inflation index for goods at the final stage before reaching consumers was just 1.7 percent.
Producers thus continued to absorb higher manufacturing costs, as fierce competition in many industries has largely prevented them from passing increases along to customers.


Intertrans Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


AT HOME WITH: Larry Kramer; When a Roaring Lion Learns to Purr
THEY are two words that stab fear in a bureaucrat's heart, send doctors groping for Alka-Seltzer and television producers begging for mercy.
They inspire tight-lipped secretaries to insist that their bosses are in a meeting, out to lunch, on safari.
Larry Kramer.


Argentina Striving To Regain Confidence
As Mexico's financial crisis continues, and markets around Latin America are jolted, Argentina has been hit hardest among the Latin nations.
Although Argentine stocks rebounded today, the financial markets have plummeted in recent days and short-term interest rates have spiraled, sending officials scrambling to allay investor concerns.


Marshall &amp; Ilsley Corp.(MRIS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Official Quits AT&amp;T to Run Netscape
The head of AT&amp;T's cellular telephone and paging division is resigning only four months after joining the company to become chief executive of a small California company that makes Internet software.
The executive, James L. Barksdale, who was formerly head of the $2.2 billion cellular telephone business of McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., said yesterday that he would join Netscape Communications Inc., a privately held start-up company in Mountain View, Calif.
The company is trying to corner the emerging field of digital commerce on the Internet, the global web of computer networks.


Escapee Killed; 2 Are Captured
Acting on information from two homeless men seeking a reward, law-enforcement officers killed one escapee from a state prison and captured another late Tuesday at an encampment of shanties near here.
A third fugitive was taken into custody tonight as he walked in the city's Little Havana section.
The fugitives were among five convicted murderers who nine days ago tunneled out of the Glades Correctional Institution in Belle Glade, 85 miles north of here.
The search has focused on the Miami area, but officials have also alerted the authorities in the Caribbean and Latin America.
All the fugitives were born in Cuba.


In Performance; THEATER
Accentuating the Positive, 'Little Prince' Without a Snake  Theaterworks/USA Promenade Theater
Plenty of charm and theatrical talent are on display at the Promenade Theater (2162 Broadway, at 76th Street), where Theaterworks/ USA is presenting the New York premiere of its latest musical for children, "The Little Prince."


F.T.C. Approves Lockheed-Martin Marietta Deal
In a unanimous vote, the Federal Trade Commission gave its approval yesterday to the Lockheed Corporation's merger with the Martin Marietta Corporation, eliminating the last Government obstacle to creating a $10 billion enterprise that will be the world's largest maker of military hardware.
The vote followed an agreement negotiated by the F.T.C. and the companies, which resolved antitrust concerns without requiring either company to sell parts of its operations.


Hovnanian Enterprises Inc.(HOV,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Jobless Data Show Blacks Joining Economic Recovery
Unlike other economic recoveries in which blacks were often left behind, the current upswing helped push the unemployment rate for blacks to below 10 percent last month for the first time in more than two decades.
"In the scramble for jobs in 1994, blacks were winners for the first time in many years," said Andrew Brimmer, a former Federal Reserve Bank governor who now runs a consulting concern in Washington.


In Performance; POP
Songs Serene on the Surface, But Harsher Underneath  Grant McLennan Brownie's
At first, Grant McLennan seems to be one more mild-mannered folk-rock songwriter.
His voice is an understated tenor, somewhere between Al Stewart and Tom Petty; his songs strum along in major keys.
Mr.
McLennan was modest and earnest when he performed solo on Monday night, previewing his next album, "Horsebreaker Star" (Beggars Banquet/Atlantic), which is due in February.
He explained that one song was his fantasy of Leonard Cohen as a 1920's movie star; he praised "Clouds," which was written by Robert Forster, who was with Mr.
McLennan in the fondly remembered Australian band the Go-Betweens.


Remembering 4 Fallen Firefighters


ICF Kaiser International Inc.(ICF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Executive Changes
BROWN BROTHERS HARRIMAN &amp; CO., New York, named Radford W. Klotz a general partner.
HASBRO INC., Pawtucket, R.I., appointed Dave Wilson president of the newly formed Hasbro Group, an umbrella organization that will manage the company's two domestic game companies: Milton Bradley Co. and Parker Brothers.


Algerian Opposition Says It Is Near Agreement on a Peace Plan
Representatives of major Algerian opposition parties, including Muslim fundamentalists battling the country's Government, said today that they were close to a joint proposal for a cease-fire and a transitional government to end the Algerian civil war.
The war has taken more than 30,000 lives in the last three years.


Hunting Fistfuls Of Bounty Dollars; An Unusual Freelance Career: Capturing Convicted Aliens
The final leg of Lennox Medina's aborted flight from justice was a 12-story elevator ride up to the Immigration and Naturalization Service's deportation office in Manhattan.
After 18 hours spent in handcuffs and in silence, the 30-year-old native of Trinidad and convicted felon began to swear and to threaten violence.
And then he began to cry.
"You'll get paid now," Mr.
Medina said to the two men beside him in the elevator, who had captured him earlier that morning last week on the streets of Brooklyn.
"You won."


End Duty-Free Limit In New Trade Era
To the Editor:
A year ago the North American Free Trade Agreement was approved because Congress was convinced that the reduction of trade barriers was in the American economy's best interests.
Then a posse of former Presidents joined President Clinton in making the same argument for the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Global free trade became a bipartisan mantra.


Useful, if Tame, Labor Reforms
The U.S. is enjoying peaceful labor-management relations.
Yet serious problems persist.
Outdated laws prevent workers from joining labor-management teams to discuss ways to improve productivity and quality.
Employers flout workers' right to organize unions free of retaliation.
A third of all non-union workers want to join unions, but are thwarted by the majority of workers who do not.
A Presidential commission headed by John Dunlop, a former Labor Secretary, proposed constructive solutions this week.
They would largely exempt labor-management teams from prohibitions on "company unions." The idea is to give managers and many workers what they say they want: something in between no representation and full-fledged, often confrontational unions.


Seasoned Helmsmen Feeling Unprepared
Call it weather, or call it calamity, but uneasiness has set the stage here for the start of the first set of America's Cup defender trials on Thursday.
Even Team Dennis Conner seems to have a case of the jitters, despite having the equivalent of a millennium of cup racing experience compared with its two relatively neophyte defense rivals, America
and PACT 95.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK TRANSFERS KILLER TO OKLAHOMA Thomas J. Grasso, the double-murderer who has demanded to be executed and whose case became an issue in George E. Pataki's gubernatorial campaign, was transferred from New York to Oklahoma to await execution.
A1.
Opponents of capital punishment said that there might be a way to challenge the execution of Thomas J. Grasso in Oklahoma, but they said the chances of success were remote.
B8.
NEW YORK CITY


Regulators to Study Buried-Cable Paths
New Jersey regulators say they will study whether a clearer system of markings is needed for the paths of buried cables and pipelines before construction crews begin working near them.


Fans Are Glad, Mad Or Just Indifferent
"They settled? That's good."
William Allen, Ranger fan, offered this assessment from Adolf Kusy &amp; Company in Manhattan yesterday afternoon after learning that negotiators had, indeed, reached a tentative settlement of the 103-day National Hockey League labor dispute and that his Stanley Cup champions would probably be returning to the ice by late next week.


Western Digital Corp.(WDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Events: Architecture, Graphics, Glass, Crafts
Architecture and Design  Main waiting room, Grand Central Terminal, Park Avenue at 42d Street; (212)753-1722.
The Architectural League of New York is sponsoring two exhibitions from Tuesday through Feb. 15.
Projects by the architect Zaha Hadid will be examined in a display of photographs, models, drawings and paintings.
The second exhibition features designs for bicycles by students from the Southern California Institute of Architecture.
Open Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
No charge.


Town &amp; Country Corp.(TNC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Rangers and Islanders Make Ticket Plans, but Devils Don't
With no actual schedule to work from, Rangers and Islanders ticket officials were flying blind -- and in different directions -- in the wake of yesterday's tentative collective bargaining agreement.
Devils officials were not flying at all.
The Rangers and Islanders both announced partial policies, taking different tacks.
The Devils said they would have no ticket policy until they had a schedule.


Dr. Alfred Lilienfeld; Psychiatrist Was 88
Dr.
Alfred Lilienfeld, a Manhattan psychiatrist and expert on psychosomatic illness, died on Saturday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 88 and lived on the Upper West Side.
The cause was an infection after a long period of failing health, his family said.


New York Transfers Killer to Oklahoma To Await Execution
Thomas J. Grasso, the double murderer who has demanded to be executed and whose case became an issue in George E. Pataki's gubernatorial campaign, was transferred today from New York to Oklahoma to await execution.
Coming 11 days after Mr.
Pataki took office, Mr.
Grasso's extradition fulfilled one of the new Governor's top campaign pledges and starkly symbolized the political transformation in Albany.


The Neediest Cases; Contributing as a Family Tradition Ingrained Early in Life
Emma Kates-Shaw is not old enough to appreciate traditions, but eventually, she might grow fond of one that began in her first year of life.
Last month, her parents sent $50 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund to celebrate her first Christmas and start an annual routine.
"My dad and mom thought I should begin the tradition right away of sharing what I am so lucky to have," Anthony Shaw and Betsy Kates wrote on their daughter's behalf.
"I especially hope this money can be used to help babies that are not so lucky."


NEW AIDS FINDINGS ON WHY DRUGS FAIL
New findings about how the AIDS virus behaves in the body help explain why all drugs tried until now have been ineffective, and they cast new light on the reaction of the body's immune system to the invader.
Infection by H.I.V., the human immunodeficiency virus, has been thought of as a gradual process in which the virus acts slowly to undermine the immune system.
In fact the virus and the immune system engage in a pitched battle from the very start of infection, according to new findings being published today.


CHRONICLE
Sometimes there's still happy news from royal families, even those without thrones.
KING CONSTANTINE and QUEEN ANNE-MARIE of Greece announced from their home in London yesterday that their son CROWN PRINCE PAVLOS, 27, was engaged to MARIE-CHANTAL MILLER, 26.
She is the daughter of ROBERT WARREN MILLER and his wife, CHANTAL MILLER.
Mr.
Miller is a founder of Duty Free Shoppers, said to be the largest duty-free retailer in the world, and is chairman of the Search Group, an investment holding company in Hong Kong, where the family has lived for 34 years.


Valerie Cossart, 87, Actress of the 30's
Valerie Cossart, an actress who appeared in many Broadway and Off Broadway productions in the 1930's and 40's, died on Dec. 31 at Beth Israel North Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 87 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pneumonia, said her stepdaughter, Valerie Livingston Hopkins.


Christopher Said to Offer to Quit, but Clinton Says No
In a private meeting with President Clinton at the White House before Christmas, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said he wanted to resign but Mr.
Clinton said he wanted Mr.
Christopher to stay in his post indefinitely, according to senior Administration officials and outsiders familiar with the conversation.
Mr.
Christopher is said to have told the President that he believed the Administration had achieved a string of foreign policy successes, particularly in recent months, and that he could leave the job confident that American foreign policy was firmly on course.


Seahawks Expected to Name Erickson
DENNIS ERICKSON of the University of Miami has been hired as coach of the Seattle Seahawks, The Associated Press reported last night.
The Seahawks have called a news conference for today in Palo Alto, Calif., apparently to announce the hiring, which came after a week of negotiations.
Erickson, who will coach the East team in the East-West Shrine All-Star game in Palo Alto on Saturday, would replace TOM FLORES, who was fired as coach and general manager of the Seahawks on Dec. 29.
Erickson would become the fifth head coach in the Seahawks' 19-year history.


A New President Is Appointed at Barneys
Barneys New York, the apparel retailer, said yesterday that Charles W. Bunstine 2d, formerly its senior vice president, had been promoted to president and chief operating officer.
Gene and Robert L. Pressman, brothers who had shared the president's title, will become co-chairmen and co-chief executives of Barneys, which their grandfather Barney Pressman founded as a cut-rate men's clothing store in 1923.


Kennedy Honors Gave Artists Their Due
To the Editor:
Frank Rich didn't find much to his liking in the Kennedy Center Honors telecast (column, Jan. 1).


Yeltsin Weighs a Shake-Up Of Russian Army Command
In a further sign of growing dissatisfaction with how the divided and demoralized Russian military has handled the military offensive in Chechnya, President Boris N. Yeltsin was reported today to be considering taking over direct control of Russia's armed forces.
Mr.
Yeltsin was said to be planning to remove the Russian General Staff from the control of the Defense Ministry and have it report directly to him.
The biggest loser in such a radical reorganization could be Mr.
Yeltsin's politically embattled Defense Minister, Gen.
Pavel S. Grachev, who is widely blamed for bungling the Chechen operation.


School Case Displays High Court Divisions on Desegregation
The Supreme Court's fault lines on the subject of desegregation remedies were starkly obvious today as the Justices heard arguments on whether the state of Missouri had met its obligation to dismantle the legacy of segregation in the Kansas City school system.
The central question before the Court was how to measure success in a court-ordered program that has rebuilt much of the battered district.
The answer could affect the future of hundreds of school districts that are still under Federal court supervision.


Don't Look Now, but Knicks Are Bonding
Who said the Knicks would be lost without Charles Oakley?
Who said New York needed shooting guards who can shoot?
Who said the Knicks looked old and tired?
A lot of people. But the Knicks never believed them.


Ready to Skate but Far From Happy
In effect, they took one for the team.
That was the general feeling yesterday among Islanders and Devils players regarding the tentative agreement in the National Hockey League labor dispute.


Developments in Congress
HOUSE: Dozens of lawmaker gathered on Capitol Hill to demonstrate their support for term limits, papering over deep divisions over what the lmit should be.
The star attraction was Speaker Newt Gingrich, who is beginning his ninth term - his 17th year - in Congress.
Mr.
Gingrich said he favored a 12-year limit and would vote against the six-year limit that a new Republican poll shows most voters favoring.
"A six-year learning curve is just too short," he said.
"I don't know that I'm all that smart, but as hard as I worked at it, I didn't get it in the firstr six year." Most of the 73 freshman Republicans support the six-year limit.


Utility Regulators to Study Buried-Cable Signs
New Jersey regulators say they will study whether a clearer system of markings is needed for the paths of buried cables and pipelines before construction crews begin working near them.
Herbert H. Tate Jr., head of the state's Board of Public Utilities, said the accident on Monday when a pile driver sliced into three major underground electrical lines at Newark International Airport underscored the need to examine how sites are marked.


George Aguirre, 62, Hispanic-Art Backer
George L. Aguirre, a pioneer of laser photography and an advocate of Hispanic culture in New York City, died here on Sunday.
He was 62.
The cause was a heart attack, said his brother Gabriel.


Independent Ski Resorts Go for Diversity
Recent mergers among ski resorts have set up corporate galaxies that reach out to skiers with deals that are light years away from anything most single resorts can afford.
But in an effort to strike back, other ski areas are doing some celestial thinking of their own.
Take, for example, the new deal for season-pass holders at five independent resorts scattered among the Berkshires, Catskills and Green Mountains.
They include Butternut Basin and Jiminy Peak in Massachusetts, Okemo and Stratton in Vermont and Ski Windham, in New York.


Northeast Federal Corp.(NSB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Unifirst Corp.(UNF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


N.F.L.'s Leading Sacker Says Trench Warfare Is Not His Game
The National Football League's leading sacker looks like a wild man, drives tanks in the Army Reserves and has a paratrooper's wings.
Kevin Greene of the Steelers is just the sort of gung-ho guy football coaches love.
Of all America's sports, football is the one they compare most often with warfare.


The Future of U.N. Peacekeeping
United Nations peacekeeping missions have hit hard times.
Since the end of the cold war, the use of lightly armed soldiers to police cease-fires or monitor elections has given way to ambitious attempts to impose peace on hostile forces determined to keep fighting, as in Somalia or Bosnia.
The result has been a loss of political support for U.N. peacekeeping, particularly in Washington.
The Clinton Administration now shies away from involvement in operations not commanded by an American so that U.S. troops will not be dependent on others for relief or evacuation as they were in Somalia.
Congressional Republicans go further, proposing tight legal restrictions on the use of American forces and opposing participation in the U.N. force that will soon take over in Haiti, even though it will be commanded by an American.


Tension at Convention Over Restructuring Issue
The delegates were getting antsy.
Their annual effort to shape college sports was coming to an end.
A motion was made to limit debate on each remaining issue to five minutes.
The motion was defeated, but the point had been made.
Red-eye reservations were waiting and the promise of more storms provided a very good reason for leaders of higher education to get out of town and back to their campuses.
And yet, in one of the final moves of the 89th National Collegiate Athletic Association convention late Tuesday afternoon, delegates reopened discussion on what seemed to be a relatively simple and insignificant matter.
The issue was whether the new Great Eight Basketball Festival, an early-season four-game event that includes leading schools from the men's basketball tournament of the previous season, should be granted an exemption from the maximum 27 games that teams are permitted to play.


Mix-Ups and Worse Arising from Sex-Offender Notification
Dennis Hoffman had been a good worker at Daniel Enderle's construction company before he was arrested six years ago.
So when he was released from state prison on Tuesday, Mr.
Enderle agreed to give him a ride from jail to his sister's house.
"I tried to help the guy, but it sure backfired," Mr. Enderle said today.


The Old Gang Gathers to Remember Tip O'Neill
They were there when Tip O'Neill went to grammar school.
They were there when he went to Congress, in 1953, and when he became Speaker, in 1977, and when he retired, in 1987.
They were there when he was buried, a year ago this week: Lenny Lamkin, Pinky Sullivan, Skippy McCaffrey, Mickey O'Neil, Russ Cutter and the other fellows from Barry's Corner.


Colombia Denies Island Is a Drug Haven
Colombian authorities denied today that a Caribbean island, San Andres, serves as a haven for drug traffickers and that old jets like Boeing 727's and French Caravelles are being used to transport cocaine from the island to Mexico.
An article published Tuesday in The New York Times quoted United States officials as saying Colombian authorities were doing nothing about the fact that planes loaded with cocaine were taking off from Colombian territory.


Police Sift Clues in $5 Million Jewelry Theft
Police officials said yesterday that they were still interviewing three people who said they were robbed of $5 million in jewelry when they pulled their car over after an accident on the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway.
While their account was similar to that of several other crimes that have occurred in the New York region in the last couple of years, the police said that the three people in the car had given investigators different descriptions of the incident and that there were several unanswered questions.


The Banker's Songwriting Outlived Him
To the Editor:
Your account of the 1924 Dawes Plan to bail out a bankrupt Germany after World War I by issuing bonds that are only now being repaid (Business Day, Jan. 6) brings only one thought to my mind: Songwriters come in all shapes and sizes.
The banker behind the Dawes


Twyla Tharp Discovers Virtue as a Cause for Dancing
The title doesn't roll easily off the tongue.
Is anything about Twyla Tharp -- the wise-cracking Roseanne of the dance world and one of its pre-eminent and most provocative choreographers -- ever easy?
But "Twyla Tharp Red, White and Blues New Works," a revue that opens on Monday for a two-week run at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, was the product of a very simple desire.
Ms.
Tharp wanted to spend the summer in Washington with a new man in her life.
But she was not interested in taking a vacation.
"Not work?" Ms.
Tharp asked rhetorically in a recent interview.
"What? Are you kidding? It wouldn't have been me. It's easy to be an acceptable human being when you're not working. But when you're working it's a different story. We had to find out whether or not the me that is is a passable me. And he turned out to be a terrific fan."


Prosecution Says Simpson Abused Wife For 17 Years
In an effort to bolster their arguments for introducing evidence of domestic violence at trial, prosecutors in the murder case against O. J. Simpson asserted in court documents released today that he had abused Nicole Brown Simpson for 17 years.
"Not only did defendant verbally abuse, physically abuse, degrade and humiliate Nicole through their relationship, but he stalked and harassed her as well," the prosecutors said in an introduction to the 85 pages of documents, in which at least a dozen of his former wife's friends and associates describe, in often gruesome detail, more than 50 incidents from the couple's stormy relationship.


Market Place; Despite the turmoil in Mexico, some companies have seen gains.
IN the rubble of the Mexican stock market, it has been almost impossible to make dollars by owning Mexican stocks.
Only one large company has seen its value rise enough in pesos to offset that currency's collapse against the dollar since its first devaluation on Dec. 19.
And few stocks have gained even in pesos, no surprise considering that Mexico's leading index has tumbled 9 percent in pesos since then.
In dollars, the loss has been 45 percent, even with yesterday's rally, which sent the market up 2.8 percent in pesos and, with the peso also bouncing back, up 6 percent in dollars.


Biogen's Share Price Drops In a Running Patent Battle
Firing a volley in a war over biotechnology patents, Schering A.G., the German drug maker, said yesterday that it had been awarded exclusive rights to a process being used by Biogen Inc.
The announcement sent shares of Biogen tumbling.
A spokesman for Schering in Frankfurt said the company and Stanford University had received on Dec. 27 a United States patent that gave Schering exclusive rights to produce beta interferon, an immune system hormone, from Chinese hamster egg ovary cells.


Anti-Gay Measure Is Defeated
In the latest skirmish of a national battle over laws guaranteeing rights of homosexuals, voters in West Palm Beach, Fla., upheld an anti-discrimination ordinance in a special election on Tuesday.
By 56 percent to 44 percent, the voters defeated a proposal that would have removed "sexual orientation" as a classification under which people are protected against bias in employment, housing and public accommodations.


Movies Haven't Stolen Tim Allen's Attention
How does a performer follow the spectacular success of having the top-rated television show, the highest-grossing holiday movie and the No. 1 best-selling book all at the same time?
If the performer is Tim Allen of ABC's "Home Improvement," he shrugs off movies and decides to do theater.
More precisely, he decides to do theaters, with a comedy act based on his best seller, "Don't Stand Too Close to a Naked Man" (Hyperion).


COMPANY BRIEFS
AQUILA GAS PIPELINE CORP., San Antonio, a provider of natural gas, agreed to acquire Tristar Gas Co., Dallas, a closely held natural gas company, for $16.3 million.


Of Journalists, Hypocrisy and Betrayal
THE PAPERBOY  By Pete Dexter  307 pages. Random House. $23.
The title of Pete Dexter's strong new novel, "The Paperboy," refers to the job the narrator takes at the opening.
A swimmer for the University of Florida, Jack James got fed up with practicing, drank a bottle of vodka one night and emptied the team's swimming pool.
Expelled for this vandalism, Jack has nothing better to do than go back to his home town of Lately, in northern Florida, and drive a delivery truck for his father, William Ward James, the beloved publisher of The Moat County Times, whom his friends call W. W. or World War.


A Pay Raise's Impact
The Clinton Administration, which appears to be advocating a higher minimum wage as one of its major policy objectives, is doing so at a time when most economists find less damage from raising the minimum wage than they once did.
A chief argument against raising the minimum wage, among both economists and politicians, is the fear of job losses.
The threat is that employers will dismiss thousands of workers on the ground that they lack the skills to be worth more than the minimum wage, which is $4.25 an hour.
But nearly all these estimates of job losses have shrunk as research continues.


Passing the Torch: A special report.; New Israeli Generation: 'Me' Replaces Myths
An important generational change is under way in Israel's public life, and with it has come a change in what Israelis care about and demand from their leaders.
Soon, possibly as early as the 1996 elections, political power will shift from the generation of nation-builders to one born, or at least reared, after Israel was founded in 1948.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Taming a Noisy Intruder In the Quiet Chamber World  New York Philharmonic Ensembles Merkin Concert Hall
The New York Philharmonic Ensembles concert on Sunday afternoon opened with Eric Ewazen's trim, conservative Trio for Trumpet, Violin and Piano, composed in 1992.
The trumpet is a dangerous creature to bring into the china shop of chamber music, but Mr.
Ewazen cannily exploits the instrument's lyric side, basing his idiom on Copland's Americana style.
The trumpet's reflective, rocking melody in open intervals sets the tone, with the violin and piano moving in a more chromatic, Romantic vein.
The performance by Philip Smith, Sharon Yamada and Jonathan Feldman made an excellent argument for this beautifully shaped and balanced piece.


Blame for the Cold War Falls on the Soviet Side
Those on the political right who have been inveighing against the leftish tendencies of PBS documentaries can find solace in "Messengers From Moscow," an account of the cold war that echoes decades of messages from Washington that Soviet ambitions were behind the long East-West confrontation.
Relying on recently opened Soviet archives and testimony from former high Soviet officials and apparatchiks, the four-hour retrospective centers on Kremlin machinations in the pursuit of power.
The first program, tomorrow night, deals with postwar Europe, particularly Germany, which Stalin saw as the key to a Soviet takeover of the Continent.


Brother Cadfael on the Case
Public television's "Mystery" is taking an unusual detour, going back to the 12th century for a series of four 90-minute stories about Cadfael, a Benedictine monk and amazingly busy sleuth.
Portrayed by Derek Jacobi, the character is the hero in a series of best-selling novels by Ellis Peters, pen name for Edith Pargeter, now over 80 and still turning out Cadfael tales.
Brother Cadfael is not your typical monk.
He joined the monastery in middle age after an adventurous life that included fighting in the Crusades and fathering a child.
Now in his 50's, he is the apothecary of Shrewsbury Abbey, shrewdly using medicine, herbs and common sense to solve crimes that seem to be all over the place.
Tonight, in "The Leper of St. Giles," an elderly baron (Norman Eshley) is murdered shortly before his intended marriage to a young, lovely and very reluctant heiress (Tara Fitzgerald).
The girl's true and handsome young love (Jonathan Firth) is arrested.
Cadfael sets about proving the ardent lad's innocence.


Remarks by Clinton Halt Slide of Stocks
President Clinton's willingness to lend Mexico more money to overcome its economic crisis reassured investors today and buoyed the Mexican stock exchange after two days of steep losses.
The peso recovered some strength, closing at 5.675 to the dollar, compared with Tuesday's close of 5.85.
Mexican companies and funds on the New York Stock Exchange rebounded in active trading.


Houses by Gates: Virtual and Real; It Takes Time To Build Xanadu
THE garage is tunneled into the hillside, with room enough to hold 20 cars, its roof covered by sod from the Cascade Range and surrounded by a fresh-planted forest of Northwest alders.
Batman would blush.
At the bottom of the slope is an estuary, man-made, fed by a small stream into which salmon will swim, procreate and die every fall, according to plan.
Nature, not the building code, now governs that part.


Roderick Stephens, 85, Sailor And Innovator in Yacht Design
Roderick Stephens Jr., a leading yachtsman and boat systems expert who sailed in three America's Cup defense campaigns, died early Tuesday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 85.
Bill Langan, a spokesman for the family, said Mr.
Stephens died in his sleep.
He had suffered a stroke in the late 1980's but still sailed occasionally.


Collected Pieces From a Passionate Life
FOR several months in 1990, while reporting an article on Rudolf Nureyev, I found myself, memo book in hand, in the daunting presence of the man who kindled my passion for dance and permanently ingrained in me a romantic ideal that would prove entirely unattainable.
Rudolf Nureyev died on Jan. 6, 1993, at the age of 54.
After that, I would walk past his apartment at the Dakota and gaze up at his five arching windows overlooking the park: one for the music room, three for the living room, one for the guest room.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Television
A rare opportunity to watch a major college game live on national television comes up Saturday when the Colorado College-Wisconsin contest will be telecast by ESPN2 from the Dane County Coliseum in Madison, Wis., beginning at 8:05 Eastern time.
The Tigers (17-5), in first place in the Western Association, have not won at Madison since 1989.
The Badgers (11-9-1), long known for their rough play, are said to have moderated their style and are second, not first, in the Western College Hockey Association in most penalty minutes.
Michigan Tech is No. 1.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Washing Away Scale
Q.
Is there any way to rid my houseplants of scale?
I spray twice yearly with an insecticidal soap to no avail.
What am I doing wrong? -- Alice Thurston, Washington.


Storms Drench California, Creating a Trail of Havoc
A major winter storm system continued to push out of the Pacific Ocean today after causing tens of millions of dollars in flood damage to roads, homes, businesses and crops, and leaving Californians bracing for a renewal of heavy rainfall on Friday.
Federal and state officials said it was still too early to estimate the overall cost of damage from the storm system, which has spawned a series of drenching rainstorms since last week.


On the Edge of Disaster, But Ready for Anything
From disaster to cleanup, this is a city that lives the Southern California cycle.
The same range of hills whose beauty attracts residents also threatens them with the brush fires, mudslides and floods that are a part of life here.
Just over a year ago, 12 of the 16 houses on Kindair Drive were destroyed in a wave of wildfires that swept the region.
Vicky Wade's house was one of those that survived the unpredictable flames.


Eh? C.F.L. Is Putting a Team in Alabama
A Canadian Football League team landed in Alabama yesterday, thanks to the owner, ART WILLIAMS, a former insurance executive, who is personally funding the franchise with $10 million and has signed a 10-year lease at Legion Field in Birmingham.


Homeless Animals Face Killing at a New Site
To the Editor:
Re "On Sunday" column (Jan. 8): The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals has divested itself of its killing role and of its real estate.
The Center for Animal Care and Control, a nonprofit group working under contract with New York City, has taken over the A.S.P.C.A.'s decrepit Brooklyn shelter and its state-of-the-art big house for animals on 110th Street in Manhattan.
The society is expected to mount an aggressive campaign urging the adoption of animals it houses.


Freeze Poultry but Don't Call It Fresh, U.S. Says
After 60 years of allowing frozen chicken and turkey to be sold as fresh, the Department of Agriculture said today that it had decided that the practice was deceptive and proposed that thawed frozen poultry be labeled as "previously frozen."
Under current regulations, poultry frozen to an internal temperature of 1 degree Fahrenheit can be sold as fresh.
The new rule will prohibit poultry from being called fresh if it has been chilled below 26 degrees, the temperature at which poultry becomes hard to the touch.


Death Foes See 2 Slim Chances To Prevent Execution of Grasso
Opponents of capital punishment said today that there might be a way to challenge the execution of Thomas J. Grasso in Oklahoma, but they said the chances of success were remote.
The best option, they said, would be for Mr.
Grasso himself to appeal the death sentence he received for murdering an 87-year-old woman in Tulsa, Okla., in 1990.
But Mr.
Grasso has steadfastly said he wants to die, and his lawyer reaffirmed that position today.


2 New Accounts Gained by Grey
The Whitehall-Robins Healthcare division of the American Home Products Corporation added Grey Advertising in New York to its agency roster yesterday by naming Grey to handle its Anacin pain-reliever and Chapstick lip care brands, with combined billings estimated at $15 million to $20 million.
For the last three years, the Anacin account has been at McCann-Erickson New York and the Chapstick account at Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg in New York.
Grey was awarded the brands after a review in which the other participants were not disclosed.
The trade publication Adweek listed as contenders the incumbents as well as another American Home roster agency, Partners &amp; Shevack in New York.
A spokeswoman for Whitehall-Robins in Madison, N.J., declined to comment.


LEADER OF REBELS SEEKS PEACE TALKS WITH RUSSIAN FOES
The embattled president of the secessionist Chechen region met with reporters today for the first time in three weeks, to urge talks with Russian Government leaders on a peaceful end to the war and concede that Chechnya could not win a war with Russia.
As Russian troops pressed ever closer to his presidential palace in central Grozny, Dzhokhar M. Dudayev, the Chechen leader, did not exclude some kind of negotiated autonomy within the Russian Federation for Chechnya and said that "everything can be settled in an hour."


Club Med Inc.(CMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Mexico's Crisis Drags Down U.S. Stocks
To traders, the peso loomed larger than inflation yesterday.
The stock market rallied for all of 10 minutes because of a report showing moderate inflation.
But the continuing financial crisis in Mexico quickly dragged down stock prices as traders wondered which American companies would be hurt by the declining peso.
"Some stocks are taking a hit even though nothing has come out yet that even hints that they're going to take a hit," said Paul L. Hennessey, a senior trader at Boston Company Asset Management Group, which manages about $18 billion worth of stocks.


Burlington Resources Inc.(BR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Christopher Asks Out But Clinton Says No
In a private meeting with President Clinton at the White House last month, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said he wanted to resign, but Mr.
Clinton said he wanted Mr.
Christopher to stay in his post indefinitely, according to senior Administration officials and outsiders familiar with the conversation.
Mr.
Christopher is said to have told Mr.
Clinton that the Administration had achieved a string of foreign policy successes, and that its foreign policy was firmly on course.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Don Barbara, first baseman, and Peter Kuld, Paul Thoutsis, Scott Wade and Aubrey Waggoner, outfielders, to minor-league contracts.
National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Traded Greg Hillman, pitcher, to the Cincinnati Reds for Keith Kessinger, infielder, and assigned him to Iowa of the American Association.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Assigned Greg Hillman, pitcher, to Winston-Salem of the Carolina League.
NEW YORK METS -- Named Lynwood Garrett scout for Florida and southern Georgia and Tom Allison administraive assistant for the scouting department.
International League
ROCHESTER RED WINGS -- Named Joe Altobelli special assistant to the president and Dan Mason general manager.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Placed Stacey King, forward, on the injured list.
Activated Charles Shackleford, center, from the injured list.
Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Announced the resignation of Dick Jauron, secondary coach, to become defensive coordinator for the Jacksonville Jaguars.
JACKSONVILLE JAGUARS -- Signed Scott Sisson, placekicker; Reggie Clark, linebacker; Frank Robinson, cornerback; and Ron Collins, offensive tackle.


Michael Castaldi, 90, Ex-Special Prosecutor, Dies
Michael A. Castaldi, a former New York City special prosecutor and State Supreme Court justice, died on Monday at the Heartland Health Care Center in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
A former resident of Flushing, Queens, he was 90 and lived in Jupiter, Fla.
He had been in declining health for several months, according to the Aycock Funeral Home in Jupiter.


No Headline
"New York wants to get rid of a killer. We want him to be returned to be executed. I think anyone who takes a life in a premeditated fashion should lose his own." -- GOV.
FRANK KEATING of Oklahoma.  [ B8:1. ]


Back From Brink, Back to Rink, With Few Smiles
Gary Bettman said he was thrilled that the 103-day National Hockey League lockout had ended yesterday, but his face said something different.
"Smile!" a photographer shouted at the commissioner.


Southtrust Corp.(SOTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; 'Bottom Line, We Want To Play'
SIX months ago, Jay Wells was trading stitches in his face for his name on the Stanley Cup.
In the third game of the playoff final against the Vancouver Canucks, this lean 35-year-old Ranger defenseman needed four stitches under his left eyebrow where Pavel Bure's stick had sliced him.
"Two outside, two inside," he said that night.


Mercury Finance Co.(MFN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chinese Runner Wants Out of 'Ma Army'
WANG JUNXIA, China's top female long-distance runner, has vowed not to return to training under MA JUNREN, complaining that the controversial coach treated his athletes poorly.
Wang, who set world records in the 3,000 and 10,000 meters in 1993, was among 16 athletes who walked out of Ma's training camp in mid-December over differences over prize money and excessive discipline.
"If Coach Ma had treated us better, we would have worked ourselves to death," Wang told The Beijing Youth News.
The newspaper paraphrased Wang as saying, "I'm not returning to the Ma Army," as Ma's team is called, "but I won't abandon my training."


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Saturday about activities marking the 30th anniversary of the playwright Lorraine Hansberry's death misidentified the play of hers that will be performed at Ford's Theater in Washington on Feb. 10.
It is "A Raisin in the Sun," not "To Be Young, Gifted and Black."


McMillen Looks Back on 70 Years of the Grand and the Grander
BETTY SHERRILL, the president of McMillen, the interior design company that just celebrated 70 years in business (Mrs. Sherrill has been there since 1951), is one person from whom name-dropping can be, well, charming.
On a tour of pictures of projects and clients that were on display in the offices on East 56th Street in November and December, she came upon a photograph of a young Rose Kennedy and said, "Isn't she cute?" She continued: "There's Jean Nidetch, the diet queen; Her Majesty Queen Noor of Jordan; Babe Paley; Mary Phipps as a Gibson girl; Marjorie Merriweather Post; Diana Ross and her children, and Olive Watson of I.B.M. And over there, Alice Walton, Sam's only daughter -- that's Wal-Mart."
Altogether, 300 such clients were represented.
They were the kind of people with Fifth Avenue triplexes and rambling turn-of-the century summer cottages on the shore (one house done in the 1920's has the name "The Port of Missing Men"), living rooms with fireplaces and French doors that open onto wide terraces, large entrance halls encircled by swirling stairs and, of course, breakfast rooms and dressing rooms, libraries and wine cellars.


CHRONICLE
MILTON MOLLEN, 74, for whom New York City's commission to investigate police corruption was named, is back in the private practice of law after a 42-year hiatus.
He has joined Graubard Mollen Horowitz Pomeranz &amp; Shapiro, the firm of his son, SCOTT MOLLEN.


Giuliani Urges New Agenda For Cities: Self-Reliance
Positioning himself for the nation's new Republican era, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday called for New York to become a model for how other cities can solve their own problems if freed from state and Federal mandates that tell them what services to provide.
In his second annual address to the City Council, Mr.
Giuliani began to lay out the bare bones of what he called a "new urban agenda" of self-reliance that he is expected to describe further at Yale University next week.
Aides said the Yale address would be the first of many national appearances by the Mayor devoted to urban affairs.


Clarcor Inc.(CLC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday, about two technologies competing to become the industry standard for digital videodisks, referred incorrectly in some editions to the operas of Wagner's "Ring" cycle, cited as an example of storage capacity.
They are a group of four operas, not a trilogy.


Premier Bancorp Inc.(PRBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Maurice Saatchi Is Forming A New Independent Shop
Eight days after Maurice Saatchi's ouster as chairman of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi led him to quit the world's fifth-largest agency company in anger, the colorful British advertising executive is forming his own breakaway shop.
Mr.
Saatchi, 48, whose roller-coaster career has made him one of the most significant industry figures of the last quarter century, said yesterday that he would start an agency with three top executives who resigned in solidarity from the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company on Monday.


Highsmith Starting New Career in Boxing
The former National Football League running back ALONZO HIGHSMITH, whose three-year career ended with a 1992 knee injury, is back in pro sports -- as a heavyweight boxer.
Highsmith, the No. 3 pick in the 1987 N.F.L. draft, has been training in Houston for a year and is scheduled to make his ring debut on a card in that city Feb. 23.


Violent Mental Patients Must Have Treatment; No Clinical Breach
To the Editor:
Re Bob Herbert's "Double-Trouble Killers" (column, Jan. 7): I am a social worker in an inpatient acute-care clinic for chronically mentally ill, chemically addicted people.
I invite you to spend a day with me and my dedicated colleagues -- other social workers, psychiatrists, nurses, occupational and recreational therapists -- and then to fill us in on our "obvious clinical breaches."


Leo Pine; Researcher, 72
Dr.
Leo Pine, a Federal medical researcher who developed a growth medium for the bacterium that causes Legionnaires' disease, died on Dec. 29 at a relative's home in Jupiter, Fla.
He was 72 and lived in Atlanta.
The cause was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease, his wife, Geraldine, said.


U.S., in Shift, Says Russia Breaks Pacts
After weeks of saying Russia's assault against Chechnya was strictly an internal matter, the Clinton Administration accused Moscow today of violating international agreements by failing to notify other countries about its large-scale troop movements into Chechnya.
In its strongest criticism of Moscow's actions in Chechnya, the State Department said that in sending 40,000 troops there, Russia flouted an agreement in which European countries have pledged to notify the others whenever they move more than 9,000 troops or more than 250 tanks.


New Study of Electromagnetism Clouds Hunt for Cancer Link
In a study that further muddies the issue of whether electrical transmission lines affect human health, researchers have found that electric utility workers exposed to high levels of magnetic radiation face a greater risk of dying from brain cancer than workers exposed to lower levels.
But no general association was found between exposure to the radiation and deaths from leukemia.
The scientists noted that both findings differed from those of other recent studies, which have found a significant risk of leukemia in people exposed to magnetic fields but a weaker association between exposure to the fields and brain cancer.
Because of the inconsistencies, the question of whether low-frequency electromagnetic radiation causes cancer "remains unresolved," says the new study, which was released yesterday.
It is being published on Sunday in the The American Journal of Epidemiology.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  CHECHEN SEEKS PEACE  The president of secessionist Chechnya, Dzhokhar M. Dudayev, conceded today that it could not win its war with Russia and urged talks with Russian leaders.
A1


Agency Lifts Restriction on Use of Plane in Cold Weather
The Federal Aviation Administration today lifted a ban on flying in icy conditions that it imposed one month ago on the type of plane that crashed in October near Roselawn, Ind., killing 68 people.
But before airlines can fly in icy conditions with the ATR propeller planes, which are made by the French-Italian consortium Avions de Transport Regional, the airlines must train pilots and flight dispatchers to follow new procedures intended in part to limit the time the aircraft spend in potentially dangerous weather.


Prudential Insurance May Face Specter of Losses
When Robert C. Winters, the former chairman of the Prudential Insurance Company of America, called 1993 "a very tough year," at least he was able to soothe the pain of admitting that Prudential had steered thousands of customers into bad investments with the balm of $879 million in profits.
Arthur F. Ryan, who succeeded Mr.
Winters a few months ago, will have no such comfort.
When he reports Prudential's 1994 results in late February or early March, the past misdeeds at Prudential Securities will remain an open sore.
And the salve of profits is likely to be replaced by a loss of as much as several hundred million dollars.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about cooperation between the Peace Corps and the International Rescue Committee misstated the new relationship.
Some Peace Corps volunteers, not the entire federal agency, will be placed under the direction of the Rescue Committee, a private group.


Pact Reached For Salvaging Hockey Season
On the 103d day of a bitter lockout, the representatives for National Hockey League players and owners said yesterday that they had reached a tentative collective bargaining agreement, that training camps would probably open by tomorrow and that a truncated 48-game season would probably start late next week.
The deal averted the possibility that hockey would become the first major professional sport to lose an entire season because of a labor dispute and left strike-bound baseball as the only sport crippled by labor strife.
It also gave hockey a chance to revive the momentum it seemed to have in 1994, when the Rangers won the Stanley Cup for New York, when new television deals were signed with ambitious networks, when expansion continued to Sun Belt cities and when a wave of arena-building swept across North America.


TCF Financial Corp.(TCB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


All Eyes on the Cup


Amway Asia Pacific Ltd.  (AAP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sofia Journal; Rogue 'Wrestlers' Have an Armlock on Bulgaria
In the Vienna Cafe at one of this city's most expensive hotels, the clientele is mainly men.
They are sturdily built, carry mobile phones and lend a menacing air to the art nouveau decor.
Positioned close to a disco that is popular with local gangsters, the cafe is just one of the most conspicuous hangouts for what have become known as "wrestlers" in Bulgaria.


Absence of Salary Cap In Settlement Heartens Baseball Union Leaders
Donald Fehr, in Arizona, and Gene Orza, in New York, had the same reaction yesterday to the settlement of the National Hockey League labor dispute, picking out the same refrain they have heard countless times from baseball owners.
Echoing the view that Fehr, the head of the baseball players union, had expressed shortly before, Orza, the union's associate general counsel, said, "The biggest benefit of the hockey settlement is I no longer have to hear Jerry McMorris and Bud Selig give me the ultimate non sequitur of these negotiations: 'We want a salary cap and you'll notice the only sports playing have salary caps.' "


Police Charge a Second Suspect In Six Killings in College Point
Acting on an anonymous tip, the police made a second arrest yesterday in the killings last week of six people in College Point, Queens, but a third suspect remained at large and investigators had yet to determine the motive for the massacre.
The suspect arrested yesterday, Enrique Rodriguez, 28, was found hiding in the basement of an apartment building at 33 Evelyn Place in the University Heights section of the Bronx at 1:45 A.M.
He put up no resistance when officers arrested him, said Lieut.
Arnold Korman, the commanding officer of the 109th Precinct's detective squad in Flushing.


Hanoi to Accept Refugees Now in Germany in Exchange for Aid
Germany said today that it would soon begin forcibly repatriating some of the 40,000 Vietnamese immigrants here illegally, and that Hanoi agreed to accept them by 2000 in exchange for increased trade and economic aid.
About 60,000 other Vietnamese whose status as refugees or immigrants has been recognized would not be affected, officials said.


Journal; Separated at Birth
Was it last week's photo of those huge heads side by side at the White House, each gleaming with the identical Doublemint smile?
Or was it the new Speaker's compassionate opening address to the House in which he felt poor people's pain?
Or was it the television debut of Kathleen Gingrich, colorfully strong-willed Middle American Mom, who is as unapologetic about her cigarette addiction as the late, great Virginia Kelley was about her two-dollar bets?
Whatever clue you find most compelling, the evidence keeps mounting that Bill Clinton and Newt Gingrich were separated at birth -- never mind the three-year age difference.
And now that we've had two weeks of Newt in ascendancy, the similarities between the two men seem less superficial than predictive: the Speaker's behavior increasingly seems to follow the President's as Vermont once did Maine.


Mr. Pataki's Mediocre Choices
No one wins a hard-fought race for governor by promising, publicly at least, that important state jobs will be handed out to key political supporters.
Still, it is not all that surprising, or unusual, that Gov.
George Pataki of New York would sprinkle his new administration with political appointees even though their resumes are fairly thin.
Two of Mr.
Pataki's latest choices, however, stretch political loyalty too far.
Peter Delaney, Mr.
Pataki's nominee for General Services Administrator, a job that manages the state's office space and its $2 billion purchasing operations, has been doing essentially the same job in Westchester County for five years.
But he has a dubious track record of leasing expensive office space -- sometimes unneeded office space -- from G.O.P. contributors to the County Executive, Andrew O'Rourke, a Republican.
That attracted criticism from both Democratic and Republican county legislators, and should have given Mr.
Pataki pause about elevating his old friend.


City Rejects 2 More Bidders for Municipal Concrete Plant
New York City officials have rejected proposals by two companies to take over a city-subsidized concrete plant on the West Side, creating fresh doubts about its future and about how municipal construction projects in Manhattan will get concrete supplies this year.
The latest rejections brought to four the number of bids turned down by the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani since July for a contract to run the plant, which is not now operating.
Under the proposed deal, the successful bidder would become the owner of the plant and would also have the right to be the sole supplier of concrete for municipal construction projects in Manhattan through 1996.


Suffolk Chief Calls for Cut In Lilco's Electricity Rates
Just three months after former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo called for a state takeover of the Long Island Lighting Company, the Suffolk County Executive said today that customers could save just as much money if the company were forced to cut its staff and reduce its dividends.
Saying that Gov.
George E. Pataki, a fellow Republican, had endorsed his recommendations, the County Executive, Robert J. Gaffney, called on state regulators to impose a 10 percent cut in electric rates -- the same amount that Mr.
Cuomo had said could be enacted under his takeover plan.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Associates Corp. of North America, Dallas, is selling $300 million of 8.125 notes due in 1998 through UBS Securities Inc.
The notes are priced at 99.676 to yield 8.25 percent.
The issue is noncallable and rated A1 by Moody's Investors Service and AA- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Federal Realty Investment Trust, Bethesda, Md., is selling $100 million of 8.875 percent notes due in 2000 through Goldman, Sachs.
The notes are priced at 99.815 to yield 8.921 percent.
The issue is noncallable and rated Baa1 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P.


Clinton Is Confident U.S. Trade Deficit With Japan Will Narrow
After two years of confrontational meetings with a succession of Japanese leaders, President Clinton changed his tone today, expressing confidence that his Administration's blitz of recent accords with Tokyo would soon bring down the United States' $60 billion trade deficit with Japan.
In its businesslike quickness and its low-key style, the meeting between Mr.
Clinton and Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama, a 70-year old Socialist who abandoned many of his party's principles in a deal last summer that propelled him from obscurity to the Prime Minister's office, seemed to reflect the Administration's battle fatigue in its dealings with Tokyo.


Huntington Bancshares Inc.(HBAN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TIME INC. FORMS UNIT FOR MARTHA STEWART PROJECTS
A new division of Time Inc.
Ventures has been formed to encompass Martha Stewart Living and the magazine's many television, multimedia and merchandising spinoffs.
Ms.
Stewart, who founded the magazine in July 1991, has been named chairwoman of the division: Martha Stewart Living Enterprises.
She will retain the title of editor in chief of the magazine.
The magazine has grown rapidly and now has a circulation of 880,000.
A syndicated television show is in its second season and the first spinoff magazine, Martha Stewart Living Weddings, went on newsstands last month.


Making One Voice Of Many


New Galactic Evidence of Black Holes
A gigantic concentration of mass, equivalent to 40 million Suns, has been detected at the heart of a distant galaxy.
It is a region of incredible turbulence, surrounded by a maelstrom of gas and dust, generating powerful X-rays and twisted jets of gas emerging at speeds of 400 miles a second.
It is almost certainly a black hole.
If there was any lingering doubt, astronomers said today that this dense mass in the center of the spiral galaxy NGC 4258 was "compelling evidence" for the reality of black holes in many galactic cores.
Predicted by Einstein's general theory of relativity, black holes are masses of collapsed stellar material so dense that nothing, not even light, can escape their gravitational fields, which is why they have been so maddeningly elusive.


Captive Thai Women Suffered Physical Harm
To the Editor:
A Jan. 5 news article reports that a dozen Thai women were brought to the United States with the understanding that they would receive lucrative jobs in good restaurants in New York.
These women were held as prisoners and forced to work as prostitutes in a Chinatown brothel.


S.E.C. Wins Big Round Against Stratton Oakmont Firm
The Securities and Exchange Commission won an important round yesterday in its continuing court battle against Stratton Oakmont, a Long Island brokerage firm that the commission had accused of operating as a penny-stock boiler room.
After a court hearing on Monday, Judge Joyce Hens Green of Federal District Court in Washington issued a preliminary injunction last night that required the brokerage firm to comply, at least for now, with every detail of an out-of-court settlement it reached with the S.E.C. last year -- including recommendations made by a consultant who reviewed the firm's operations at the S.E.C.'s direction.


MDS Health reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Bally Gaming Sale Plan Rejected by Regulators
A Louisiana gambling commission has rejected a bid by Bally Gaming Inc. to sell slot machines to a planned casino in the state, after finding that the company's management and directors had allowed it to be infiltrated by "elements of organized crime".
In a decision by its president this week, the Louisiana Economic Development and Gaming Corporation said Bally Gaming apparently knew that two Louisiana companies with which it had a business relationship had ties to organized crime.


The House That's So, So . . . Mary
EVAN and NAOMI MAURER had no idea they had bought a house haunted by a celebrity ghost when they moved from Michigan to Minnesota.
Never mind that the spirit of Mary Richards was the friendliest specter since Casper; the spooking began immediately.
"This house, Mary's house, turned out to be Minnesota's version of Graceland," Mr.
Maurer said recently.
"Who knew?"
Among those who might have known were the many millions who had seen one of the infinitely rerun episodes of "The Mary Tyler Moore Show," the epochal situation comedy that ran on Saturday nights on CBS from 1970 to 1977.
But the Maurers were experts in high art, not pop culture.
They were unfamiliar with Ms.
Moore's portrayal of Mary Richards, a 30-ish single woman who worked in the newsroom at fictional WJM-TV in Minneapolis and lived in an apartment in a quirkily majestic turreted white Victorian house.


For American Corporations, a Tie That Binds Too Tightly
These days, Mexico's troubles are increasingly becoming the United States'.
The risks presented by the rapidly growing Mexican operations of American corporations seemed clear today as more companies announced setbacks.
The Federal-Mogul Corporation, a maker of auto parts, said its 1994 and 1995 earnings would fall short of analysts' estimates partly because of the peso's decline and the slumping Mexican economy.
The company's stock fell $5.375 yesterday, to $17.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.44
2.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.69
2.93
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.17
6.31
3.10
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.77
7.83
5.56
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.83
7.86
6.18
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.69
8.70
7.15
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.84
6.87
5.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


In Performance; DANCE
How Mother and Father Would Dance Together  Pat Catterson Bessie Schonberg Theater
Pat Catterson's parents were professional ballroom dancers in the 1940's and 50's.
For Ms.
Catterson, they must have been magical figures.
She lovingly evoked the allure of their dancing in "The Ballroom," a new work she presented on Sunday afternoon as part of "Choreography by Pat Catterson."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Mexico's Financial Crisis  The Clinton Administration stepped up efforts to help Mexico, saying it was ready to increase a $9 billion line of credit.
It is also looking for ways to provide subsidized loans to Mexico.  [ Page D1. ] The peso and the Mexican stock market gained after two days of steep losses, helped by the indication of U.S. support.  [ D6. ]


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Agassi Loses in Exhibition's First Round  Patrick Rafter was a 6-3, 6-2 winner over Andre Agassi yesterday in the first round of the Adelaide International, an exhibition and warm-up to the Australian Open.
"It was very tough for me to see and I struggled a lot in that twilight," said Agassi, who will make his Australian Open debut next week.
Guy Forget scored another upset, defeating Todd Martin, 6-4, 3-6, 7-6 (7-4). (AP) Sampras Struggles but Wins: Pete Sampras, the world's top-ranked player, defeated Wally Masur, 6-1, 4-6, 6-1, in the first round of the Colonial Classic, an eight-man exhibition in Melbourne, Australia.
Stefan Edberg, who won last week's event in Doha, Qatar, beat Michael Stich, 6-2, 6-4.
Boris Becker and Michael Chang beat Australian opponents to advance to the other semifinal.
Becker beat Jason Stoltenberg, 6-4, 6-2, and Chang defeated Pat Cash, 6-2, 6-4. (AP)


Bridge
Many generations of New York players will mourn the loss of Victor Mitchell, who died in Manhattan last Thursday at age 71.
He was a Runyonesque figure with a generous heart who liked to attend the races at Aqueduct.
The older generation remembers him as a two-time winner of the Spingold Knockout Teams and many other major titles.
His regular partner in the 50's and 60's was Sam Stayman, and in 1964 they came close to a world team title.
Their American team reached the final of the World Team Olympiad, played in Manhattan, but then succumbed to the great Blue Team of Italy.


Excerpts From Address By Giuliani to Council
The following are excerpts from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's address to the City Council yesterday.
In the past year, I know we've made more progress on crime than we ever expected to make.
But now we need to insure that those gains are made permanent, that they're not just a one-year phenomenon.


Suntrust Banks Inc.(STI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Barnett Banks Inc.(BBI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
U.S. Moves to Increase Aid To Ease Crisis in Mexico
The Clinton Administration pledged to increase its aid package for Mexico, including the possibility of new, subsidized loans.
Page D1.
The show of support helped stabilize markets in Mexico and elsewhere in Latin America.
Page D6.
Black Joblessness Falls
The unemployment rate for black adults dropped faster in 1994 than it did for whites, though long-term prospects are uncertain.
Page A12.
Call for 'New Urban Agenda'
Mayor Giuliani called for New York to become a model for how cities can solve problems if freed from state and Federal mandates.
Page B1.
Flight Restrictions Eased
Federal officials said a type of commuter plane may resume flying in icy weather, with new pilot training and flight procedures.
Page A14.


Republicans' Philosophical Discord Stalls Plan for Changes
Negotiations over the future of the nation's welfare programs have been slowed by the emergence of deep philosophical disagreements between Republican governors and Republican members of Congress.
In general, participants in the negotiations said, governors want the fewest possible restrictions on their use of Federal money to help poor people with the costs of food, shelter, clothing and child care.
By contrast, conservative Republican members of Congress say they want to regulate use of the Federal money to change the behavior of welfare recipients, to reduce out-of-wedlock births and to penalize welfare recipients who refuse to work.


House Republicans Hit a Snag Over the Extent of Term Limits
The new members of the week-old 104th Congress, who rode into town on a wave of anti-Congress sentiment, have found themselves at odds with longer-sitting members over how long they should all stay.
Speaker Newt Gingrich of Georgia has aligned himself with the old-guard, among those favoring limiting Congressional terms, supporting a bill that allows House members to stay in office for 12 years -- even though a Republican poll shows that most voters overwhelmingly favor 6-year limits.


Coaches Reward Nebraska's Osborne
TOM OSBORNE added another honor to Nebraska's national-championship season when he was named 1994 National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I-A coach of the year yesterday at the American Football Coaches Association convention in Dallas.
The coaching body's award was the first in Osborne's 22 seasons at Nebraska, which beat Miami, 24-17, in the Orange Bowl to complete a 13-0 season.


Barney Frank's Delivery
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 6 profile of Representative Barney Frank describes him as a "sharp-tongued and quick-witted debater." This recalls another attribute of Mr.
Frank: his staccato, rapid-fire delivery, showing that his mind is even quicker than his tongue.


Croatia Is Set to End Mandate Of U.N. Force on Its Territory
President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia, exasperated by the continued Serbian occuption of large swaths of his country, has decided to end the mandate of United Nations forces in Croatia on March 31, Western diplomats said today.
The decision, to be formally announced in a speech on Thursday by Mr.
Tudjman, opens up the possibility of a renewed war between Serbs and Croats that could dwarf the Bosnian conflict in scale and violence.


Jack G. Thayer; Radio Executive, 72
Jack G. Thayer, chief operating officer and executive vice president of Gear Broadcasting International and former president of NBC radio, died on Jan. 1 at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Providence, R.I.
He was 72 and lived in Providence and Manhattan.
He died after a brief illness, said Ed Robalisky, president of Gear Broadcasting, a subsidiary of Gear Telecommunications, a wireless cable operator in New England.


CHRONICLE
What would a day be without word of the British royal family?
DIANA, THE PRINCESS OF WALES, is expected to be in New York for the 14th annual awards ceremony of the Council of Fashion Designers of America on Jan. 30 at the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center.
"It is our understanding that she will be attending the gala as the guest of Veronica and Randolph Hearst, and it is a private visit," FERN MALLIS, executive director of the fashion council, said yesterday.


M. Allen Pond, 82, Public Health Expert
M.
Allen Pond, who was an Assistant Surgeon General of the United States in the 1960's and later the dean of the School of Public Health at the University of Pittsburgh, died last Wednesday at his home in Cranberry Township, Pa.
He was 82.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Madeleine.


A Death, Yet Another, in Grozny
Marya Semyonovna was found dead this morning in Grozny.
She was buried by her neighbors in a shallow ditch they dug in the courtyard of their bombed apartment building at 103 Lenin Prospekt.
They could not remember her last name, Natalya Y. Sheluptsova said, but they thought she was 60 or so.
A retiree living alone, Marya Semyonovna had fallen ill and her neighbors, Chechen and Russian, tried to tend her between Russian bombardments with no water, light or heat, and little food.


Embattled Borland Chief Steps Down
A self-described "barbarian" of the software industry has fallen on his sword, a victim of both his own missteps and the increasingly brutal market for personal computer business software.
Borland International Inc. said today that Philippe Kahn would step down as president and chief executive of the company he founded in 1983 and built into the third-largest publisher of desktop software before it began foundering several years ago.
While many of Borland's problems are unique to the company, its rapid unraveling indicates how difficult it can be for any software company to compete directly these days with the industry leader, the Microsoft Corporation.


Ancient Necessity Gets a New Look
THEY'RE made of brass or chrome, with a polished or satin finish.
They come in two sleek shapes: an elongated diamond (right) and a stylized leaf (below).
They're modern andirons, designed by Stephen Doyle and Miguel Oks, two partners in Drenttel Doyle Projects, a New York design firm.
"The andirons seem to float in front of the logs they support," Mr.
Doyle said.
"They are designed to embody the qualities of light and fire, faceted to reflect light." They are $2,250 a pair from John Boone, a trade showroom at 1059 Third Avenue, near 63d Street, (212) 758-0012.


CD-ROM Deal on Language
Random House Inc. and Syracuse Language systems are teaming up to jointly publish a series of language instruction programs on CD-ROM's under the Living Language Multimedia imprint, which can trace its origins to language instruction on records nearly a half-century ago.
In addition, Random House announced this week that it was investing in Syracuse Language Systems.
The company, based in Syracuse, was established in 1989 by the members of a research group of educators, linguists and computer experts who were studying the use of multimedia computers in language learning.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about redevelopment plans for the Arverne area of the Rockaways in Queens misstated the given name of the managing partner of Washington Square Partners, a development company.
He is Paul Travis, not Peter.


Storage Space Becomes a Floating Landscape
SARA KLAR is a painter and interior designer.
When Cary and Donna Park wanted storage for their bedroom in their Manhattan apartment, Ms.
Klar gave them an inventive landscape of silvery hanging cabinets more than 14 1/2 feet long.


Nets Want More Than Points From Their Stars
Willis Reed stood at one end of Byrne Meadowlands Arena today, expounding on the nuances of acting like a co-captain.
Derrick Coleman sat on his locker-room stool on the other end of the arena, explaining that he has to "take care of Derrick," not the Nets.
Butch Beard was in the middle of all this, moments after playing taskmaster on the practice floor.


Grants Help Explain Urban Environment
Martha Cooper, a photographer, is studying vernacular architecture, including the small, free-standing houses, or casitas, that are scattered on vacant lots in places like East Harlem.
Rebecca Read Shanor is writing a book, "Building New York City," about 48 of the major public works, including bridges and zoos, built in the city from the early 1800's.


Tigers' New Executive: All in the Family
JOHN McHALE Jr. returned to his Detroit roots yesterday when he was named the 14th president and chief executive officer of the Tigers, the team his father, JOHN McHALE, once served as a player and general manager and his second cousin, WALTER BRIGGS Jr., once headed.
The Tigers' owner, MIKE ILITCH, chose the 45-year-old McHale after a two-and-a-half-year search for someone to oversee the Tigers' entire operation.
But McHale's chief project will be leading the drive to get a new stadium approved, funded and built.


Economic Scene; Mexico's lesson: don't depend on the kindness of foreign investors.
TO judge by the press reviews, Mexico's economic reformers did everything right.
Why then did the peso collapse?
For those inclined to gloom, the lesson is that foreign capital is fickle; countries that depend on resources from abroad to promote development are riding the tail of the tiger.
If this view is correct, the rest of Latin America, not to mention the former socialist economies, should be on notice: the only safe route to prosperity is the one taken by East Asia, where growth has been financed almost entirely from domestic savings.


Manitowoc Co.(MTW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Intel Settles A Legal Duel With Rival
The Intel Corporation and Advanced Micro Devices Inc. ended their bitter, seven-year legal fight today, settling all court disputes over whether Advanced Micro Devices had the right to make copies of Intel's industry-dominating microprocessor chip.
The agreement between the two companies could reshape the terrain in the microprocessor market now dominated by Intel, whose chips are the standard for nearly 90 percent of the personal computer market.
By lifting a potential legal cloud from companies like Advanced Micro, chip makers are more likely to invest more quickly in innovations, increasing competition.


Miami Is Now 1-29 On the Road
While Miami guard Steven Edwards cried tears of joy, St.
John's players just cried.
Embarrassment and disbelief were the prevailing emotions after the Miami Hurricanes did what few expected by stunning St.
John's, 82-79, last night at Alumni Hall.
It was the first Big East road triumph ever for Miami, which began playing in the league during the 1991-92 season and had lost 29 straight away from home.
And it was its first Big East regular-season victory since beating Villanova by 77-76 in the second to last game of the 1992-93 regular season.


White House Moves to Increase Aid to Mexico
The Clinton Administration moved today to increase its aid package for Mexico, warning members of Congress that more money may be needed for new, subsidized loans.
Declaring Mexico's prosperity and stability to be an important American interest, President Clinton also said today that the United States was ready to increase its existing $9 billion line of credit for Mexico and give it longer to repay the money.


House Committee Advances Balanced-Budget Measure
The House nudged a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution a step closer to enactment today, and the Senate passed its first bill, a measure subjecting Congress to the same labor laws that govern private employment.
Both acts were victories for Republicans, who campaigned on those issues in the fall.
And neither came easy, suggesting that the Congress's new Democratic minority has taken a cue from the Republicans, who gummed up the process when they were in the minority last year.


City Ballet's Rustic Romp
In the search for genius, mere excellence is never enough.
It is easy to say that David Allan's "Pastoral Dances," which were performed by the New York City Ballet on Tuesday night, were not the equivalent of a masterpiece by George Balanchine.
But it is equally defeating to overlook excellence on its own terms, which is what "Pastoral Dances" embody so effortlessly
Mr.
Allan's choreography for the company's 1994 Diamond Project is classical but not academic; he combines steps with a naturalness that suggests an inevitable continuum of movement rather than sophisticated artifice.
There is even a deliberately bucolic tinge to "Pastoral Dances" that derives from the nature imagery of his music, selected from three 20th-century Swedish composers (Erik-Lars Larsson, Kurt Atterberg and Hugo Alfven).


Violent Mental Patients Must Have Treatment
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert notes in "Double-Trouble Killers" (column, Jan. 7) that homeless, mentally ill, chemical-abusing people have obtained notoriety in New York City by a series of tragic incidents, the latest having been the death of a woman pushed in front of a subway by Reuben Harris, an escapee from a state psychiatric hospital.


Treasury Issues Are Up On New Price Report
Prices of Treasury securities rose yesterday for the second consecutive session after another report showing moderate inflation.
The Commerce Department reported that the Consumer Price Index rose two-tenths of 1 percent in December.
The so-called core rate, which excludes the volatile categories of food and energy prices, rose one-tenth of 1 percent.


UConn Rallies From 25 Down to Top Pitt
Connecticut 85, Pittsburgh 76
Ray Allen scored all but 8 of his 27 points in a frantic second-half rally as second-ranked Connecticut turned a 25-point first-half deficit into an 85-76 road victory over Pittsburgh last night.
The Huskies (11-0, 4-0 Big East), the only unbeaten Division I team, fell victim to Pitt's turnover-producing full-court pressure and 3-point shooting and trailed by 14-2 with barely 5 minutes gone, and by 40-15 with 4 minutes 42 seconds left in the first half.
But Connecticut turned up the defensive pressure after that, reeling off a 10-0 run to cut the lead to 15 and a 9-0 run early in the second half that made it 55-50.


Another Year Of Little Rise In Inflation
Despite fears of inflation that have dominated economic policy in the last year, consumer prices for 1994 rose only 2.7 percent, the fourth consecutive year in which inflation failed to advance any more than 3 percent or so, the Government said today.
Consumer prices in December crept up just two-tenths of 1 percent, held down by a rare decline in the cost of housing.


Primadonna Resorts
Shares of Primadonna Resorts, an operator of casino-hotels, fell yesterday.
After the market closed on Tuesday, the company said that fourth-quarter earnings were likely to be below estimates.


Friends, Again, At Least For Show
Robert Plant and Jimmy Page thought they could pull a fast one.
The two estranged members of Led Zeppelin decided to reunite last year, perform new versions of old Zeppelin songs for an MTV special and embark on a world tour without inviting John Paul Jones, the bassist and keyboardist, to join them.
In fact, they didn't even tell him about it; in an interview last year, Mr.
Jones said he was upset when he found out about the reunion through a newspaper article.
Little did Mr.
Plant and Mr.
Page suspect that at the 10th annual Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremony tonight at the Waldorf-Astoria, they would not only have to account for their actions to Mr.
Jones, but they would probably also perform with him for the first time in seven years. (The group disbanded in 1980 after the death of its drummer, John Bonham, but Mr. Page, Mr. Plant and Mr. Jones performed together several times since.)


End Is Sought To Blood Test That Barred Many Donors
A Federal panel recommended today that blood banks stop performing a screening test introduced in 1987 that has permanently excluded about one million people as blood donors in this country, even though many are healthy.
The exclusions contribute to the nation's severe blood shortage.
The recommendation sets the stage for many of these potential donors to be reinstated if they are found to be healthy, said the panel's chairwoman, Dr.
Jane F. Desforges, an expert in blood disorders at the New England Medical Center in Boston.


MOGUL HOMES
In 1895, when locomotives drove the American economy, a railroad scion named George Washington Vanderbilt built the ultimate bachelor pad: a 175,000-square-foot chateau with 225 rooms.
It remains the largest home in the United States.
A century later, microchips rule, and Bill Gates, the founder of Microsoft, and his wife are settling for just 34,000 square feet, most of it underground.
The number of rooms?
Who knows?
Their architects aren't talking.
Given inflation (and considering the wall-to-wall high-tech gadgetry that is being installed), the Gates house will probably be up to the mogul standard set by Biltmore -- costing around $30 million.
So if you ever strike it rich, here's a primer to kingpin style.
MITCHELL OWENS


A Warmer Tone From the Mayor
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani used his State of the City address yesterday in a way that does him credit and augurs well for the second year of his term.
He publicly declared a truce in the budget warfare that has poisoned his relations with the City Council and contributed to New York City's fiscal anxieties.
In a speech that predictably and justifiably focused on the successes of a largely upbeat first year, Mr.
Giuliani also emphasized the importance of cooperation between himself and the City Council -- a departure from his confrontational posture during the recent struggle over modifications in the city budget.
He confirmed that he was approaching the next modification in a wholly different spirit: instead of presenting his own budget amendments as a fait accompli, he is joining with Speaker Peter Vallone and Council members in advance to narrow differences.


Nomination Earns Pataki Hot Water In 2 States
GOV.
GEORGE E. PATAKI may be running into more criticism than he anticipated with his nomination of George J. Marlin, a Conservative Party leader with no government experience, to head the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
Former executive directors of the authority are highly critical of Mr.
Marlin, and Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey, unimpressed with the choice, is twitting her New York counterpart.
She was apparently not consulted in advance and was informed by fax, both breaches of political etiquette.
Ms.
Whitman has not suggested she will veto Mr.
Marlin's nomination.
But when she meets with Mr.
Pataki tomorrow, she will, top advisers said, insist that at least two strong aides -- one a manager and the other an expert in engineering -- be appointed to Mr.
Marlin's staff.
She may well wrench a few other concessions in exchange for her support of Mr.
Marlin; that is standard Port Authority politics.


State Democratic Chairmen Criticize Dodd as Too Liberal
President Clinton's choice of Senator Christopher J. Dodd to head the Democratic National Committee has sparked an open rebellion among some state party leaders who argue that he is too liberal and that he cannot effectively represent the interests of his home state and lead the national party at the same time.
"Some of us have severe reservations with Chris Dodd," Gary Hindes, chairman of the Delaware Democratic Party, said of the Connecticut Senator.
"We need to send a signal that centrists and mainstream people aren't going to sit back any longer."


Israelis and Arabs Back Regional Bank
The Clinton Administration's push for a regional development bank in the Middle East moved ahead today when Israel, Egypt, Jordan and the Palestine Liberation Organization jointly proposed to set it up..
At a meeting here, officials from more than 30 countries hailed the Israeli-Arab plan, saying it should go far toward overcoming opposition to the idea from the European Union and Saudi Arabia.


Mayor to Shift Oversight Role For City Cabs
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and his Police Commissioner, William J. Bratton, have said again and again that the police will go after seemingly minor annoyances that affect the "quality of life" in New York -- like overly aggressive beggars and windshield-smearing squeegee men.
Now the Mayor and Commissioner are about to take on what many New Yorkers consider one of the most important quality-of-life issues in the city: taxis.
As part of a budget move the Mayor initiated last year, the city is drastically cutting the mission and staff of the Taxi and Limousine Commission and giving some functions to other departments.


Essay; Most Sacred Cow
Across the street and down the block, a languid construction gang is renovating the Department of Veterans Affairs.
When finished, entrenched bureaucrats will have a magnificent view of the White House from Vermont Avenue at a cost of $43 million.
Nobody asks questions because any veterans' boondoggle has been "untouchable." The gun lobby, the abortion lobby and the welfare lobby all are opposed by powerful counterforces, but the veterans' lobby has no opposition -- which is why it causes the most wasteful special-interest spending in Washington.


A 1993 Rebellion Simmers in Caucasus
Across the border from Chechnya, another Caucasus separatist movement threatens to reignite in Georgia, where talks between the central Government and the breakaway region of Abkhazia are stalled, a report from Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali says.
Under a United Nations-brokered peace agreement, refugees from fighting in 1993 and early 1994 were to be returned and talks were to begin on a political settlement.


Rangers Demanding That Messier Show Up to Play
With the Rangers' second training camp expected to open as early as this weekend, management has decided to send an ultimatum to Mark Messier, who never showed up for the first training camp: Report for practice this time, or the team will cut off all contract talks.
According to a high-ranking Ranger official, management has decided to take a different approach to the Messier situation than was taken in September, when the two sides carried on negotiations while the team captain was holding out.
The club still plans to honor its promise to redo his deal, the official said, but it will not do so unless Messier honors his current contract by reporting to camp.


Haley Cares Mostly About Sacks
An approach is made, and Charles Haley deflects it the way he pushes aside an offensive lineman.
"No thank you," he says politely.


Kennedy Implores Democrats to Stick to Their Party's Values
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, who turned a losing race into a landslide victory last fall by re-emphasizing his liberal values, said today that his party could rebound, "but only if we stand for something."
"If we become pale carbon copies of the opposition and try to act like Republicans," he said, "we will lose -- and we will deserve to lose."


Why We Don't Get Federal Tax Dollars Back; Leaving Town
To the Editor:
I do not dispute Representative Charles E. Schumer's data about the money to be lost under the Republican "Contract With America" (editorial, Jan. 6).
But New York officials are blaming the wrong culprit.


A Boy and His Dog, Lost but Undefeated
"Far From Home: The Adventures of Yellow Dog" appealingly upholds a rarely breached law of family entertainment: a boy and his trusty dog are not to be separated.
When a friendly canine strays into the life of 14-year-old Angus McCormick (Jesse Bradford), a boy growing up on a remote island of British Columbia, it is mutual love at first sight.
Even after Angus's frisky new pet, whom he names Yellow, rips the laundry while running after a baseball, the devoted retriever is quickly accepted as a member of the McCormick family.


Young Catcher Testing Major League Draft Rules
If Jason Varitek and his agent are correct, the young catcher's name could take a place in baseball history next to those of Andy Messersmith and Dave McNally.
Those two former pitchers presented the case that created free agency for major league players.
Varitek took a step yesterday that could lead to free agency for drafted amateur players.
Varitek, the Seattle Mariners' first-round selection in last June's amateur draft, signed yesterday with the St.
Paul Saints of the Northern League, a league that is not affiliated with major league baseball or the National Association of minor leagues.


CHRONICLE
It's a girl -- and another girl.
KERRY KENNEDY CUOMO gave birth Wednesday evening at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington to fraternal twin daughters.
CARA ETHEL KENNEDYCUOMO weighed 6 pounds 13 ounces, and MARIAH MATILDA KENNEDYCUOMO weighed 5 pounds 14 ounches.
Ms.
Kennedy Cuomo is married to ANDREW CUOMO, an assistant deputy secretary of Housing and Urban Development and a son of former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York and Matilda Cuomo.


Songwriters and Restaurateurs in Major Royalty Discord
Depending on who calls the tune, groups that collect royalties for songwriters are spying on unwary businesses and setting them up for lawsuits, or simply forcing deadbeat business owners to pay composers whose works enhance their profits.
Songs, like other intellectual property, are protected by Federal copyright laws.
Hundreds of thousands of songwriters depend on the collection societies like the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers and Broadcast Music Inc. to round up their royalties from restaurants, supermarkets, medical offices, barber shops and companies that serenade telephone callers while putting them on hold.


Budget Worsening, Mayor Criticizes State Fiscal Board
With New York City's budget situation worsening, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani called the State Financial Control Board "an anachronism" yesterday and said its criticisms of his budget proposals had been partisan and "totally hypocritical."
The Mayor's remarks were in response to a call by the State Comptroller, H. Carl McCall, to convene a special meeting of the Financial Control Board to review the state of the city's budget this fiscal year and next.


Texas Didn't Err In Death Penalty Case
To the Editor:
Re "Murder by Texas" (editorial, Jan. 5): Your news articles and editorial have erroneously focused on who pulled the trigger, Jesse Dewayne Jacobs or his sister, in the shooting death of another woman.
You also chose to focus on erroneous and insupportable comments by the former prosecutor in the case.


Anti-Abortion Clinic Receives a Threat
A threatening note was found taped to the door of an anti-abortion information center here Tuesday night, the Suffolk County police said today, and authorities are investigating whether there is a connection between the note and threatening signs posted over the weekend at four Long Island abortion clinics.
The handwritten note stated: "If any of my friends are hurt you will be shot from 300 yards away leaving this facility. I will never be caught. Do not endeavor to make the nonmilitant militant."


METRO DIGEST
OFFICIAL SAYS WATER TESTS WERE SKEWED
The city official who supervised the testing of New York City's drinking water for the last decade said that senior environmental officials repeatedly skewed results of water-quality tests in recent years by ordering workers to avoid potentially contaminated sites.
A1.
WHITMAN-PATAKI HONEYMOON HITS A BUMP
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey and Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York are sniping at each other over Mr.
Pataki's intention to nominate a political ally to head the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
Mrs.
Whitman's aides say she was perturbed both by the choice of someone inexperienced in management on the scale of the Port Authority, and by the fact that she was not consulted.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY GIULIANI CRITICIZES STATE FISCAL BOARD
With the city's budget situation worsening, Mayor Giuliani called the State Financial Control Board "an anachronism" and said its criticisms of his budget proposals had been partisan and "totally hypocritical." B3.
NOT JUST SAVING MONEY, ADVISER SAYS
The Mayor's senior adviser on a new program to make more able-bodied, childless welfare recipients work for their benefits and to scrutinize new applicants more aggressively said that its main focus was not to save money.
B3.
MOVIE CREW TURNS CITY HALL GIDDY
In a place accustomed to cameras, the spotlight and constant notoriety, the film crews that spent several weekends working at City Hall still produced an unmistakable giddiness in even the most blase of city officials.
B3.
M.T.A. SEEKING TENANTS FOR COLISEUM
Ending an impasse with City Hall about what to do next with the vacant New York Coliseum, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority is seeking proposals from prospective tenants who would use the complex's vast exhibition hall for up to three years and finally generate some income for the authority.
B3.
Herman Mourino was expecting a box of fresh basil.
What he got was freshly minted $100 traveler's checks.
B2.
A 22-year-old admitted that he had known that a dog he was to pick up at Kennedy International Airport was carrying cocaine.
B3.
REGION PATAKI WALKS A TIGHTROPE
On a frenetic first lobbying trip to Washington, Governor Pataki found himself caught between his instinct to show loyalty to the new Republican leaders of Congress and his need to protect his state from the potential impact of their budget-cutting policies.
B6.
SONGWRITERS BATTLE RESTAURATEURS
Depending on who calls the tune, groups that collect royalties for songwriters are spying on unwary businesses and setting them up for lawsuits, or simply forcing deadbeat business owners to pay composers whose works enhance their profits.
So bitter are relations between the two groups that a bill aimed at establishing some ground rules has sailed through the New Jersey Assembly and is before the Senate Commerce Committee.
B5.
A New Jersey father must stand trial for taking nude photos of his 6-year-old daughter.
B6.
Neediest Cases B2 Holiday schedule B3 Chronicle B4


A Volatile Master Who Made Nature's Splendor His Religion
THOMAS COLE (1801-1848) is often referred to as the father of the Hudson River School, but the family resemblance is only skin deep.
One looks to his followers Frederic Edwin Church and John Frederick Kensett for bravura visions of pure idealized beauty.
In Cole himself, one finds an art of messages and admonitions, a nose-to-the-grindstone style and a temperament swinging between elation and despair.
This dynamic runs like a thread through "Thomas Cole: Landscape Into History," the striking retrospective exhibition of the artist's work that opens today at the Brooklyn Museum.
The show, organized by the National Museum of American Art, not only offers an encyclopedic look at Cole's career, but also shows him to be a darker, more difficult artist than he is often thought to be.


When Print Journalists Collide on TV
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal's "Journalists as Performers" (column, Jan. 10), on such subjects as print journalists on television talk shows, flails about more than he accuses his cousins on television of doing.
It is amusing to read how the clash of opinion is somehow unworthy of the august columnists who deign to appear on such an unseemly vehicle as television or even cable television.


Pope Begins an 11-Day Tour in Asia


Dole Takes Another Step Toward Bid For President
All but eliminating any lingering doubt that he would run for President in 1996, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas today announced the creation of a "Presidential exploratory committee" and said he planned to announce his decision in late March or early April.
"I haven't yet officially thrown my hat into the ring," Mr.
Dole, the Senate majority leader, said in a statement, "but you could say this is the first step." The committee, registered with the Federal Election Commission, allows him to begin raising campaign money.


Art in Review
'De Meyer' 'A Singular Elegance'
International Center of Photography Midtown  1133 Avenue of the Americas (at 43d Street)  Through Feb. 12
Baron Adolph de Meyer (1868-1946) first achieved fame as a member of the Pictorialist movement at the turn of the century.
His light-drenched, soft-focus images of drooping hydrangeas and water lilies floating in crystal bowls attracted the attention of Alfred Stieglitz, who showed de Meyer's work at his gallery, 291, and published it in Camera Work.


Suddenly, the Red Storm Is Scrambling
A week ago, nothing but good feelings surrounded the St.
John's basketball program.
An 89-74 victory at Providence on Jan. 4 had improved the Red Storm to 8-1 on the season and 2-0 in the Big East, both road victories.
But the bubbling optimism that solid start created has been shattered, thanks to a 20-point whipping at Connecticut Sunday and an unexpected 82-79 loss to lightly regarded Miami Wednesday night at Alumni Hall.
Suddenly, St.
John's is a team scrambling to stay in the upper division of the conference standing and in desperate need of a victory tomorrow, when the Red Storm meets Seton Hall at Madison Square Garden.


Baker Basks in House, And Warns on Meddling
Trailed by cameras and reporters, the Secretary of State came up to Capitol Hill today to brief Congress on the state of the world.
It was not, however, the current Secretary of State, who was in his office in Foggy Bottom engaged in undefined activities.
It was the former Secretary of State, James A. Baker 3d, who testified for three hours about the direction of American foreign policy over the next two years.


Developments in Congress
HOUSE -- It is beginning to look as if a crucial element of the House Republicans' Contract With America -- one that is intended to make it almost impossible for Congress to raise taxes -- lacks enough Republican support to survive.
Instead, a more moderate rival, conceived and nurtured in part by conservative Democrats, has the best chance of winning House approval, and perhaps the Senate's too, as part of the balanced budget amendment.
When the House Judiciary Committee voted on Tuesday to approve such an amendment, the three-fifths requirement for tax increases was part of it.
But in an interview yesterday, a senior Republican aide who spoke on condition of anonymity said that such a hurdle to future tax increases "ain't gonna fly." SENATE -- The Senate began debate on legislation that would reshape relations between Federal and local governments, making it harder for Washington to impose rules on cities and states without helping pay the costs.
But the opening debate took longer than the Republican majority had planned, as some Senators cautioned against hasty votes on something they do not yet fully understand, and indeed Democrats won some extra time to develop several amendments limiting the measure's scope.
"There is still some confusion, frankly, among a lot of members as to exactly how it will work," said Senator William S. Cohen of Maine, a Republican.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  JACKSONVILLE JAGUARS -- Named John Pease defensive line coach; Jerry Palmieri strength and conditioning coach; and Paul Langford director of player programs.
Signed Leon Brown, running back; Chris Dausin, center; Gonzalo Floyd, linebacker; John Morton, wide receiver; and Greg Schorp, tight end.
NEW YORK JETS -- Named Zeke Bratkowski offensive coordinator and quarterbacks coach; Jim Vechiarella defensive coordinator; Bill Muir offensive line coach; Richard Wood wide receivers and tight ends coach; Peter Giunta secondary coach; and Jim Williams strength and conditioning coach.


Croatia Tells U.N. Troop Accord Ends
Croatia formally told the United Nations today that it was ending the agreement under which more than 12,000 United Nations peacekeeping troops have been stationed on its territory.
The mandate is to end on March 31.
The move was a blow to the United Nations, which uses Zagreb, the Croatian capital, as the headquarters for all its operations in the former Yugoslavia, including peacekeeping efforts in Bosnia.


After a Storm, Thick Fog


On First Washington Trip, Pataki Walks a Tightrope
On a frenetic first lobbying trip to Washington today, Gov.
George E. Pataki found himself caught between his instinct to show loyalty to the new Republican leaders of Congress and his need to protect his state from the potential impact of their budget-cutting policies.
To balance those interests, Mr.
Pataki expressed his support for the central fiscal tenets of Speaker Newt Gingrich's "Contract with America," saying he favored balancing the Federal budget, cutting taxes and replacing Washington's antipoverty programs with block grants to the states.
But he conditioned his support by seeking guarantees that none of those measures would reduce the Federal government's traditional level of support for New York.


Region Briefs; Fog Delays Flights At Three Major Airports
Heavy fog disrupted air traffic at the three major airports in the New York City area yesterday, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said.
Incoming flights were diverted for several hours at La Guardia Airport until 2 P.M., when the fog lifted enough to allow them to resume landing.
Bill Cahill, a Port Authority spokesman, said delays lasted up to three hours at Newark International Airport.
He said some incoming flights at Kennedy International Airport were diverted.


At the Bar; A Supreme Court Justice with a less-than-shining image begins to step out in public.
Swishhhh!
The shots were falling through the hoop with more consistency than usual at the basketball court on the top floor of the Supreme Court a few weeks ago.
But then the shooter happened to be Charles Barkley, blustery forward of the Phoenix Suns.


Revolution in Health Care Industry Means Big Business for Specialist Lawyers
For lawyers who specialize in health care and related issues, business is booming, largely as a result of the wholesale restructuring of the health care industry.
Doctors, hospitals, insurance companies, clinics, laboratories and drug manufacturers are repositioning themselves to make money in a brave new world of joint ventures and managed care that continues to evolve amid the ashes of national health care legislation.


Therapy on Wheels: It's a New Van Service; Two Psychologists Come Up With Idea of Chauffeured Sessions for Patients
Hurtling down life's fast lane, executives and professionals often don't have time to relieve their stress by baring their souls to a psychotherapist.
Enter Dr.
Ursula Strauss and Dr.
Shelley Lennox, two psychologists who have come up with a scheme as original to psychology as takeout food and the Big Mac were to the culinary arts.
They chauffeur their patients to work and analyze them all at the same time.


Eclipse Awards Reflect Lukas's Big Comeback
As they did on the race track all last year, Jimmy Croll and D. Wayne Lukas and their horses dominated the voting for racing honors yesterday when Croll's Holy Bull was named the year's outstanding 3-year-old colt and Lukas scored a rare double with his juvenile champions, Flanders and Timber Country.
And when the ultimate honor, the title Horse of the Year, is announced in Washington on Jan. 27, it will almost certainly be bestowed on Holy Bull, the great gray colt who won 8 of 10 races last year with front-running speed that created a new hero for an old sport besieged by problems.


Justice Dept. Extends Inquiry On Cisneros
The Justice Department has decided to extend its preliminary inquiry into whether Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros's tape-recorded conversations with his former mistress raise questions of conduct serious enough to require an independent prosecutor, law-enforcement officials said today.
Justice Department lawyers in the public integrity section have been reviewing the taped material for three months.
The decision today keeps the investigation open under the Ethics in Government Act of 1978, the law providing for the appointment of independent prosecutors.
The provision used allows the department to continue its inquiry for another 60 days.


Rioult Dance Theater
The Pascal Rioult Dance Theater, which is led by a former principal with the Martha Graham Dance Company, is to perform tonight through Sunday at the Kaye Playhouse, Hunter College, 68th Street between Lexington and Park Avenues.
"Wien," a new piece set to "La Valse," by Ravel, was inspired by the decadence of German society after World War I. The program also includes a premiere set to Arvo Part's Te Deum, and "Harvest," a dance based on the painting of Jean-Francois Millet.
A champion hurdler in his native France, Mr.
Rioult has also danced with Paul Sanasardo and May O'Donnell.
Performances are at 8 tonight and tomorrow and 3 P.M.
Sunday.
Tickets are $15; $13 for students and the elderly; $40 for the opening performance tonight and a reception.
Reservations: (212) 772-4448.


Controversy Over Death Squad Threatens Spanish Government
Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez is under strong pressure to resign or call early elections as public disquiet grows over reports that his Government authorized a secret police unit to hunt down and kill suspected Basque separatist terrorists in the mid-1980's.
In a television appearance on Monday, Mr.
Gonzalez denied any link to the so-called Anti-Terrorist Liberation Group, which is suspected of carrying out 27 killings.
"I did not tolerate it or approve it and even less did I organize it," he said.


Sounding Like Quayle Blasting Cultural Elites
THE REVOLT OF THE ELITES  And the Betrayal of Democracy
By Christopher Lasch
276 pages. W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.
If the title of Christopher Lasch's final book, "The Revolt of the Elites and the Betrayal of Democracy," sounds vaguely familiar, it's probably because the book reverberates with echoes of former Vice President Dan Quayle's heated 1992 attack on the "cultural elite."


Accounts
*
Time Warner Electronic Publishing, New York, to the Gotham Group, New York, as the first agency to handle its account, including the introduction of Modus Operandi, an interactive on-line game, and Time Warner Quick Reads, a line of floppy diskette software.
Billings have not been determined.


Big Nursing Home Company Is Accused of Mistreatment
A new report by a union representing nurses' aides says Beverly Enterprises Inc., the nation's largest operator of nursing homes, neglected and mistreated patients at some of its homes around the country.
The report, released yesterday by the Food and Allied Service Trades Department of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., said its review of nursing homes in Missouri operated by Beverly had found repeated violations in such basic areas of patient care as avoidance of bed sores and treatment of incontinence as well as what the union called unnecessary use of chemical and physical restraints.


Barnabas Ahern, Biblical Scholar, 79
The Rev.
Barnabas Ahern, a prominent Roman Catholic theologian and biblical scholar, died on Monday at the Immaculate Conception Passionist Monastery in Chicago.
He was 79.
The cause was complications from Alzheimer's disease, said the Rev.
Michael Joseph Stengel, head of the Passionist order.


These Guys Look Familiar
The round trip between Long Island and Philadelphia took five years, but several of Rich Kotite's assistants returned with him yesterday.
Kotite, the Jets' new head coach, brought six assistants from the Eagles with him.
He named Zeke Bratkowski as his offensive coordinator and Jim Vechiarella as his defensive coordinators.
Bratkowski will also tutor the quarterbacks, as he did with the Eagles.
And as he did in Philadelphia, Kotite will call the plays.


Met Blocks Sale to Keep Old Master For Itself
The Metropolitan Museum of Art yesterday stepped in to buy Lo Scheggia's "Triumph of Fame," among 183 Old Master paintings being sold by the New-York Historical Society, which is raising money to keep operating.
The painting attracted a bid of $2.2 million from a London dealer yesterday at a sale at Sotheby's.
But the Met, exercising an option that gave right of first refusal to New York institutions, agreed to match the offer, thereby keeping a work that it had exhibited on loan from the society since 1979.


New York City Official Says Tests of Water Were Skewed
The city official who supervised the testing of New York City's drinking water for the last decade says that senior environmental officials repeatedly skewed results of water-quality tests in recent years by ordering workers to avoid taking samples from potentially contaminated sites.
The official, Eva Chen, is the second former city manager to contend this week that the testing was manipulated by senior officials.
Mrs.
Chen, who worked for the city's Department of Environmental Protection for 25 years, said she took an early retirement last month because of disagreements with her supervisor over the tests.


Robert Abajian, 62, A Fashion Designer
Robert H. Abajian, a retired fashion designer for Liz Claiborne, died on Jan. 6 in his home in Manhattan.
He was 62.
The cause was lung cancer, said a friend, Ronald Marshall of Manhattan.


Art in Review
Anna Paparatti
Annina Nosei Gallery  100 Prince Street  SoHo  Through Feb. 8
If Joseph Stella had been a Buddhist he might have produced paintings like those in the first New York show of Anna Paparatti, an Italian artist who has worked in avant-garde theater and has been exhibiting in Europe for more than 20 years.


Kirshenbaum Gets Grand Marnier Job
Marnier-Lapostolle Inc. and Schieffelin &amp; Somerset, which are teaming up to become the new importer and distributor of Grand Marnier liqueur in the United States, said yesterday that they had selected Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York to handle advertising and promotion, with billings estimated at $10 million.
TBWA Advertising in New York had handled the brand under its previous distributor, Carillon Importers Ltd.


Deng's Daughter Opens a Long-Shut Door
A daughter of China's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, said today that her father's health had declined significantly in recent months and that he was unable to stand or walk.
The daughter, Xiao Rong, denied reports that he had entered a hospital, as a Japanese newspaper reported this week, and said he remained at home at the family compound in Beijing.
But her unusually frank remarks in an 80-minute interview in Mandarin Chinese did little to dispel concern that his death is near.


For Children
'Faith Journey'
Actors' Playhouse  100 Seventh Avenue South (between Bleecker and Grove Streets)  Greenwich Village  (212) 222-8666  Recommended ages: 9 and up  Thursdays through Sundays  Special performance on Monday for Martin Luther King Day
Although the sections in history books devoted to the civil rights movement have grown, when children see the story re-enacted onstage they can see the human foibles that often feed political and historical moments.
This musical focuses on the civil rights era's early rumblings, when the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. began preaching about nonviolence and Rosa Parks refused to sit in the back of a bus.


McCormick Account Goes to Ogilvy
McCormick &amp; Company, the maker of spices, seasonings and specialty foods in Sparks, Md., said yesterday that it had named Ogilvy &amp; Mather Atlanta to handle its national broadcast account, with billings estimated at $7 million to $10 million.


C.B.A. Coach to Direct Pan Am Team
MIKE THIBAULT of the Omaha Racers of the Continental Basketball Association was picked yesterday as head coach of the United States men's team at the Pan American Games in Mar del Plata, Argentina, from March 11-26.
Because the games conflict with college tournaments and the end of the N.B.A. season, the United States team will be made up of C.B.A. players. (AP)


Chief Stuns Burger King In Shift to Denny's Parent
James B. Adamson, widely credited with effecting a strong turnaround at the stumbling Burger King chain over the last 18 months, stunned the company yesterday by accepting an offer to become president and chief executive of Flagstar Companies, which owns the troubled Denny's family restaurant chain.
Mr. Adamson, who is 46, succeeds Jerome J. Richardson, 58, who will remain as chairman.


Art in Review
Tim Rollins and K.O.S.
Mary Boone Gallery  417 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 25
Tim Rollins and his collaborators, the Kids of Survival (K.O.S.), have now applied their trademark artistic method to the comedies of Aristophanes.
For those of you who came in late, this method consists of tearing out the pages of a book, pasting them onto canvas in a grid pattern, and then painting on them.
The pages of "The Clouds" are adorned with blobby cloud shapes.
For "The Birds," Mr.
Rollins and K.O.S. use a trilobite form (two big blobs at either side of a small blob) that looks something like a bird but even more like an R. Crumb bow tie.
For "The Frogs," they have invented a creature assembled from transparent globules, which doesn't look anything like a frog but may be intended to represent the sacs in which frogs lay their eggs.


Croatia's Way: Dealing Without U.N. and Serbs
By announcing that he will end the United Nations mission to Croatia, President Franjo Tudjman has underscored the fact that the problems of Yugoslavia's violent dissolution remain unresolved, interconnected and as profound as ever.
With fighting now reduced in Bosnia, Sarajevo far more quiet than Grozny, and a long-closed stretch of the main Zagreb-Belgrade highway in Croatia reopened, a mild optimism had been in the air at the United Nations headquarters here.
But Mr.
Tudjman has now made clear that this sanguine New Year mood amounted to little more than a flight from reality.


LEADERS OF G.O.P. IN CONGRESS BACK CLINTON ON MEXICO
President Clinton won approval from top Congressional leaders today for what is expected to become an enormous package of loan guarantees to rescue the Mexican economy.
The agreement, described by the White House as a significant test of bipartisanship in a foreign financial crisis, is aimed at trying to keep Mexico's growing financial crisis from erupting into a clash with the Republican majority and dissident Democrats.


Action at City Hall! Movie Politicians Take Over
In a place accustomed to cameras, the spotlight and constant notoriety, the film crews that spent several weekends over the last few months working at City Hall still produced an unmistakable giddiness in even the most blase and cynical of city officials.
The source of the excitement was the shooting of "City Hall," a movie that uses the 183-year-old downtown landmark building as its centerpiece.
This week, the film crews were at Gracie Mansion.
And with the crews and movie stars roaming about City Hall, the actual inhabitants of the building have been tickled to rub elbows with the fictional ones.


Elaine Sulka, 61, Theater Founder, Actor and Director
Elaine Sulka, the director of the National Shakespeare Company and of the Cubiculo theater in New York City, died on Dec. 24 at her home in Manhattan.
She was 61.
The cause was a heart attack, said Joanne Joseph, a friend.


F.C.C. Backs Digital Satellite Radio
The Federal Communications Commission allocated a portion of the airwaves today for satellite radio broadcasting, a new class of services that would use satellites to beam programs directly to listeners' radios nationwide and compete with local AM and FM stations.
But the arrival of "digital audio radio service" -- or D.A.R.S. -- is still several years away, in part because some commission officials worry about undermining conventional broadcasters and must still define the rules under which the satellite services are allowed to operate.


Letterman to Be Oscars Show Host
David Letterman will be the host of the Academy Awards telecast this year, the first purely television star to fill that role since Johnny Carson handled the job in the 1970's and 80's.
The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences and ABC, which is to broadcast the awards show on March 27, made the announcement of Mr.
Letterman's selection today.
Ted Harbert, the president of ABC Entertainment, said he hoped this would be the "long-term solution" to the question of who would be host.


For Murderer, a 'Tomb' Before His Death
The Jack Fork and Winding Stair Mountains rise to the south and east on the Ozark Plateau.
But in getting his wish to come here to eastern Oklahoma, Thomas J. Grasso will not be gazing at any of the scenery.
Instead, as an inmate on death row at Oklahoma State Penitentiary, Mr.
Grasso will spend 23 hours of every weekday and weekend days in their entirety in a concrete cell with no sunlight or view of the outside world, in a building where the earth has been bulldozed to the roofline, partly to save on energy costs.


Why We Don't Get Federal Tax Dollars Back
To the Editor:
"The G.O.P. Squeeze on New York" (editorial, Jan. 6) makes a point about the impact Republican efforts to balance the budget will have on New York State and New York City.
It is valid for the country as a whole: reducing Federal income taxes and expenditures will widen the after-tax gap in real income between rich and poor.


A new campaign centers on a top-shelf whisky's elusive star quality.
WHAT exactly is the intangible quality known as "it"?
The actress Clara Bow made a career as the "It" girl.
The rock group Badfinger earned a hit song by teasing, "If you want it, here it is; come and get it." And in the climax of the musical "Gypsy," the character Mama Rose defiantly declared, "You either got it or you ain't -- and boys, I got it!"
Beginning Monday, the Seagram Company will assert in a worldwide campaign that Chivas Regal Scotch whisky has it, too.
The campaign, the first by TBWA International since being assigned Seagram's flagship brand in September, carries as its theme a more elegantly rendered version of Mama Rose's cry, "You either have it or you don't."


2 People Are Killed by Subway Trains


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows: DAVID SHAW, Caren Golden Fine Art, 39 Wooster Street, between Grand and Broome Streets, SoHo. (Through Jan. 21.) This sculpture show includes a soap bubble made of blown glass, a simulated hole in the gallery wall and a realistically painted wax arm making a rude gesture.
The work is a little too close to joke-shop cleverness but is skillfully done.


George McNeil, Whose Paintings Explored the Extreme, Dies at 86
George McNeil, an Abstract Expressionist painter who turned to the use of vibrant colors and explosively painted figures in works that suggest the joyous anarchy of children's art, died on Tuesday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 86.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said Julian Weissman of ACA Galleries, his dealer.


Two People Killed by Metro-North Trains
Two people were killed by Metro-North trains yesterday in separate incidents, one of which caused major delays for thousands of commuters bound for Westchester County and Connecticut.
In the first incident, Kathleen C. Roch, 48, of White Plains, threw herself in front of a train at the White Plains station at 3:57 P.M., said Daniel M. Brucker, a spokesman for the Metro-North Commuter Railroad.
"Witnesses said she simply leaped right in front of the train," he said.


Fraud Counts Dismissed In Gtech Case
A Federal judge in Kentucky dismissed fraud charges against a former sales manager of the nation's largest lottery company yesterday, soon after the judge questioned whether the Gtech Corporation had been defrauded by a company that apparently did no work for it.
J.
David Smith, who resigned a year ago as Gtech's national sales manager, and Luther Rogers Wells Jr., a former Kentucky state finance secretary, were accused of defrauding Gtech of some $70,630 through a scheme involving a supposed paper wholesaler that billed Gtech for work it never performed.


Post-Season Is Aikman's Time of the Year
He will not be remembered for that boyish smile or those California good looks, even though he played his high school football in Henryetta, Okla.
Few will remember his television appearances on "The Tonight Show" or "Coach." Fewer will care that he has a video game called "Troy Aikman N.F.L. Football."
Get real.
Troy Aikman is just 28 years old and on Sunday on the road against the San Francisco 49ers he could be on his way to sealing a permanent spot in history.
What Aikman will be remembered for when his career is done -- and that could be sooner than later -- is what he has done in post-season play.
The playoffs.
The two Super Bowls.
They have been his personal playgrounds.


Corrections
A map yesterday with an article about "Megan's Law," New Jersey's new effort to deal with convicted sex offenders, misidentified one community that has had problems enforcing the law.
It is Springfield Township in Burlington County, not Springfield in Union County.


Market Place; Advanced Micro wins a battle over chip software cloning, but its archrival may have the last laugh.
"THE X86 architecture is dead!" Advanced Micro Devices' chairman, W. J. Sanders, gloated yesterday, in the aftermath of a remarkable agreement by his company and the Intel Corporation to end a bitter seven-year legal battle and go back to designing computer chips.
The settlement announced late Wednesday resulted in a low net cost of $40 million to Advanced Micro and allowed it to continue making copies of Intel's 386 and 486 computer chips.
On the surface it seems a stunning victory for Advanced Micro.
It had lived in Intel's shadow throughout the 1980's and 1990's while making compatible microprocessors, the chips that are the brains of personal computers.


8 Wolves Arrive in Wyoming As Battle Over Them Goes On
A Federal appellate court today lifted its order that had kept eight newly arrived gray wolves in small aluminum traveling crates at Yellowstone National Park.
Justice Department lawyers had asked the court, the United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit, in Denver, to lift the order, saying that if the animals remained in the shipping crates their health would be threatened.


A Disgruntled Pippen Asks for a Trade
SCOTTIE PIPPEN wants out and he says he doesn't care where he ends up.
"No place could be worse than here," the Chicago Bulls' forward said Wednesday night before the Bulls routed the visiting Philadelphia 76ers, 115-77.
Pippen has made no secret lately of his distaste for Bulls management, especially for General Manager JERRY KRAUSE.
Just two weeks ago, he called Krause a liar and said Krause was allowing the team to deteriorate by letting power forward HORACE GRANT leave for Orlando as a free agent.
Then Wednesday night he said, "Trade me or Krause."


People Confessing to Their Taxi Drivers
Pulp fact comes to the small screen tomorrow night, courtesy of HBO.
Joe and Harry Gantz, the producers of "Taxicab Confessions," recruited cabbies to pick up late-night passengers leaving New York City clubs and get them talking about sex, the odder the better, or failing that, about violence. (The passengers were informed when they reached their destinations that their rides had been immortalized by a tiny camera.)
This dose of trash television features the 11 choicest encounters filmed over a four-week period.
A crack-addicted prostitute tells how she got into the game.
A pretty young woman who says she is devoting herself full time to sex comes on to her pretty female driver.
A gum-chewing woman who started life as a man extols the $27,000 sex-change operation that did wonders for her orgasms. (She provides the program's educational component with a graphic account of her operation. She also says she goes strictly for manly men, nothing kinky for her.)


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column of Business Day on Wednesday about the purchase of a controlling interest in the Magma Power Corporation by the California Energy Corporation misstated the number of shares purchased.
Magma shareholders tendered 21.8 million shares, and California Energy accepted 12.4 million shares for payment, not 14.4 million.


A Trio by Forces of Nature
Forces of Nature knows how to celebrate.
When the company performed on Tuesday night in the Altogether Different series at the Joyce Theater, it was especially jubilant in "Two Rivers," a new work choreographed by its director, Abdel R. Salaam.
"Two Rivers" depicted a West African wedding with Contessa Gibson as a charming bride and Kevin Rainey as a stately groom.
The ritual honored more than individuals.
At the start of the piece, groups of performers gathered in the theater's two aisles and danced forward to the accompaniment of West African music played by an onstage ensemble.
When they reached the stage, it was clear that two families -- or, to use the title's own imagery, two rivers of humanity -- had been lovingly united.


9 on Staff Laid Off At Advertising Age
Advertising Age, the weekly ad trade newspaper published by Crain Communications, has laid off nine members of its editorial staff, including senior editors and three bureau chiefs.
In a statement this week, Rance Crain, president of Crain and editor in chief of Advertising Age, attributed the layoffs, and the elimination of a level of middle management, to "the changing nature of the publishing business" and to increases in the costs of paper and postage.


Grgurich Hospitalized as U.N.L.V. Plays
U.N.L.V.
Coach TIM GRGURICH remained in an undisclosed California hospital last night while his team was beating Cal State Northridge, 91-79.
Grgurich was admitted to the hospital over the weekend, and has been undergoing tests to determine the source of health problems believed related to exhaustion. (AP)


John Gleason, 87, Boys Clubs Director And Chief of Police
John Martin Gleason, a longtime police chief of Greenwich, Conn., and later the national director of the Boys Clubs of America, died on Tuesday at his home in Charleston, S.C.
He was 87 and had moved to Charleston in 1988 after 71 years in Greenwich.
He died after a lengthy illness, his family said.


Rocking Into The Hall Of Fame
The Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame held its 10th annual awards ceremony at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel last night, honoring nine new members.
Some 1,200 musicians, record-business executives and friends and relatives celebrated the induction of the Allman Brothers Band, Al Green, Janis Joplin, Led Zeppelin, Martha and the Vandellas, Neil Young and Frank Zappa, all of whom met the hall's eligibility requirement of having released a first recording at least 25 years ago.
Paul Ackerman, a former music editor at Billboard magazine, was inducted in the nonperformer category, and the Orioles in the early-influence category.
Lavish praise was given to the performers in speeches: Natalie Cole introduced Mr.
Green; Melissa Etheridge inducted Joplin, who died in 1970, and Lou Reed spoke about Zappa, who died a little over a year ago.
Fred Schneider and Kate Pierson of the B-52's inducted Martha and the Vandellas, and Willie Nelson presented the Allman Brothers.


D. A. Shaskan, 84, Psychiatrist Pioneer Of Group Therapy
Dr.
Donald A. Shaskan, a San Francisco psychiatrist noted for his work with group therapy, died on Jan. 5 at Alta Bates Hospital in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 84 and lived in Berkeley.
The cause was complications from a kidney disorder, his family said.
Dr.
Shaskan helped bring group therapy to the West Coast.
In 1954 he founded the western regional division of the American Group Therapy Association.
The division has since added several more branches.


Art in Review
Holly Solomon Gallery  172 Mercer Street (at Houston Street)  SoHo  Through Jan. 28
When it comes to infusing the Minimalist vocabulary with feminist twists and turns, including intimations of the body, the multi-media sculptor Suzan Etkin was an early arrival, ahead of Janine Antoni and a host of other women.
But precedence isn't everything.


U.S.-India Pact on Military Cooperation
India and the United States signed a military accord today that both sides described as marking a break with the estrangements of the cold-war era and as a move toward enhanced stability in South Asia, an area long troubled by strains between India, Pakistan and China.
Washington and New Delhi are strengthening ties that were frayed for long periods between India's independence in 1947 and the collapse of the Soviet Union, a close ally of India's, in 1991.
On several fronts, particularly in the expansion of business and economic ties, the United States has now become India's most important partner.


No Headline
"This is very encouraging news. We invested in research and it looks like it has paid off." DR.
ROBERT A. SMITH, referring to a decline in the breast cancer death rate.  [ A17:1. ]


L.I. Officials Are Acquitted In Bribe Trial
Two years ago, Federal prosecutors struck a plea bargain with John M. McNamara, a Long Island car dealer who confessed to swindling General Motors out of $436 million, in exchange for his testimony against Brookhaven Town officials whom he said he had bribed.
He has yet to spend a day in jail.
Today, the prosecutors suffered a stunning setback when a jury decided that Mr.
McNamara, the Government's star witness against those officials, was not believable and acquitted two of them of extortion and conspiracy.


Interactive New York: Andrewsarchus to the Zoo
A lot has been written about the future of interactive television, envisioning the day when students will discuss Diogenes or "Middlemarch" with a teacher who is miles away in a virtual classroom.
But, of course, interactive technology for learning and amusement is here today.
And for those who don't have CD-ROM's in their living rooms yet, it's scattered about New York City, in places you might or might not expect to find it, waiting to be experienced.
Many of the city's interactive technology-based exhibitions are instructive in some way.
For example, interactive multimedia kiosks at the American Museum of Natural History explore the evolution of mammals, while similar devices at the Sony Wonder Technology Lab explain the inner workings of a camcorder and other electronic gear.
A few are intended to be merely fun, with no educational strings attached.
Yet it would be a mistake to think that any of these activities are aimed strictly at children.
Even computer-illiterate adults can have a wonderful time.


Cup Banner Finally Flies In One Week
Nothing is official.
Nobody knows for sure.
The official National Hockey League schedule won't be released until today at the earliest.
But based on tentative information being circulated through various front offices, here's how the schedule might work for the three local teams when they begin their 48-game seasons next week:
*The Rangers are expected to open on Friday, Jan. 20, at home against the Buffalo Sabres.
That's when they'll raise the Stanley Cup banner earned last season.
Tickets for the original home opener, Oct. 3 against Pittsburgh, will be honored that night.
The game and the ceremony will be televised nationally on ESPN and locally on the MSG Network.
The Rangers are expected to play their first four games, and five of their first six, at Madison Square Garden.


A Pataki-Whitman Honeymoon Hits a Bump, on Port Authority
All last fall, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey acted as political pathfinder for George E. Pataki, plugging the elixir of tax cuts to New York voters on the campaign trail and praising the era of Republican good feelings that would reign across the Hudson once Mr.
Pataki was installed in Albany as Governor.
But Mr.
Pataki has been Governor less than two weeks and already the two sides are sniping at each other.
The cause is Mr.
Pataki's intention to nominate one of his political allies, Conservative Party leader George J. Marlin, to head the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, the multibillion-dollar economic development engine -- builder and operator of airports, bridges and tunnels -- that the two states share.


Republican Bans Contacts On Communications Bill
Senator Larry Pressler of South Dakota today ordered Republican staff members on the Senate Commerce Committee not to talk to telecommunications lobbyists while drafting a bill affecting their industry, and not to talk to consumer groups either.
A spokesman for Mr.
Pressler, the committee chairman, said the ban would last about two weeks, or until his proposed legislation to modernize telecommunications and expand the industry's markets is polished and put before the committee.


Deferring Arms Curbs in South Asia
Secretary of Defense William Perry did little to discourage the nuclear arms competition in South Asia during his just-completed visit to India and Pakistan.
That made the visit, the first to the region by an American Secretary of Defense since 1988, a missed opportunity to send a clear message that preventing the spread of nuclear arms and missiles is Washington's paramount concern in the region.
Instead Mr.
Perry revived military ties to Pakistan and India.
That could leave the wrong impression that Washington will improve relations even if the countries continue to ignore U.S. proliferation concerns.


Josef Gingold, 85, Violinist And Influential Teacher, Dies
Josef Gingold, a Russian-born violinist who played under Toscanini and George Szell and later became one of the two or three most influential American violin teachers, died on Wednesday at Bloomington Hospital in Bloomington, Ind.
He was 85.
He was hospitalized 10 days ago after what was apparently a heart attack, said Charles Webb, dean of the Indiana University School of Music, where Mr.
Gingold was a distinguished professor emeritus.


Art in Review
Ann Messner
Bill Maynes Contemporary Art  225 Lafayette Street (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 4
Ann Messner's wax and metal casts of everyday objects have in the past had a compressed, quiet energy, halfway between the sentimentality of bronzed infant shoes and the gravity of tomb sculptures.


Random House Editor Shift
Ann Godoff, a vice president and associate editorial director, has been named editorial director of the Random House Adult Trade Group by its president and publisher, Harold Evans.
Mr.
Evans said yesterday that Ms.
Godoff would work with the editorial staff to coordinate lists among the group's publishers, which include Random House, Times Books, Villard and Modern Library.


Muslim Women's Exclusion Is Target of New Campaign
Charging that there is growing discrimination against women in sports in a number of Muslim countries, European women's groups have launched a campaign demanding that countries barring women from their Olympic delegations be excluded from participating in the Summer Games in Atlanta in 1996.
The groups say sex discrimination is analogous to the racial discrimination that resulted in South Africa's being banned from the Olympic Games between 1964 and 1992.
The Olympic charter states that "any form of discrimination with regard to a country or a person on grounds of race, religion, politics, sex or otherwise is incompatible with belonging to the Olympic Movement."


Giving a Child New Teeth, and Hope
Trapped in unsmiling shyness, Nicholas Wright played alone in quiet corners of his day-care center.
At 4, he was missing something that everyone else his age had.
So, not long after he learned to talk, he stopped interacting with other children and spent his days in silence.
Nicholas was born with a heart condition, and the medication that saved his life also caused extensive damage to his baby teeth.
The upper set grew in decayed, and when he was 3, a dentist extracted all but two of them.
Without his top teeth, he could not talk normally and had to see a speech therapist.
Other children started teasing him, and he became depressed and withdrawn.


Judge Finds Inmate Abuse at Top-Security Prison in California
The Pelican Bay State Prison is one of California's most modern and most secure prisons.
It is also, a Federal judge said yesterday, one of the most abusive.
In a 345-page ruling, Judge Thelton E. Henderson of Federal District Court in San Francisco told of guards who assaulted prisoners in their cells with batons, high-voltage taser guns and rubber bullets, chaining them for hours in "fetal restraints" with their wrists bound to their ankles and regularly locking them up for more than 22 hours a day with virtually nothing to do.


Ultimatum? Messier Planned To Report
Mark Messier did not join nine of his teammates at an informal skate here this morning, a day after the Rangers reportedly sent him an ultimatum: Report for practice or there will be no negotiations for a new contract.
But the Rangers captain, who held out of the team's original training camp before the lockout began on Oct. 11, did phone in to tell reporters he will show up for the second training camp, scheduled to begin Friday.


Lawyer Defends Use of #$:*@*
What do Mary Conn's brassiere, a metal detector and the question of just how much vulgarity is used around the average criminal courthouse have in common?
They all recently wound up in Justice of the Peace David M. Patronella's courtroom here.
The case of People of Texas v.
Mary E. Conn started one day in the spring of 1993 when Ms.
Conn, a defense lawyer who was rushing to an appointment in the Harris County Courthouse, caused the metal detector to start beeping.
More explicitly, her wire-rimmed nursing bra caused the machine to start beeping.
So Ms.
Conn started bleeping.


Region Briefs; Fog Delays Flights At Three Major Airports
Heavy fog disrupted air traffic at the three major airports in the New York City area yesterday, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said.
Incoming flights were diverted for several hours at La Guardia Airport until 2 P.M., when the fog lifted enough to allow them to resume landing.
Bill Cahill, a Port Authority spokesman, said delays lasted up to three hours at Newark International Airport.
He said some incoming flights at Kennedy International Airport were diverted.


G. P. Franklin, 79, A Former President Of the Saks Chain
Gordon P. Franklin, a former president of Saks Fifth Avenue, died on Tuesday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 79 and lived in East Hampton, L.I.
The cause was complications from cancer of the esophagus and stomach, his family said.


Art in Review
Dan Walsh
Paula Cooper Gallery  155 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through Jan. 28
Dan Walsh uses a Minimalist vocabulary of long wavering lines, painted in black or yellow on a white field and arranged in rows.
From time to time, the lines intersect to form right angles or squares.
But there is a defiant arbitrariness to Mr.
Walsh's compositions.
His stripes have a habit of stopping short unexpectedly, leaving large areas of the canvas bare.
His pictures are distinctly horizontal, even squat, in their proportions, and they are hung surprisingly low on the wall.
You literally look down on them.
The overall effect is simultaneously cheerful and austere, qualities one might have thought incompatible.


Maisonneuve and Venturini Tops in College
Indiana midfielder BRIAN MAISONNEUVE and North Carolina forward TISHA VENTURINI were picked yesterday as winners of the Hermann Trophy, awarded to the top college soccer players in the United States.
Maisonneuve, the Big Ten player of the year, scored 13 goals for the Hoosiers, who lost to Virginia in the National Collegiate Athletic Association final.
He scored 43 goals during his career at Indiana.
Venturini scored 21 goals, including eight in the N.C.A.A. tournament, as the Tar Heels won their ninth straight title and 12th in 13 years. (AP)


Aouita, 35, Runs Out of Retirement Today
SAID AOUITA of Morocco, the world's dominant distance runner of the 1980's, is making a comeback at age 35.
The former Olympic and world champion will run in the 3,000 meters at today's Grand Prix indoor meet at Hamilton, Ontario.
It will be Aouita's first race since March 1992.
In an interview today in the French sports daily L'Equipe, Aouita said he decided to return to competition after being dropped as Morocco's national team director in October.
"I love competition and when I see athletes my age who are still around, I ask myself, 'Why not me?' " Aouita said.
Aouita said his first "real test" will be at the Millrose Games in Madison Square Garden on Feb. 3. (AP)


Dr. Victor Goodhill; Founder of Clinics And Surgeon Was 83
Dr.
Victor Goodhill, an ear surgeon who helped found clinics and advocacy groups for the hearing-impaired, died on Dec. 26 at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 83.
The cause was heart disease, said Christine Coleman, executive director of the Hope for Hearing Foundation-U.C.L.A., an advocacy group the doctor founded in 1957.


Region Briefs; Formerly Homeless Man Files Suit Against 26
A man who once was homeless here but now describes himself as "a tenant and taxpayer like everyone else" has filed a suit against more than 26 people, including the State Attorney General's office, the Morris County Prosecutor and his dentist.
The man, Richard R. Kreimer, moved to Colorado after winning both publicity and $230,000 in a suit against Morristown and the Morristown Library, which had expelled him after patrons complained about his behavior and personal hygiene.


Megan's Law Needs Fixing
Only two months after it became effective, "Megan's Law," New Jersey's panicky effort to inform communities about released sex offenders in their midst, is proving an irresistible invitation to vigilantes and self-proclaimed protectors of community safety.
The law provides for notification of schools, community organizations and even whole neighborhoods when a sex offender moves into their area.
Those notified are given the offender's name, address, description, picture, license plate number and place of employment -- everything a concerned parent might need to keep a wary eye out for potential danger.
Unfortunately, the same information is all a vigilante needs to hunt down and harm someone who has already served his sentence and might never commit another crime.


Orange County in Suit Against Merrill Lynch
Seeking to recover some of its bankruptcy losses, Orange County, Calif., sued Merrill Lynch &amp; Company today, contending that the brokerage firm sold risky and unsuitable securities that are barred by California law.
The long-awaited lawsuit, which asks for $2 billion in damages, is the first in what is expected to be a series of claims against the brokers, bond lawyers and financial advisers who did business with Orange County.


G.O.P. TAX PLAN MAY LACK SUPPORT
It is starting to look as if a major subparagraph of the House Republicans' "Contract With America" -- one that is intended to make it almost impossible for Congress to raise taxes -- lacks enough Republican support to survive.
And it now appears that a more moderate proposal has the best chance of winning House approval, and perhaps Senate approval, too, as part of the balanced budget amendment to the Constitution.


College Basketball Report
The Big East's key players, several of them newcomers, have been established by now, and as the conference games, described by one coach as "trench warfare," accelerate, their performances become more important.
Their coaches spoke about those players yesterday during a conference call with the news media.
Danya Abrams


Western Digital
Shares of Western Digital, an Irvine, Calif., maker of computer disk drives, fell sharply yesterday.
On Wednesday, after the market closed, Western said that its gross margins in the second quarter had declined to 20 percent from 21 percent in the first quarter.


Art in Review
Carl Ostendarp
Jay Gorney Modern Art  100 Greene Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 4
Carl Ostendarp continues to fool around with painting, elaborating a line of Pop-formalist jokes that were pretty thin to begin with.
In his latest paintings, carefully outlined blobs, disks, question marks and exclamation points drift and bounce across fields, sometimes with horizons, of flat subdued pastels.


Don't Ax Federal Support for Art
The National Endowment for the Arts, now in its 30th year, has been a brilliant though sometimes controversial success.
At a modest cost to the taxpayers, $167 million this year, it has helped channel private donations to an impressive variety of nonprofit arts institutions across the country.
Institutions report that each dollar granted by the Endowment generates an average of $11 in matching private funds.
As a result, many more Americans have been able to experience original art firsthand, and talented artists have been encouraged to pursue their work.
This is just what the Endowment was created to do.
But now, for a variety of reasons, some conservative Republicans want to use their new Congressional majorities to cut off funds for the Endowment and shut it down.
They should not be allowed to succeed.


U.S. Breast Cancer Deaths Fell Nearly 5 Percent in Three Years
The United States death rate from breast cancer dropped by almost 5 percent from 1989 to 1992, according to Federal statistics released this week.
The decline for white women was 5.5 percent, which Dr.
Samuel Broder, director of the National Cancer Institute, said was the largest decrease since 1950.


Prosecutors Say Nicole Simpson Kept Record of Acts of Violence
Nicole Brown Simpson assembled a meticulous record of abusive acts committed by her former husband, O. J. Simpson, in the weeks and months before she and her friend Ronald L. Goldman were found slashed and stabbed to death, prosecutors said today, describing it as an archive should something happen to her.
"What you're heard so far in this case is nothing more than O. J. Simpson's life," Christopher Darden, a deputy district attorney, told reporters today, referring to Mrs.
Simpson's archive.
"This is his character, his behavior, and it has come back to haunt him."


Philosophy Before the Fall, or, Life's a Banana Peel
Class, meet your teacher, the comely Madeline X. She's a mess.
Her lipstick's smeared, her slip is showing and she wears a dopey tiara that makes her look like someone on a bender pretending to be Miss America.
She stumbles.
She drops things.
She hits herself in the head with a hammer.
Her way of answering questions with questions is less suggestive of wily Socratic reasoning than chronic bewilderment.
She makes statements, in a bruised, wobbly voice, like, "I'm missing," and you sort of have to agree.


Dog Used to Smuggle Drugs To Embark on a New Career
A 22-year-old pizzeria worker admitted yesterday that he had known that a dog he was supposed to pick up at Kennedy International Airport was carrying cocaine into the country.
John Erik Roa of Paterson, N.J., pleaded guilty in a Brooklyn courtroom to conspiring to smuggle drugs into the United States with the help of the sheep dog, since named Coke.


Steelers: N.F.C. Tough, Not A.F.C. Semi-Tough
This is the place where Troy Aikman and Steve Young are not playing on Sunday.
That's somewhere out west, where Iron City Beer is a funky import from the Alleghenies, and where they'll be playing the National Football Conference championship game with glamour quarterbacks.
The Cowboys against the 49ers, the teams that have won four of the last six Super Bowls.


Republicans' Drive to Ease the Burden of Mandates on States and Cities Is Slowed a Bit
The Senate today began debate on legislation that would reshape relations between Federal and local governments by making it harder for Washington to impose rules on cities and states without paying the costs.
But the opening debate took longer than the Republican majority had planned, as some senators cautioned against hasty votes on something they did not yet fully understand.
As a result, Democrats won some extra time to develop several amendments that would limit the measure's scope.


At Home Abroad; Revolution by Law
Imagine that Chief Justice John Marshall and his colleagues, when they began interpreting the American Constitution in 1803, had had on their docket many of the issues that came to the Supreme Court over the next two centuries.
That is the prospect that confronts the Constitutional Court of South Africa.
The new court, created as part of the country's political transformation, begins hearing arguments on Feb. 16.
Already it has on its docket numerous claims by individuals that they are protected by the bill of rights in South Africa's new Constitution.
The issues are of a kind familiar to Americans.


Black Plainclothes Officer Says the Police Beat Her
An accusation by a black plainclothes police officer that other officers mistook her for a suspect in a domestic dispute and then beat her has prompted complaints from black police organizations here.
In an article on Wednesday, The Philadelphia Daily News quoted the 26-year-old plainclotheswoman, Adrienne Cureton, as saying several officers, led by whites, pummeled her with fists and flashlights early on the morning of Jan. 2 even after she had shouted, "I'm a police officer!"


Holiday on Monday
The Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday, which falls on Sunday, will be legally observed on Monday.
NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office, at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, open.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Alternate-side street-cleaning regulations suspended.
SANITATION Regular pickups and recycling but no street cleanings.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETSOpen.
TRANSPORTATION Subways, buses, the Long Island Rail Road and the Metro-North railroad on regular weekday schedules.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and rail service on regular weekday schedule. CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on regular weekday schedule.


Dollar Bruised in Stampede Of Investors to Yen and Mark
The dollar fell sharply against the Japanese yen and the German mark yesterday, accelerating a decline that reflects investor concern about the financial crisis in Mexico and the weakness of currencies in Spain, Italy, Sweden and Canada.
A big concern is that the economies and currencies of emerging-market countries like Mexico will be under pressure this year if investors decide to take their money to countries where the risks of losses are lower.
Analysts say the current weakness of currencies in developed countries like Canada and Spain was also sending investors into more stable and stronger alternatives, in this case the yen and the mark.


Tuned In: TV as a Constant Companion
I'M a television watcher, the kind of person who flips on the set within minutes of walking into the house so there will be chatter in the living room.
If I'm home and hungry, I tend to eat in front of it.
By now I have all the channels, premium cable included.
It's a flaw, perhaps, a weakness, a practice signifying that real life is too tough, that I've yielded to a need for palliation, that I can't take all this stress.
So shoot me.
But I happen to think that "When all else fails, TV" is not a bad motto.


Shoreham Journal; Britons on the Barricades, on Veal Calves' Behalf
Until last week, Rosemarie Burtenshaw had never been to a political meeting, let alone joined a protest rally.
But for four nights now, she has been among several hundred demonstrators along the harbor front here, jostling with the police and spilling into roads to turn back trucks carrying bleating cargoes of week-old calves to the docks.
"My son and daughter begged me not to come," said Mrs.
Burtenshaw, 52, a quiet-spoken part-time legal secretary.
"But I couldn't stand by and watch while our town was used to ship these poor animals to across the Channel. I had to do something."


COMPANY BRIEFS
CISCO SYSTEMS INC., Menlo Park, Calif., said it had completed the acquisition of Lightstream Corp., Billerica, Mass.
Terms were not disclosed, but analysts estimate that Cisco paid $120 million in cash.
PRIME HOSPITALITY CORP., Fairfield, N.J., which owns and manages hotels, said it had acquired the 225-room Sheraton Crossroads Hotel in Mahwah, N.J., from an affiliate of Pinnacle Commercial Properties, for $18 million.


Death Driver Admits Guilt
In a moment of remorse, Abraham Meyers, the car enthusiast charged with killing a Brooklyn mother and her two daughters last May while driving intoxicated through Howard Beach, changed his plea to guilty yesterday, his lawyer and Queens prosecutors said.


Britain to End Daytime Army Patrols in Belfast
The chief security official in Northern Ireland announced today that Britain would withdraw army troops from daytime police patrols in Belfast.
The Chief Constable, Sir Hugh Annesley, said that beginning Monday morning British troops would not accompany police officers of the Royal Ulster Constabulary on daytime patrols in Belfast, where most of the killing in the 25-year sectarian guerrilla warfare has taken place.
Sir Hugh, noting that the cease-fire by the Irish Republican Army was now in its fifth month, said he hoped nighttime patrols would also be eventually eliminated.
Army patrols in Londonderry, Ulster's second largest city, were suspended three months ago.


Morris Unlikely to Face 76ers
Chris Morris is still bothered by a hyperextended left elbow and it is unlikely that he will play for the Nets Friday night when they meet the 76ers in Philadelphia.
"It doesn't look like Chris will be going tomorrow," Coach Butch Beard said today.
"But he could go on Saturday," he said, speaking of Minnesota's visit to Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Shells Rain Down on Grozny As Russians Step Up Attack
Russian forces moved with new determination today to try to break the back of the Chechen secessionist movement, increasing considerably the rocket and artillery fire directed at the tattered, blasted presidential palace here.
For several hours this afternoon, shells were landing every few seconds, with huge explosions and fires visible from a hill near the burning oil refinery.
Streets that had been almost busy during a cease-fire that the Russians had declared and often broke were once more nearly empty of traffic.
Even the Minutka traffic circle, about a mile and a half from the palace, was being shelled and was mostly free of strolling Chechen fighters with their military regalia and bravado.
The Chechen fighters were waiting out the heavy bombardment in basement bunkers as the Russians seemed to be trying to cut off the southern route to the palace along Lenin Prospekt.


As Seau Aims for the Super Bowl, Guilt and Pain Aren't Far Away
His neck burns like a forest fire, and his left arm sleeps on the job.
Junior Seau can tackle you with his pinched nerve, but he cannot maim you.
He needs a month off, ultrasound around the clock and more days at the beach with Dennis Hopper.
He needs to listen to his mother and send his uniform on vacation.
He needs a new Sunday activity, such as stopping off to see his brother in jail.
He needs bad directions to Three Rivers Stadium.


Departing Saatchi Executives Are Sued
The Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company struck back yesterday at Maurice Saatchi, its deposed chairman, and three top executives who left out of loyalty to him.
To stop the four men from opening a rival shop, the British agency company sued them for "conspiracy to injure the business."
In a writ filed in a London court, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi accused Mr.
Saatchi and his compatriots -- David Kershaw, Bill Muirhead and Jeremy Sinclair -- of conspiracy and Mr.
Saatchi of soliciting the resignations of the other three.
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi seeks damages to be determined, as well as an injunction against the three from "joining a competing business" or from "soliciting or working for clients of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi in a competing business."


CHRONICLE
See George run, especially this week.
GEORGE PLIMPTON, the versatile editor of The Paris Review, will fly home to New York from Los Angeles tomorrow just in time for two parties.
He is billed as the host at Nell's on West 14th Street for an art exhibit and a concert to benefit the Tanzania Wildlife Fund.
At the same time, he is expected uptown at a concert at St.
Thomas Church and a dinner at the St.
Regis Hotel for the Kings College Choir, another cause near and dear to his heart.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
President Clinton won approval for a plan to assist Mexico from top Congressional leaders.
The plan is expected to provide an enormous package of loan guarantees, and the agreement is aimed at trying to keep the Mexican financial crisis from erupting into a foreign policy clash with the Republicans.  [ Page A1. ]
A prototype of a new warplane was introduced by Japan, the first major weapon developed with the United States.
While production would be a shot in the arm for American and Japanese companies hurt by cuts in government spending, the costs of the project are raising doubts about whether it should move ahead.  [ D1. ] Companies
Microsoft will tie its planned network to the Internet, in a move that will make the company one of the world's largest commercial providers of access to the global computer network.  [ D1. ] Citicorp reported sharply higher earnings five days early in an effort to show that its fourth quarter had not been hurt by the turmoil in Mexico.
J.
P.
Morgan said earnings fell in the quarter largely because of a $72 million loss from bond trading.  [ D1. ] Burger King's chief is leaving to head the parent of the Denny's chain, Flagstar.
The executive, James B. Adamson, has been credited with righting Burger King in his 18-month tenure.  [ D3. ] A former national sales manager of Gtech was cleared of fraud charges by a Federal judge in Kentucky.  [ D3. ]
Xerox will pay $960 million to increase its stake in Rank Xerox.
The deal is expected to increase the company's access to markets in Europe and Asia.
Shares of Xerox surged on the news.  [ D3. ] Canada's upstart in long-distance phone service may be rescued by plan in which Rogers and AT&amp;T will increase their stake.  [ D4. ] Saatchi &amp; Saatchi sued Maurice Saatchi and three former top executives in a London court, seeking to prevent the four men from starting a rival advertising agency.  [ D14. ] Markets
The dollar tumbled against the yen and the mark.
The dollar is suffering from the turmoil in both emerging market countries like Mexico and developed countries like Canada and Spain.  [ D1. ] Stocks ended mixed, but essentially unchanged.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index slipped 0.03 point, to 461.64.  [ D4. ] Gold prices led a rally in precious metals, recovering from recent eight-month lows.
Natural gas prices continued to slump.  [ D13. ] Treasury prices declined, hurt by weakness in the dollar.  [ D14. ] The Economy
Oil is flowing from once-sputtering wells, thanks to aggressive development efforts by independent producers like Apache and Anadarko.
They have bought thousands of fields from companies like Amoco and Texaco that considered them marginal.  [ D1. ] Orange County sued Merrill Lynch.
The California county contends that the firm sold it risky and unsuitable securities.  [ D2. ] The F.C.C. allocated a part of the airwaves for satellite radio broadcasting.
But new services competing with local AM and FM stations are still several years away.  [ D14. ] Today's Columns
An accord with Intel was scored a victory for Advanced Micro Devices by Wall Street.
But Intel may still have an insurmountable lead over the competition.
The microprocessor feature wars are going to accelerate rapidly, and Intel has the financial muscle to finance new factories and designs.
Market Place.  [ D4. ] A new campaign for Chivas Regal Scotch whisky uses a series of wry contrasts to underscore the elusive quality of being a star, without seeming boastful.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D15. ]


House Historian Made Virtue of Fairness; Nazi Views Explored
To the Editor:
Re your Jan. 10 front-page article on the House historian's dismissal:


What's Gooey and Ghoulish And Has an Ax to Grind?
Ernest Dickerson's garishly stylized horror film, "Tales From the Crypt Presents Demon Knight," is a blown-up live-action cartoon that wants to be bone-chilling and funny at the same time.
In its leering adolescent way, it half succeeds.
Between scenes of splattering gore in which severed heads literally roll across the floor, the movie has a good time spoofing itself and a gallery of mostly sleazy characters who confront a crew of blood-thirsty demons.
Although not unduly frightening, "Tales From the Crypt" captures the moralistic gallows humor of the 1950's comic-book series that gave the movie its name.
A zombie-faced Hollywood horrormeister called the Crypt Keeper (the voice of John Kassir) introduces the Demon Knight tale with a facetious grandiosity that recalls "Alfred Hitchcock Presents." Referring to Gory Cooper and Robert Deadford in his opening spiel, the Crypt Keeper effectively sets the film's chortlingly macabre tone.


Qubilah Shabazz: An 'Ideal Young Lady'
Unlike her mother and sisters, Qubilah Shabazz is not an esteemed professor, nor an aspiring actress.
She is not the oldest child, nor the baby.
Her moment in the spotlight was fleeting and tragic, and occurred on Feb. 21, nearly 30 years ago.
That was the day she and her three sisters accompanied their pregnant mother to the Audubon Ballroom in Harlem.
They sat in the audience, saw their father, Malcolm X, walk onto the stage, and then heard the gunfire as he fell to the floor -- shot to death by an assassin.


INSIDE
Russians Intensify Attack
Russian forces moved with renewed determination to try to break the back of the secessionist movement in the Chechen capital.
Page A10.
Decline in Cancer Deaths
Deaths from breast cancer have decreased 5 percent, national figures show, with the sharpest drop among young white women.
Page A17.
Old Master Maneuver
The Metropolitan Museum is stepping in on the New-York Historical Society's sale of a painting.
Page C3.


House Historian Made Virtue of Fairness; What F.D.R. Said
To the Editor:
Newt Gingrich erred in his speech to the House upon becoming Speaker when he quoted Franklin D. Roosevelt as saying "We have nothing to fear but fear itself" (transcript, Jan. 5).
What Roosevelt said was: "There is nothing to fear but fear itself." A small point perhaps, but Mr.
Gingrich, a professor of history, should get it right.
HAROLD REISS  Buffalo, Jan. 6, 1995


Rutgers Stays Close To UMass, For a Half
Overmatched Rutgers stayed close to the nation's top-ranked team for half the game tonight.
Then the talent differential took over and Massachusetts ran away with the Atlantic 10 contest, 85-68.
It was the ninth straight victory for UMass, its 10th in 11 games this season.
It also was the eighth loss in a row to UMass for Rutgers (4-7, 0-2) since 1991.


Microsoft's Next Move Is On Line
The Microsoft Corporation, in a move certain to accelerate the already dizzying growth of the Internet and on-line information services, disclosed plans yesterday to become one of the world's largest commercial providers of access to the global Internet computer network.
In remarks scheduled to be delivered last night at a software industry conference in Seattle, William H. Gates, chairman and chief executive of the Redmond, Wash., software company, outlined plans to offer full access to the global computer network through the Microsoft Network on-line information service it plans to start up later this year.
Until yesterday, Microsoft had not disclosed the extent to which it would link its network to the Internet.


Critic's Choice/Film; A Survey Of Works By Hartley
The American Museum of the Moving Image may be onto a radical idea.
A director doesn't have to be dead to have a retrospective; he doesn't even have to be old.
He simply has to be as extravagantly talented and accomplished as Hal Hartley, the 35-year-old writer and director who after five years, four features and a handful of shorts is more than qualified for a series of his own.
Beginning tomorrow he'll get one.
"True Fiction Pictures: A Hal Hartley Retrospective" (True Fiction is the name of Mr. Hartley's production company) will run through Jan. 29 at the museum, in Astoria, Queens.
It begins tomorrow at 2 P.M. when Mr.
Hartley will introduce "Simple Men," the mordant story of two brothers who set out to find their long-lost father, accused of tossing a bomb at the Pentagon 25 years before.
As in all Hartley films, the plot is a device for droll dialogue, deadpan characters and delicious grace notes.
Where else would a nun and a policeman wrestle in the middle of a dirt road over a medal of the Blessed Virgin?





A New Warplane's Murky Horizon
While Shinto priests chanted and waved sacred branches, Japan introduced the prototype of its FSX fighter today, the first major weapon jointly developed with the United States.
Once the focus of controversy with Washington over Japan's growing industrial competitiveness, the FSX may still face a troubled future.
With the cold war over and Japan's military procurement budget tighter, questions are being raised about whether the FSX should move from prototype to production.


What's Better Than Fresh Basil?
Expecting a package of fresh basil from California, Herman Mourino was suspicious when he picked up his delivery: the box was unusually heavy, and his package was supposed to weigh only three pounds.
When he opened the box early yesterday, he couldn't believe what he saw.
It was full of freshly minted $100 Citibank traveler's checks.


Restaurants
Enough to make people talk.
People talk about the food at Aja.
One night, I was sitting on one of the sofas that surround the bar, waiting for my guests to arrive.
It was cozy there with the big Art Deco fixture overhead shedding just enough light to allow the woman across from me to read a magazine.
Next to her, a man sat mumbling over a book about saltwater fish, occasionally angling the book to catch some light from the chandelier above the bar.
When his companion arrived, he put the book down, ordered a martini and began discussing his last meal at the restaurant.
By the time he was finished describing five-spice grilled squab and steamed lobster with Penang curry, his friend was insisting on staying for dinner.
To do that they had to leave the warmth of the bar and move to the far reaches of the large open room.
Aja, an oddly decorated space, offers a new definition of the term eclectic.
Part Victorian, part Art Moderne, part modern, the barn of a room is an uncomfortable mush of styles that combine open ducts and chandeliers.
That's fine with me, but I wish the Shaker element were not the chairs (hard and uncomfortable) and the modern element were not the sound level (extremely high).
Most of all, I wish the decor did not try so hard to compete with the food.


G.O.P. Plan Would Cost Billions, Opponents Say
Trying to carry their legislative fight beyond Washington, Democrats warned state governments today that the Republicans' "Contract With America" would cost them hundreds of billions of dollars for Medicaid, welfare, education and highways.
The Democrats had asked the Congressional Budget Office to produce a state-by-state analysis of the likely effects of adopting a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget, one of the chief components of the contract, a package of proposed legislation.


War Over an Overhaul Appears to Be No Contest
Scarcely believing how much ground they have lost in the past six months, advocates for welfare recipients are beginning to regroup for what is widely expected to be an uphill battle against an array of Republican proposals to fundamentally restructure poverty programs.
They face these immense hurdles: A public clearly fed up with the ineffectiveness of existing welfare programs; a Democratic Party on Capitol Hill still reeling from its losses in November, and an Administration eager to identify itself with "welfare reform" that has at times seemed reluctant to challenge major elements of the Republican plans.
"The silence of the White House is startling," the Rev.
Jesse Jackson said in an interview this week.


AT&amp;T and Rogers in Canadian Phone Deal
Rogers Communications Inc. and the AT&amp;T Corporation have taken an option to buy nearly half the shares of the company that broke Canada's long-distance telephone monopoly in 1992 but is losing about $1 million a day.
Rogers, Canada's biggest cellular phone and cable company, and AT&amp;T are minority partners in the company, Unitel Communications Holdings Inc., which has about 6 percent of Canada's long-distance market.
Under a deal announced today, Rogers and AT&amp;T would pick up the 48 percent stake in Unitel owned by Canadian Pacific Ltd., which wants to focus on its core businesses of transportation and energy.


On My Mind; Here We Go Again
Here we go again.
One more time, still yet one more time, the merchandisers of death, from China to Russia to Western Europe, are ready and lobbying hard to build up the blackmail power and military potential of a virulent, marauding dictatorship.
This time it is nothing less they are peddling than nuclear military potential.
The country is Iran, the most virulently anti-Western, anti-democratic nation in the world, terrorism's headquarters.


Break in Rain Lets Evacuees Return Home
People forced from homes and businesses in the floods that have inundated wide areas of the state began returning today to assess the damage, using a break between storm fronts to begin thinking of recovery from the devastating rains.
Gov.
Pete Wilson declared a state of emergency for 10 more counties, bringing the total to 34, as a result of nine days of powerful storms.
President Clinton issued a a Federal declaration of disaster for 24 of those counties on Tuesday, making owners of homes and businesses eligible for low-interest loans and other relief.
Mr.
President Clinton will visit California on Monday night and Tuesday.


Sports of The Times; The Garden Owes Mark For the Cup
MARK MESSIER may be the ultimate victim of the Great 1994-95 We're-Gonna-Stop-'Em-Once-and-For-All Owners' Lockout, but Messier is showing admirable restraint.
Derrick Coleman should take a lesson.
Coleman, the ostensible captain of the horrendous New Jersey Nets, develops car trouble or his alarm clock doesn't work whenever he doesn't feel like practicing.
Derrick wants to know: what's leadership got to do with it?


Art in Review
Marilyn Minter
Max Protetch Gallery  560 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 4
Marilyn Minter's paintings take the icons of the pornographic imagination and lay them out for dissection on a cold, hard operating table.
Lips parted in ecstasy, deliquescing lipsticks, glistening buttocks and anatomical displays not suitable for discussion in a family newspaper occupy rectangular areas placed off-center on large metal panels of the type used by sign painters.
The remaining surface of each panel is covered with a sheer, lacy pattern of Ben Day dots representing women in burlesque-show bikinis or (more ominously) lengths of rope.


Diner's Journal
Twins at Twins
Twins sounds like a pretty silly gimmick.
Until you get there.
When you are greeted at the door by two gorgeous and identical hostesses, then glance at the bar to find two identical men pouring drinks, the idea begins to grow on you.
By the time a pair of waitresses arrives, one wearing a sign saying "I'm not Lisa," the other a sign saying "I'm not Debbie," it is hard not to be charmed.
Twins, owned by one pair of twins and staffed by many others, creates its own giddy world of doubles.
Most times there are twins at some of the tables as well, which makes those of us who came into the world alone feel as if we were somehow cheated.
Where are our doubles?


Squeezing U.S. Oilfields' Last Drop
Small companies have been buying thousands of oil and gas fields around the country that the likes of Amoco and Texaco have written off, using perseverance and high technology to get sputtering wells flowing again.
Their success is so widespread that it is slowing the decline in domestic production.
Independent companies like the Apache Corporation, Burlington Resources and the Anadarko Petroleum Corporation have increased the activity at so many fields that exploration and development in the United States have risen significantly for the first time since 1990.


Daughter of Malcolm X Charged With Trying to Kill Farrakhan
When Malcolm X was assassinated nearly 30 years ago in a Harlem ballroom, his 4 1/2-year-old daughter, Qubilah Bahiyah Shabazz, was there and watched her father die in a hail of gunfire.
Yesterday, Ms.
Shabazz, 34, was arrested in Minneapolis on Federal charges of trying to hire a hit man to kill her father's Muslim disciple turned bitter rival, Louis Farrakhan, minister of the Nation of Islam, and a man her mother believes was involved in Malcolm X's murder.


For Hard-Core Fans, New Channel Offers All Golf, All the Time
Golf, golf, golf, golf, golf, golf, golf.
Are you Penicks-in-training ready for 24 hours of golf, 7 days a week, for $6.95 a month?
That's what the Golf Channel, which tees off Tuesday with an $80 million investment and the blessing of Arnold Palmer, vows.
Life's a fairway!
Everything I ever wanted to know I learned putting with Bing at Pebble Beach!


First Reform Welfare for Corporations
To the Editor:
"Anybody Home?" (editorial, Jan. 8), recommending limits on political action committees and ending corporate welfare, urges overdue change.


Citicorp Tries To Reassure The Market
Hoping to quash rumors that it had been hurt by the turmoil in Mexico, Citicorp announced its fourth-quarter earnings five days ahead of schedule yesterday to show the market that its profits were above analysts' expectations.
John S. Reed, the bank's chairman, said in a statement that the bank had not been significantly hurt by the sharp devaluation of the peso and declines in Mexico's stock and bond markets.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-12  SUPPORT FOR MEXICO LOANS  President Clinton won approval from Congressional leaders for what is expected to become an enormous package of loan guarantees to rescue the Mexican economy.
A1  CHINA'S LEADER IS AILING  A daughter of China's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, said her father's health had declined significantly in recent months, and that he was unable to stand or walk.
A1


Inside Art
Didn't Leave Home
When Eli Broad flew to New York in November to attend Sotheby's sale of contemporary art, he didn't leave home without his American Express card.
In fact, the Los Angeles collector used his little piece of plastic to buy Roy Lichtenstein's "I . . . I'm Sorry," a painting from 1965-66, for which he paid $2.5 million.
While the auction house, which has been accepting the American Express card (but not Mastercard or Visa) since September, does not generally discuss the payment methods of its clients, Mr.
Broad's office confirmed that he had bought the painting with his American Express card.
William Ruprecht, Sotheby's managing director for North and South America, said this was certainly "not a typical transaction and not something Sotheby's sees on a daily basis." (The painting was the most expensive work in the sale.)


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
International Lease Finance Corp., Los Angeles, is selling $150 million of 8.125 percent notes due in 1998 through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The notes are priced at 99.553 to yield 8.296 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A2 by Moody's, A+ by S.&amp; P. and AA by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Nebraska Lands the Quarterback It Lost
Quarterback SCOTT FROST enrolled at Nebraska yesterday after spending one year at Stanford.
"We are pleased to have him join our program," Coach TOM OSBORNE said in a news release.
"He will be eligible to play for Nebraska beginning in the fall of 1996."
National champion Nebraska's two scholarship quarterbacks, TOMMIE FRAZIER and BROOK BERRINGER, will be seniors next season.
Frost will sit out next year and then have two years of eligibility.
The 6-foot-4-inch, 210-pound Frost was the target of a recruiting battle between Osborne and then-Stanford Coach BILL WALSH in 1993.
Frost opted for Walsh's pro-style offense, but Walsh resigned as Stanford coach after this past season. (AP)


Bond Prices Hurt by Fall Of the Dollar
Treasury securities fell yesterday.
Prices were hurt by a sharp drop in the dollar, which makes dollar-denominated investments like bonds less attractive to foreign investors.
Rising prices of precious metals and some commodities, which typically signal a pickup in inflation, also weighed on Government securities.
Gold and other precious metals are considered an investment hedge when inflation accelerates.
The price of the 30-year bond fell 16/32 of a point, to 9522/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction, rose to 7.88 percent, from 7.83 percent on Wednesday and back to Monday's level.


On Stage, and Off
Fugard, After Apartheid
The McCarter Theater in Princeton, N.J., has announced that Brian Friel's play "Wonderful Tennessee," which did not work on Broadway in 1993, will replace the intended end of its season: the world premiere of a new work by the South African playwright Athol Fugard, the author of "Master Harold . . . and the Boys" and "A Lesson From Aloes."
Mr.
Fugard, reached at his home in Durban, said the play was not ready yet and in any case, the McCarter was to get only the American premiere, after which he hopes to bring it to New York in cooperation with the Manhattan Theater Club.
A few years ago, he stopped opening his plays in America first to protest apartheid and now gives their first productions at the Market Theater in Johannesburg.


Robert W. Harlan, 73, Ex-Head Of National Y.M.C.A. Council
Robert Warren Harlan, a former executive director of the National Council of Young Men's Christian Associations, died on Monday at Grossmont Hospital in La Mesa, Calif.
He was 73 and lived in Alpine, Calif.
The cause was liver cancer, said Frank C. Kiehne, a family spokesman in Washington.


Art in Review
Hiroshi Sugimoto
Sonnabend Gallery  420 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 4
The almost lifelike figures found in wax museums are pushed even closer to animation in Hiroshi Sugimoto's recent black-and-white photographs.
Recorded at wax museums in London and Hollywood, Mr.
Sugimoto's subjects range from Queen Victoria to Norma Shearer.


Lopez Receives Writers' Gold Tee Award
NANCY LOPEZ was selected yesterday for this year's Gold Tee Award by the Metropolitan Golf Writers Association.
The award goes each year to an individual whose career and behavior is considered to "exemplify the true spirit and traditions of the game." Lopez will receive the award at the association's awards dinner May 15 in Tarrytown, N.Y. (AP)


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.44
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.56
5.58
2.94
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.17
6.17
3.12
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.79
7.77
5.67
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.88
7.83
6.26
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.74
8.69
7.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.85
6.84
5.51
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Vinny Pazienza's Necessary Risks
One night recently in a club in Manhattan, Dennis Rodman, the unconventional basketball player, was told that Vinny Pazienza, the unconventional prizefighter, was on the premises.
"He is?" said Rodman.
"I'd like to meet the guy."
Rodman was surely aware of Pazienza's story.
How he had returned to fighting after having been in a near-fatal car accident in which two vertebrae were broken and two damaged.
How he was later told by his doctor that he would never box again, and might never walk again, but, of course, is doing both.


Welfare Advocates Expect Uphill Battle
Advocates for welfare recipients are regrouping for an uphill battle against Republican proposals to overhaul poverty programs.
They face immense hurdles: a public fed up with the ineffectiveness of existing welfare programs; a Democratic minority still reeling from election losses, and an Administration that seems reluctant to challenge key elements of the Republican plans.
Article, page A22.


Landlords Have the Edge in Housing Court
To the Editor:
Re "Landlords Don't Get a Fair Shake in New York's Housing Court" (letter, Jan. 6):


None of Them Shy, 3 Women on a Roll
No movie could live up to the hilarious title of Russ Meyer's legendary 1965 sexploitation romp, "Faster, Pussycat! Kill! Kill!," not even the film itself.
The movie, which John Waters has proclaimed his all-time favorite, is a rambunctiously amusing period piece, which flaunts a fetish for large-breasted women and, indeed, for any image that could be deemed cheap and vulgar by genteel mid-60's standards.
The movie is famous for accomplishing a great deal on a minuscule budget (only $44,000).
Although crudely acted, with laughably inept action sequences and a story that makes little sense, it has the feverish pulse of a classic B movie, boldly angular cinematography and a blaringly cheesy jazz soundtrack.
In its humorous celebration of a buxom dominatrix as the ultimate icon of female desirability, it is also a movie with an erotic vision in tune with contemporary interest in so-called mean sex.


Stocks Finish Mixed As Peso Worries Persist
After seesawing in active trading, the stock market closed mixed but essentially unchanged yesterday, as worries persisted about the economic crisis in Mexico and new worries emerged about the home mortgage business.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 3.03 points, to 3,859.00, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 fell 0.03 point, to 461.64.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index rose 0.77 point, to 756.51.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "CAROUSEL," Vivian Beaumont Theater, 150 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center.
Revival of the 1945 musical with book and lyrics by Oscar Hammerstein 2d and music by Richard Rodgers, adapted from the Ferenc Molnar play "Liliom." Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $45 to $65.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


ResultsPlus
N.B.A.
Spurs Pick Up the Slack  Sean Elliott's 32 points and Vinny Del Negro's 27 made up for the absence of David Robinson as the San Antonio Spurs defeated the visiting Miami Heat, 113-108, last night.
The Spurs won their sixth straight game without their star center, Robinson, who is out with a muscle strain in his lower back.
Dennis Rodman added 11 points and a season-high 22 rebounds for San Antonio. (AP)


Police Kill 2 Gunmen in Bronx Shoot-Out
Three gunmen who burst into a Bronx apartment last night found two police officers in civilian clothes who were in the apartment investigating a robbery, setting off a shoot-out that left two of the gunmen dead, the police said.
The officers from the 46th Precinct had gone to 1740 Grand Ave., in Morris Heights, to interview the victim of a robbery in Apartment 114.


House Historian Made Virtue of Fairness
To the Editor:
As a student of Prof.
Christina Jeffrey at Kennesaw State College, I must comment on her appointment and resignation as historian of the House of Representatives (front page, Jan. 10).


A Neophyte on a Tour of the Unseemly
With their lurid melodramas and seedy audiences, the movie theaters that lined 42d Street in New York City in the 1950's could have been made expressly for Diane Arbus's mordant eye.
From 1956 to 1958, Arbus photographed these theaters and their patrons.
In a fascinating show of recently rediscovered prints, the Robert Miller Gallery is presenting a selection of the images she made on her forays into these faded picture palaces.
At the time, Arbus was still a neophyte in photography, the respectable daughter of a well-to-do family who had only recently begun to take pictures.
The edgy, unnerving images of nudists, sideshow entertainers and other outsiders that would first bring her fame were still in the future, as were the shots of crying babies, forlorn middle-class interiors and crazed patriots that for many people epitomized the troubled mood of the 1960's.


Aides Say Gingrich Met Murdoch Before Book Deal
House Speaker Newt Gingrich met with Rupert Murdoch in late November, but the two did not discuss Mr.
Gingrich's pending $4.5 million book deal with Mr.
Murdoch's publishing house or Mr.
Murdoch's problems with communications legislation, spokesmen for both men said today.
"They passed the time of day," said Tony Blankley, Mr.
Gingrich's spokesman, who said the two met at 5:30 P.M. on Nov. 28 for a few minutes in a ceremonial room in the Capitol.
"There was no impropriety."


Home Video
Onward and Upward
Video stores might become obsolete some day, but with that fate in no way imminent, the industry has some steadying new year's advice for itself: keep doing what you usually do, with a few modifications.


Alarming Quake Study on California
Seismologists have more bad news for Southern California.
New computer simulations show that many office buildings, hospitals, malls and other structures that meet the latest earthquake engineering codes will probably collapse in a large earthquake, and it seems more certain than ever that a huge quake will strike densely populated parts of the Los Angeles area.


The Migration From the South In 60 Images
IN the late 1930's and early 40's, the young Jacob Lawrence was a man with a mission: to recount different chapters of the black American experience in visual terms.
Reared in Harlem during its cultural flowering and trained in art, Mr.
Lawrence had by the age of 20 evolved a slightly archaic, Cubist-inflected style that held abstraction and representation in perfect balance.
By 1940, when he turned 23, he had already executed three cycles of small tempera paintings, each numbering around 30 works, which chronicled the lives of Toussaint L'Ouverture, Frederick Douglass and Harriet Tubman.
Mr.
Lawrence's activities did not go unnoticed: his work was exhibited not only in group shows but also in two solo shows, and he received a Rosenwald Fund fellowship.
With this support, he waded into his fourth and longest cycle early in 1940, executing "The Migration Series," whose 60 captioned images have been reunited for the first time in 20 years in a compelling exhibition that has just arrived at the Museum of Modern Art.
A bittersweet saga whose mixture of words and images has a circling, fuguelike rhythm, "The Migration Series" is Mr.
Lawrence's greatest achievement.


In Italy, a Child Is Born, And So Is a Lively Debate
The birth of a baby has unleashed a stormy debate in a land proud of its family values.
The girl was supposedly born from a frozen embryo donated by a woman before she died more than two years ago and carried to term by her sister-in-law.
Since the birth last week, the story has fascinated many Italians -- not only because of the moral questions it has raised but also because fertility is a favorite topic in the nation with the world's lowest birth rate.


John Paul Presses On In Manila
He joked today about the cane that supports him when he walks.
He ruffled his security detail by plunging unscheduled into a sea of dancers who pressed close around him.
He signaled the stirrings of a new campaign to nurture religious freedom in China.
All in all, on the first day of his first extended foray in 16 months, Pope John Paul II was a man determined to let it be known that his 74 years and two surgical operations and a dislocated shoulder over the last two years offered no reason to shirk the way he sees his duties as the pastor for the world.


An American Original


Workfare Not Just a Program To Save Money, Adviser Says
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's senior adviser on a new program to make more able-bodied, childless welfare recipients work for their benefits and to scrutinize new applicants more aggressively said yesterday that the main focus of the initiative was not to save money.
The adviser, Richard J. Schwartz, said the program, which Mayor Giuliani initially promoted as a major budget-cutting measure, was intended to "restore integrity" to the public assistance system by screening out people who try fraudulently to qualify for benefits.
In addition, he said, the workfare plan would "build a sense of reciprocity" by requiring those who are physically able to work for the city in exchange for their grants.


For the Devils, Lockout Lasts a Few Extra Minutes
A day after a tentative collective bargaining agreement was reached with the owners, the Devils still found themselves locked out of their training facility today.
About a dozen players of the Devils waited for about an hour outside the South Mountain Arena to get their practice equipment, which was locked inside.
Some cheered when Michael Vasalani, the team's strength and conditioning coach, showed up with the key just before noon.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp.(KBH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Welfare Overhaul Chorus Begins on a Cautious Note
Members of Congress from both parties promised today to give states much more control over a wide range of welfare programs.
But they said they could not surrender as much authority as governors wanted because the Federal Government was ultimately responsible for the proper use of Federal money.
As the House Ways and Means Committee opened hearings on the future of welfare, there appeared to be substantial bipartisan agreement on the issue, boding well for passage of comprehensive legislation this year.


First Union Corp.(FTU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Supreme Court to Rule on Religious Symbols in Parks
Resuming its long-running debate over the public display of religious symbols, the Supreme Court, agreed today to decide whether government agencies must permit private groups to sponsor religious displays in parks and other areas that are generally open to all.
The case is an appeal from Columbus, Ohio, where the agency that runs a public park in front of the state Capitol tried to bar the Ku Klux Klan from erecting a 10-foot cross as a Christmas display in December 1993.
The Klan sued, arguing successfully that the state could not discriminate against the message that any speaker sought to convey in a public forum.


Coke Splashes Cold Water On Dorfman's TV Rumors
Does Dan Dorfman have a clue?
Coca-Cola doesn't think so.


UConn Romps, but Gets a Scare
Connecticut's 80-36 romp over Seton Hall in women's basketball tonight produced a huge scare -- for one player and the spectators if not for the winning coach.
With 5 minutes 18 seconds left in the game and UConn leading by 38 points, Rebecca Lobo, its 6-foot-4-inch all-American on the court and in the classroom, dislocated the little finger on her right hand.
She was listed as probable for Monday afternoon's long-awaited showdown here between Tennessee, ranked No. 1 in the nation, and Connecticut, ranked No. 2.


Top Officials Of 2 Boroughs Fight to Keep Alarm Boxes
A day before the Giuliani administration is to begin removing fire alarm boxes from city streets, two borough presidents are headed to court to try to stop the move.
The borough presidents, Ruth W. Messinger of Manhattan and Guy V. Molinari of Staten Island, said they would apply for separate emergency hearings before the Appellate Divisions of State Supreme Court that cover their boroughs in an 11th-hour effort to delay removal of the 16,300 boxes.


Washington Debates the Price for Mexican Aid
As Treasury Department officials and Congressional aides scurried today to draft legislation needed for a Mexican bailout package, top Clinton Administration officials and members of Congress began discussing how hard a bargain to drive with the Mexican Government for giving it up to $40 billion in loan guarantees.
At a meeting this morning on Capitol Hill, Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin and Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, briefed 50 senators and 75 representatives on their plan for commercial banks to make large loans to Mexico and for the Federal Government to repay the loans if Mexico defaults.
After the meeting, the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, predicted that Congress would approve legislation authorizing the guarantees, but said that members wanted more details.


Anderson And Coleman Team Up As Skid Ends
They held a "God and Country" promotion for tonight's Nets-76ers game, which seemed perfectly fitting for two teams in desperate need of an answered prayer.
Between them, Philadelphia and New Jersey had suffered more recent losses than the Democratic Congress -- 8 in 9 games for the Nets, 11 in 13 for the Sixers.
However fleeting the respite, someone would finally avoid defeat tonight, and it turned out to be the Nets, who prevailed by 110-101 at the Spectrum, thanks to a season-high 40 points from Kenny Anderson and the fourth-quarter insistence of Derrick Coleman, who contributed 29 points, 9 rebounds and 7 assists.


Cullen/Frost Bankers Inc.(CFBI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


You Could Call Slovo 'Believing Unbeliever'
To the Editor:
Re "Joe Slovo, Anti-Apartheid Stalinist, Dies at 68" (obituary, Jan. 7): Why detract from your moving, eloquent obituary for the South African hero and African National Congress leader with a discrediting headline?


White House Plans for Deeper Budget Cuts
Unable to settle on spending cuts deep enough to finance its own tax-cut proposals for the years ahead, the White House has begun an urgent review intended to produce a second round of cuts by early spring, senior Administration officials said.
The strategy recognizes that the budget President Clinton will send to the Republican-controlled Congress next month will be rejected as insufficiently cut.
White House officials said the President understood that it was vital that he be seen as doing more to respond to voters who have made clear they believe that the Government is too big.


Matrix Service Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Struggling for the Soul of Rock
The Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremony is at a strange junction in its history.
After 10 years of honoring rock's pioneers and innovators with a night of improvised jams, confessional speeches and other surprises, it is turning into a ritual that one day may be as formal, as rigid and as respected as the Grammys.
The fact that in September a giant shrine of steel and glass called the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame and Museum is to open in Cleveland will add more prestige and convention to the ceremony, which is scheduled to move from New York to Cleveland in 1997.
While an annual event like this is a positive achievement for rock-and-roll, it's important that the Hall of Fame's big night not lose the spontaneity and energy that defines the music it celebrates.
In ceremonies past, the speeches were followed by jam sessions where anything could happen, and usually did.
This year, perhaps because highlights of the event were being taped for an MTV special, the performances seemed planned and contrived, with long, momentum-killing pauses between each.


El Nino Is Doing It Again: Stormy West, Balmy East
El Nino is back and appears to be showing its hand in both the disastrous rainstorms in California and the mild winter the Northeast has experienced so far.
Named for the Christ child because it usually appears in the eastern tropical Pacific around Christmas, El Nino is a vast pool of unusually warm equatorial ocean water.
The warmth sets off atmospheric events that rearrange air masses and redirect storm tracks around the globe.


A Surprise Sag in Retail Sales
Consumer spending, which was hot during much of 1994, may now be cooling off faster than most economists and business executives had expected.
Sales of retailers -- from grocery stores and drug chains to building-supply outlets and clothing shops -- slipped one-tenth of a percent in December, surprising forecasters who had counted on at least a modest gain after recent reports from large retail chains and auto makers.


Rangers Follow Messier Onto Ice
This wasn't a day for happy reunions, blaring stereos or wisecracks across a crowded locker room.
Even in one filled with winners.
The Rangers, the defending Stanley Cup champions, grimly went about the business of meeting this morning at Playland Ice Casino to vote on the collective bargaining agreement, which they ratified.


A Casulty Of Deficit: Center For Addicts
Somehow, through the fog of addiction, Rose Jackson never forgot that she was a mother.
She wanted to hold on to her children, even if that meant letting go of her high.
So she panicked that day last March when she became lost looking for the Pathway Center for Family Treatment in Harlem.
"I'll never forget," Ms.
Jackson said.
"It was snowing. I was crying because I couldn't find it, and my worker said if I didn't check in they were going to take my child."


Parametric Technology Corp.(PMTC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
AFTER TRAGIC DEATH, STUDENT TRIUMPHS This week, the Westinghouse Science Talent competition honored the toil and passion of Soo Yeun Kim of Jericho, L.I., by naming her a semifinalist, the first time in its 54-year history it has made an award posthumously.
In so doing, it also honored the love of her friends, who, hours before the contest deadline, completed and express-mailed her project after she was killed in a car crash.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  SUSPECTS IN BOMBING CITED IN OTHER CRIMES Federal prosecutors plan to present evidence that some of the 12 men charged in a terrorist conspiracy to blow up New York City landmarks were also responsible for a host of other crimes, including the 1990 bombing of a gay bar, international arms smuggling, drug trafficking and the attempted murder of Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Page 26.
RULING COULD DELAY WATERFRONT PLANS A New York State Supreme Court Justice has ruled that the state can make no new decisions on what will be built along the Hudson River in Manhattan until it completes an environmental impact statement.
Page 27.
TREATMENT CENTER A VICTIM OF DEFICIT In New York City, where there have long been complaints that there are too few treatment programs for addicts who are mothers, there are now fewer still.
Thirteen family rehabilitation programs that counseled addicted mothers while allowing them to keep their children were closed by the Giuliani administration.
Page 27.
OFFICERS SUSPECTED IN THEFT OF CARS Seven Staten Island residents -- including two police officers -- were indicted on charges of running a stolen-car ring.
Page 26. 2D ROBBERY ATTEMPT LEADS TO SHOOTOUT When three robbers got only $50, they said they would return to a Bronx apartment.
When they came back, two detectives were waiting, and when one robber reached for his gun, the officers opened fire.
Page 28.
Two borough presidents are headed to court to try to stop the Giuliani administration from removing fire alarm boxes.
Page 27.
The police raided 69 locations in an attempt to crush what they call the numbers empire of Raymond Marquez.
Page 28.
The elevator that decapitated a man last week malfunctioned because of a short-circuit, city officials said.
Page 27.
REGION  L.I.
ACQUITTALS ARE APPLAUDED For Daniel E. Kimlicka and his colleagues, going to work at Brookhaven Town Hall was a little easier after a Federal jury acquitted two former town officials of accepting bribes.
Page 29.
HOSPITAL PAYMENT CUTS ARE MULLED The committee advising Governor Pataki on how to cut Medicaid costs is now focusing on major reductions in payments to hospitals and nursing homes as it chops more than $1 billion from the state's share of the program, transition officials say.
Page 29.
WINNER IS RULED LOSER IN TEXAS LOTTERY A New Jersey police officer felt the curse of Friday the 13th when Texas Lottery officials refused to pay a $10.5 million jackpot.
Page 29.
Neediest Cases....26  Holiday schedule....26  About New York by Michael T. Kaufman....27


Abidjan Journal; Does Sharing Wealth Only Promote Poverty?
Toiling long hours in his little tailor's shop, Lazare Koffi believes he has found the answer to a question long been debated by the experts: how to explain Africa's persistent economic backwardness.
For Mr.
Koffi, a tailor who has built a small but thriving clothing business in a dusty back alley of Adjame, one of this big city's most crowded workers' quarters, the answer lies, incongruously, in a tradition of sharing that begins with extended families.


Nellcor Inc.(NELL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


The Struggle to Keep Iberia Aloft
Iberia, the Spanish national airline, is fast approaching bankruptcy.
In March, the company, which has lost more than $1.5 billion over the last five years, will run out of money, its management says, and under Spanish law, if that happened, it would have to be liquidated .
The Spanish Government has proposed an injection of almost $1 billion into the troubled airline, following its injection three years ago of $923 million that was supposed to restore the company's financial health.


Wide Rally Sends Dow Up by 49.46
Wary stock traders, caught off guard by the good news on inflation in yesterday's retail-sales report, suddenly bid prices up in the broadest rally for stocks since last summer.
The unanticipated slump in December retail sales prompted optimism among traders that the Federal Reserve would either raise interest rates only slightly at its policy meeting Jan. 31 and Feb. 1, or might even wait until its next meeting in March.


Italy Names Banker With No Party Ties New Prime Minister
Italy's search for a new Prime Minister ended today with the appointment of the current Treasury Minister, a nonpolitical banker with international financial credentials, to replace Silvio Berlusconi and form a government of technocrats to guide a program of fiscal and election reform through Parliament.
After three weeks of fretful negotiations, President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro named Lamberto Dini, a 63-year-old veteran of the central bank, as his choice to try to lead Italy out of its political stalemate and to reassure jittery financial markets.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-6  CLINTON CHIDES RUSSIA ON ATTACK
President Clinton broke his silence about the Russian attack on a secessionist region, urging that the military action be halted but saying that aid to Russia should not be cut back because of the crisis. 1


George Price, 93, Cartoonist of Oddities, Dies
George Price, a cartoonist whose eccentric comic visions of natural disasters, feuding spouses and the habits of a distinctively odd cast of characters were staples of The New Yorker magazine for nearly six decades, died on Thursday at Englewood Hospital in Englewood, N.J.
He was 93 and lived in Tenafly, N.J.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


South Africa Opens Schools to All, and All's Well
This was Henrietta Duma's week to savor the first harvest of South Africa's new democracy.
Instead of enrolling her first-grade son in one of the battered, bookless local schools in Soweto, the black metropolis where she lives, she brought him to Suidheuwels Primary School, long a closed bastion of conservative, working-class white Afrikaners but, under rules that took effect this week, now open to all races.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.50
2.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.53
5.56
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.06
6.17
3.14
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.66
7.79
5.71
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.78
7.88
6.29
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.63
8.74
7.26
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.80
6.85
5.54
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Doctor Disappears; Foul Play Is Feared
A wealthy Queens obstetrician disappeared without a trace more than a month ago, relatives say, and the police said yesterday they feared she was a victim of foul play.
Dr.
Teresita Valera Costello, 64, left behind an expensive home in Forest Hills and other property in Manhattan, Connecticut and New Jersey, the police said.
No trace has been found of her or her 1977 blue Mercedes-Benz 450-SEL, described as in mint condition.


Holiday on Monday
The Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday, which is tomorrow, will be legally observed on Monday.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office, at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, open.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Alternate-side street-cleaning regulations suspended.
SANITATION Regular pickups and recycling but no street cleanings.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Open.
TRANSPORTATION Subways, buses, the Long Island Rail Road and the Metro-North railroad on regular weekday schedules.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and rail service on regular weekday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on regular weekday schedule.


Government Works! 5 Success Stories; Saving Medicaid
State and local governments are increasingly challenged by budget cuts and public skepticism of their ability to perform effectively.
To demonstrate that the public sector can solve critical social problems, in 1986 the Ford Foundation and the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard established the annual Innovations in State and Local Government Awards.
The program's 80 winners, each of which received a Ford Foundation grant of $100,000, have included programs that automate traffic control, counter domestic violence, encourage police officers to live in inner-city neighborhoods, and mine landfills for recyclable materials.
Over 80 percent of the winning programs have expanded or been copied around the country.


Giants' Reserve Tight End Wants to Leave
The Giants' reserve tight end, Derek Brown, has asked the team to put him on the expansion draft list, several people familiar with the situation said yesterday.
The only thing that would keep the former No. 1 draft pick from playing for either the Carolina Panthers or the Jacksonville Jaguars next season is Giants General Manager George Young, who has been reluctant to let Brown go.


61 Degrees in the Shade


49ers Expect Wet Field to Go the Distance
No mop or blow dryer is big enough for Candlestick Park.
The 49ers' home field was doused again today by a sprinkler system the team can do nothing about -- storm clouds -- and Sunday's National Football Conference championship game is bound to be affected.
The lead groundskeeper, Bill Buckley, covered the field today with the thickest tarpaulin he owns after using a giant vacuum to soak up the water from nearly two weeks worth of rain and flash floods.
He declared the field squishy but twice as good as for the 1993 meeting for the championship here.


Exel Ltd.(XL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Don't Sell the Airports
The Mayor of New York City and the Governors of New York and New Jersey have all shown interest in "privatizing" the region's three airports -- La Guardia, John F. Kennedy and Newark International, which are operated under long-term leases by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
If privatization means bringing in private management to do a better job, it is worth exploring.
But outright sale would be foolish.
Responsible officials need firm control over facilities that are central to the area's role as a hub of national and international commerce and travel.
The question comes up because Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and Governors George Pataki and Christine Todd Whitman, all Republicans, are bent on having private interests take over public services wherever possible, and are all strapped for cash.
The Mayor and the Governors have separate official interests.
The cities of New York and Newark own the airport land.
The Governors, watched over by Port Authority bondholders, jointly control the Authority and thus the airport management.
But overriding their parochial perspectives, all three should have one paramount concern -- the quality and capacity of these facilities.
Ranked among the world's principal airports, they are and will continue to be key to the region's growth.


Winner Is Ruled Loser in Texas Lottery
A New Jersey police officer felt the curse of Friday the 13th in full force today when Texas Lottery officials refused to pay him a $10.5 million jackpot.
In a case that could become the first test of a 1994 Federal law prohibiting the interstate sale of state lottery tickets, the Texas Lottery Commission said that Scott Wenner, of Riverside, is not entitled to the Nov. 23 jackpot because he bought his ticket from an unlicensed out-of-state dealer.


Pataki Medicaid Advisors Mull Hospital Payment Cuts
The committee advising Gov.
George E. Pataki on how to cut Medicaid costs has changed course and is now focusing on major reductions in payments to hospitals and nursing homes as it chops more than $1 billion from the state's share of the program, transition officials say.
The shift, a significant departure from the committee's earlier proposals, has sent rumors of the expected cuts reverberating through the state's health care system, which depends heavily on government financing and particularly on the $19 billion Medicaid program.


New Tax Bills for 1993 Confuse the Professionals, Too
The computers at the Internal Revenue Service churned out hundreds of thousands of not-so-gentle reminders for taxpayers this week.
"It's time to send your next installment payment of additional 1993 taxes," the notices said, concluding with an amount owed.
Many of the recipients expressed dismay.
Edward A. Slott, a certified public accountant in Rockville Centre, L.I., said a client asked him: "What's this? I thought I paid my 1993 taxes."


Observer; Pataki Takes The Hood
Like a visit from Santa Claus, execution of the condemned works best during the wee hours of the night.
Both belong to a class of activity that loses its charm in the full glare of daylight with all the world awake.
This is one reason there has been no public outcry demanding TV cameras in the death chamber.
One might suppose the tendency of the age, with its lust for the grotesque and barbaric, would set up an insistent howl for televising executions.


Rowland Waging TV Campaign To Scuttle State Workers' Pay Raises
Gov.
John G. Rowland today stepped up his campaign to deny raises to 21,000 state employees, broadcasting a television commercial that contends the raises would make it "almost impossible" to cut taxes.
The 30-second commercial, airing on three Connecticut stations through Wednesday, features Mr.
Rowland in his office, talking into the camera and telling viewers, "Connecticut is facing a crisis, and I need your help."


CHRONICLE
Could this be the tone of the new Senate?
BOB DOLE, the majority leader, and ROBERT BYRD of West Virginia, the longest-serving Democratic senator, spent more than a few minutes on the Senate floor this week talking about their dogs.
The subject came up Thursday, The Associated Press reported, when Senator Byrd said he had been too involved in moving his office, like other displaced Democrats, to read the legislation under discussion.


West Finding Serbs Call the Shots Even if Few Are Fired
The Serbs' ability to dictate international policy in Bosnia was clear today as United States and European officials traveled to a Bosnian Serb stronghold despite a United Nations Security Council resolution barring contacts with the Serbs.
The decision of the officials from the so-called contact group to visit Pale, which is just southeast of Sarajevo, for the first time since the Serbs rejected its peace plan last July reflects the international disarray over how to secure peace now that all threats of force have been abandoned.


National Westminster Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Provident Bancorp Inc.(PRBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Crestar Financial Corp.(CF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Equity-Income Category Shines for 3 Years
Investors in the nearly 100 equity-income funds generally forsake a little return for a much smoother ride than they would get with growth stocks.
But that has not been the case lately.
The funds, which buy high-dividend stocks and a smattering of bonds, returned an average of 6.7 percent a year for the last three years, well ahead of the 5.9 percent recorded for growth funds.


Cuomo Set to Testify In Crown Hts. Case
Former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is expected to be questioned under oath next week by lawyers for Hasidic residents of Crown Heights, Brooklyn, who are suing the city over what they charge was the failure of police to protect them during an outbreak of racial violence in the neighborhood in 1991.
In a deposition scheduled to be taken in private on Wednesday, Mr.
Cuomo is to be asked about what city officials told him during the episode.


DANCE
A Troupe Commingles Its Newcomers and Mainstays  New York City Ballet New York State Theater


Canandaigua Wine (WINEA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Israelis Ask If Holocaust Is Right Image
For years it has been an almost unvarying ritual for visiting foreign officials: soon after landing they are automatically taken to Yad Vashem, the memorial in Jerusalem to the 6 million Jews killed by the Nazis.
No longer.


Corrections
A subheading in Business Day yesterday, with an article about the dismissal of Federal fraud charges against a former sales manager of the Gtech Corporation, misstated the lottery company's position on payments for "good will" in the states in which it does business.
And in some editions, because of an editing error, the company's response was omitted.


Washington Declares War on the Environment
To the Editor:
The Reagan Presidency made a concerted attack on environmental protection from the outset, under the rationale of less government.


Acquittals In Bribe Case Applauded
For Daniel E. Kimlicka and his colleagues, going to work at Brookhaven Town Hall was a little easier today after a Federal jury on Thursday acquitted two former town officials of accepting bribes from John M. McNamara, the former car dealer who has admitted to bilking General Motors out of $436 million.
"It's nice to know we can go back to the business of running the municipality without having a cloud over us every moment," said Mr.
Kimlicka, Brookhaven's deputy supervisor.


Mercantile Bancorp (MTL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy Retail sales slipped 0.1 percent in December, surprising economists and the markets.
The report indicates that consumer spending may be fading faster than expected.  [ Page 39. ] Orange County may defer debt payments through 1996.  [ 49. ] Markets Stocks surged.
Traders were encouraged by the retail sales report, which lowered expectations that the Federal Reserve would soon raise short-term interest rates sharply.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index rose 4.33 points.  [ 39. ] Treasury prices rallied.
Lower interest rates gave corporate borrowers a good opportunity to offer new debt, and more than $1 billion in securities were priced yesterday.  [ 49. ] The dollar recovered against the mark, helped by calm in European markets.
But the dollar fell again against the yen.  [ 50. ] Heating oil and natural gas prices continued to slide.
A mild winter in the Midwest and Northeast is limiting demand.  [ 50. ] International Mexican officials sought to ease concerns in the United States over the costs of a rescue package.
Officials said the loan guarantees announced by President Clinton would not cost American taxpayers anything because Mexico would pay all fees.  [ 39. ] A rescue package will probably come at a price for Mexico.
Clinton Administration officials and Congressional leaders are discussing what concessions should be demanded of the Mexican Government.
High loan fees and restrictions on immigration in the United States are among the ideas being considered.  [ 51. ] Iberia, Spain's national airline, faces bankruptcy.
A proposed bailout comes at time when Europe is reassessing the need for propping up money-losing national airlines.
But it is unclear whether the European Union has the will to force its members to make painful, market-oriented decisions or whether it will beat a costly retreat to the old use of national carriers as government employment agencies and vehicles for waving the flag.  [ 39. ] Companies The Nation magazine has been acquired by a group of investors headed by its editor in chief, Victor S. Navasky.  [ 41. ] Springs Industries agreed to buy Dundee Mills for $120 million in cash and stock.
Springs, a maker of linens and bedding, had been looking to acquire a towel maker.  [ 41. ] Fininvest said its chief executive was leaving.
Index funds, mutual funds that hold all the securities in a particular index, give investors a dependable, no-fuss method to do just that.  [ 37. ] Mexico is haunting investors in emerging markets.
But plunges and turmoil are nothing new to these markets.  [ 37. ] invest A recent notice from the I.R.S. about a tax bill for 1993 has caught even tax professionals off guard.  [ 37. ]


DANCE
Gamboling With Creatures Of the Forest or Whatever  Douglas Dunn Rio Grande Union Inc.
Studio Theater


The Neediest Cases; Giving Some Children a Summer Break
Nigel Joseph needed to get away from it all: the traffic, the crowded sidewalks, the noise.
After all, even as an 8-year-old, city life can wear you down.
So last June, when summer vacation started, Nigel packed his bags and left his home in Elmhurst, Queens.
In the past, he had spent the summer months at his grandmother's house in the Bronx.
But last year, for the first time in his life, Nigel left New York City and ventured into New Jersey.
For a child who has spent eight years surrounded by asphalt and traffic, the hiking paths and fresh breezes offered a welcome dose of serenity.


First Midwest Bancorp (FMBI,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Executive Changes
INFORMATION RESOURCES INC., Chicago, said that Thomas M. Walker, executive vice president and chief financial officer, had resigned to pursue other interests.


Ruling May Delay Decisions On Hudson Riverfront Plans
In a ruling that could slow down development along the Hudson River in Manhattan, a judge has ruled that the state can make no new decisions on what will be built until it completes an environmental impact statement on its plans for the entire waterfront from Battery Park City to 59th Street.
The ruling, handed down on Tuesday by Justice Kristin Booth Glen of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, could delay for years some elements of the waterfront plan, which is being formulated jointly by city and state officials, because it means that community groups from the top to the bottom of the 4.5-mile stretch of riverfront can challenge the waterfront plan on environmental grounds.


63 Teams Taking Part in Meet
Tomorrow's Archbishop Molloy Games, a track and field meet at the Armory, features a 63-team field from New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, New Hampshire and Virginia.
Overbrook High School of Philadelphia is favored to win the boys' meet while Bay Shore of Long Island is the front-runner to win the girls' events.


Lone Star Steakhouse/ Saloon Inc.(STAR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


MELLON BANK CORP. (MEL,N)
The Mellon Bank Corporation said yesterday that earnings fell 70.3 percent in the fourth quarter, dragged down by a $130 million charge taken to reduce the impact of swings in interest rates on its clients.
Including the charge, earnings in the quarter fell to $41.0 million, or 7 cents a share, from $138.0 million, or 84 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.
The latest quarter also included a $16 million loss in connection with a previously announced redemption of the company's series H preferred stock.


Algerian Opposition Offers Plan for Peace
Representatives of Algerian opposition parties seeking an end to three years of civil strife offered proposals today calling on the Government to recognize the principal Muslim fundamentalist party and release hundreds of jailed adherents.
But the parties, meeting in Rome, stopped short of pledging to end their armed struggle against the military-led Government that has banned them, nor did they specifically pledge to surrender their goal of an Islamic state.


First Michigan Bank (FMBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2 Governors Seek to Agree On Port Job
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey and Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York emerged from a meeting here today with a public display of warmth and glad tidings.
But it was by no means clear that the two Republicans had smoothed over differences regarding Mr.
Pataki's choice of a political ally to be the next executive director for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
What did seem clear was that the selection of the new executive director, who is traditionally nominated by New York's governor, would involve New Jersey too.
Mrs.
Whitman made clear time and again in a news conference that she wanted Mr.
Pataki's choice, George J. Marlin, to meet with her and with New Jersey's six representatives on the Port Authority board before she gives her approval.


One-Two Punch for Foreman
The heavyweight champion, GEORGE FOREMAN, was honored twice yesterday.
He won both fighter of the year and manager of the year designations from the Boxing Writers Association of America, which will honor him at its dinner in New York on April 28.
Foreman, at 45, became the oldest heavyweight champion in history when he knocked out MICHAEL MOORER on Nov. 5.
Because of his own adept handling of his comeback, Foreman also won manager of the year. (AP)


Unmediated Sensation Instead of Learned Art
About midway through the 80-minute performance by the Deep Listening Band at the Kitchen on Wednesday night, I found myself wishing that I had been present at the first performance of this group in 1988, when it recorded a CD inside a two-million-gallon cistern not far from Seattle.
Or at one of its other original performances, in an old limestone quarry with its "lovely dripping water sounds and Valhalla-like mists" or at a lava cave in the Canary Islands.
Because this New Age-ish Minimalist performance group is actually part of the aging countercultural avant-garde, in which the point is to displace the world of artifice and return the listener to a state of nature in which sound is unmediated sensation rather than learned art.
That was why Pauline Oliveros was playing a just-tuned accordion and David Gamper a just-tuned piano: so that overtones of each note would coincide precisely with the pitches of other notes being played, creating uncanny resonances like those created in cisterns and caves.
That was why conch shells were used as horns: to invoke the ritualistic, preindustrial musical universe.
And that was why Stuart Dempster walked onto the darkened performance space trumpeting a didjeridu, a long tubular Australian folk instrument that created waves of upper register overtones over a bass drone: to invoke non-Western instrumentation and exotic, unfamiliar customs of listening.


College Guide Tells Methods for Ranking
To the Editor:
Re "Hyping Numbers at Colleges" (Education Life, Jan. 8), in which the U.S.
News best college rankings is mentioned: You say that "guidebooks and magazines will not divulge how much weight they give to admission rates." If you had read our methodology, which we detail in our college guide, you would have found out what our weights are.
The acceptance rate counts for a small fraction of a school's overall ranking.
ALVIN P. SANOFF  Managing Editor, America's Best Colleges, U.S.
News &amp; World Report Washington, Jan. 9, 1995


A Sailing First: Women's Crew Defeats Men
On one scale, it was a momentous day in America's Cup racing.
On another, it was only the first race in an elimination series that will persist into April.
No matter. The unseasoned America
team defeated the highly touted Stars &amp; Stripes all-male crew by 1 minute 9 seconds today in the first match for an all-women's team in the 144 years of the America's Cup.


We Need Protection From Perilous Taxis
To the Editor:
As a practicing plastic surgeon in New York City, I have been astounded by the rise of taxi-related injuries that I have seen in my practice in the last year.


I'm Upset. Quote Me.
In Philadelphia not long ago, a teen-ager was bludgeoned to death by a gang wielding a baseball bat.
What was striking about the local news coverage was how little space was devoted to the horrible act and how much to a kind of interpretive free-for-all: the casting of blame on the 911 system, leading to the Mayor's firing of several dispatchers, all of them black; black leaders' outrage at this "scapegoating"; the Mayor's outrage that race had been injected into the whole thing.
In fact, the arc of this story was not unusual.
A typical front page of a 1990's newspaper consists of articles about people's assorted resentments, disappointments, predictions, anger, optimism or pessimism concerning one thing or another, as well as one or two accounts of murders, invasions and other events.


Edwin H. Shutt Jr., 67, Executive Who Led Tampax Maker in 80's
Edwin H. Shutt Jr., who led Tambrands Inc., a tampon manufacturer, when toxic-shock syndrome shook consumer confidence in the industry in the early 1980's, died on Dec. 23 at his home in Nassau County.
He was 67.
The cause was heart failure, according to a spokeswoman for the First National Bank of Long Island, where Mr.
Shutt had been a member of the board of directors since 1989.


Government Works! 5 Success Stories; Recycling Dumps
State and local governments are increasingly challenged by budget cuts and public skepticism of their ability to perform effectively.
To demonstrate that the public sector can solve critical social problems, in 1986 the Ford Foundation and the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard established the annual Innovations in State and Local Government Awards.
The program's 80 winners, each of which received a Ford Foundation grant of $100,000, have included programs that automate traffic control, counter domestic violence, encourage police officers to live in inner-city neighborhoods, and mine landfills for recyclable materials.
Over 80 percent of the winning programs have expanded or been copied around the country.


City Ballet to Present 'West Side Story Suite'
The New York City Ballet announced yesterday that it would present the company premiere of Jerome Robbins's "West Side Story Suite" in a gala on May 18 at the New York State Theater.
The suite of dances, put together for "Jerome Robbins's Broadway," includes the prologue, "Dance at the Gym," "Cool," "America," the rumble and the "Somewhere" ballet from the original Broadway musical, set to music by Leonard Bernstein.
Another dance may be added later.


After a Teen-Ager's Death, Friends Fulfill Her Dream
"There were days," Soo Yeun Kim wrote in her application for the Westinghouse high school science contest, "when my body ached from sitting under a bright light for several hours peering at bone fragment after bone fragment."
The Sunday after Thanksgiving, Soo Yeun's body must have ached as she worked until 2 or 3 in the morning.
That fall, she'd come home each night to an enormous pile of work, all due by Dec. 1.
She had essays to write for her first choice, Harvard, and for Yale and Princeton.
And she had two years of archeological research to write on Neanderthal man's diet, her project for Westinghouse, the country's most competitive and prestigious high school science awards.
The college applications were her future; the Westinghouse study her passion, her present.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Sotheby's sale of artworks owned by the New-York Historical Society misstated the disposition of Lo Scheggia's painting "The Triumph of Fame." At the auction, on Thursday , a representative of the Metropolitan Museum expressed a hope to raise funds to buy the painting; the museum did not buy it.
Yesterday, the museum said it had not decided whether to try to acquire the work, for which a private dealer bid $2.2 million on Thursday.
A corrective article appears today on page 13.


A Reluctant Mullen Listens and Retires
Brian Mullen finally made official yesterday what the Islanders had been urging him to do for some time: He announced his retirement as a player.
Mullen, a 32-year-old former stick boy and Rangers player who grew up in the Hell's Kitchen section of Manhattan's West Side, will remain with the Islanders, performing scouting and front office work.


Editor in Deal for Nation Magazine
The Nation, the oldest continuously published weekly magazine in the United States, has been acquired by a group of investors headed by the magazine's editor in chief, Victor S. Navasky.
The investors include the actor Paul Newman and the writer E. L. Doctorow.


Analysts International (ANLY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Players Approve Agreement With N.H.L.
After the protagonists in the 103-day National Hockey League lockout predictably vowed yesterday to communicate better in the future, Gary Bettman, the league's commissioner, and Bob Goodenow, head of the players' union, said they came close Monday night to believing there would be no 1994-95 season.
"I said to Bob when we had Chinese food Monday night, that I thought it was more likely than not that we wouldn't have a season," Bettman said of their 90-minute dinner at Shun Lee Palace, a few blocks from the Four Seasons Hotel, where the two sides negotiated the agreement approved by the players yesterday.


Manila Reports Plot by Muslims To Kill the Pope
The Philippine authorities said today that they had unearthed a conspiracy by Muslim militants to assassinate the Pope during his visit here, but John Paul II seemed to ignore the threat as he appeared before huge crowds who turned out to see him.
After days of newspaper reports chronicling the purported plot, Defense Secretary Renato de Villa said two people had been arrested after a police raid a week ago on an apartment building only a few hundred yards from where the Pope is staying.
Newspaper reports said bomb-making equipment had been found in the apartment.


Automatic Data Processing Inc.(AUD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mordi Gassner, 95, Designer and Painter
Mordi Gassner, an artist and mural painter whose most prominent work reflected the spirit of the Renaissance and humanity's knowledge of science, died on Monday in Southside Community Hospital in Farmville, Va.
He was 95 and lived in Drakes Branch, Va.
Mr. Gassner's family said the cause was heart failure.


For London Fog, a U-Turn to Maryland
A little more than two months ago, the London Fog Corporation, the venerable raincoat maker, moved its headquarters into light, airy new offices in Darien, Conn., from the Baltimore suburb of Eldersburg, Md.
But yesterday, the company said it would return its headquarters to Eldersburg, the home of its last United States manufacturing plant.


Malone to Have Tendon Surgery
San Antonio Spurs center MOSES MALONE will undergo surgery to repair the long peroneal tendon in his right leg, the team announced yesterday.
Malone, 39, ruptured the tendon Monday during practice, said the Spurs general manager, GREGG POPOVICH.
After Sunday's surgery at Southwest Texas Methodist Hospital, Malone will be sidelined, with his right foot and leg immobilized in a cast for up to six weeks. (AP)


Facing the Budget Alligators: Robert Linligthgow Livingston
On his first day as chairman, Representative Robert L. Livingston showed up at a meeting of the House Appropriations Committee with a machete, a bowie knife and, for good measure, an alligator-skinning knife.
That display, to make a point about cutting Government costs, was about as subtle as it gets for Mr.
Livingston.
But it also was in keeping with the role played by the tough-talking Louisiana Congressman.
Speaker Newt Gingrich gave him the unenviable job of striking the first blow in the Republicans' campaign to knock down the size of the Federal Government, reign in its spending and loosen many of its controls.


Mexico Says It Will Pay Loan Fees
Mexican officials promised today that the huge package of loan guarantees announced by President Clinton Thursday night would not cost American taxpayers anything because Mexico would pay all the fees involved.
President Clinton's support, with the backing of Congressional leaders, helped the Mexican market to rally today by 4.6 percent, enough to recover losses from earlier in the week.
The Mexican peso also strengthened again today as the American dollar fell.
The peso closed at 5.25 to the dollar, well above the Thursday close of 5.495.


No Headline
I am reasonably sure that mine is a brief goodbye. -- SILVIO BERLUSCONI, who stepped down last monthas Italy's Prime Minister.  [ 3:1. ]


Getting a Homestyle Loan to Remodel Their Old House
In 1993, Charles Carrier and Elizabeth Dadu bought a house in Montclair, N.J., that could only be described as a handyman's special.
The house, which had been abandoned for some time, was previously owned by a bank.
To renovate the house, the couple borrowed money under a special program of the Federal National Mortgage Association, or Fannie Mae.
The program, called Homestyle, provides homeowners with financing based on the home's estimated value after renovation.
"What Fannie Mae has done, and done successfully is address the remodeling needs of the general public, where the banks have failed," said George Billings, president of the Lenders Association Inc., Mount Laurel, N.J.


Few Big Names on Jets' Expansion List
Only a few players with recognizable names are likely to be exposed by the Jets when they submit their expansion draft list next Tuesday.
The most-noted veterans will probably be the back-up quarterback, Jack Trudeau, and Brian Washington, a starter at strong safety.
The draft will be held on Feb. 15 to stock the new Carolina and Jacksonville teams, who paid $180 million each to join the league.


Region News Briefs; 5 Years' Probation In Custody Dispute
A man who took his young daughters to Pakistan for three years because of a custody dispute was sentenced today to five years' probation.
The man, Mohammad Fazal, 34, must also give $2,000 to his former wife, Virginia Ramos of Union City, to pay for flying their daughters, Ruby, 4, and Nasreen, 7, back to the United States in November.
Mr.
Fazal, a mechanic who lives in East Elmhurst, Queens, faces deportation; he has already spent 100 days in an Immigration and Naturalization Service jail.


Failed Robbery Tactic Led To Fatal Shootout in Bronx
When three young men pushed their way into a Bronx apartment to rob the people inside on Wednesday night, they were disappointed to get only $50, the police said.
The robbers said they would be back for more.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Named Jack Mull coach of Buffalo of the American Association; Greg Booker pitching coach, and Joe Mikulik player-coach for Canton-Akron of the Eastern League; Gordie MacKenzie manager, Tony Arnold pitching coach, Dan Williams coach, and Teddy Blackwell trainer for Kinston of the Carolina League; Jeff Datz manager of Columbus of the South Atlantic League; and Harry Spilman manager of Burlington of the Appalachian League.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Named Gene Mauch bench coach.
National League  SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Named Reggie Younger Jr. director of team travel.
Basketball National Basketball Association  N.B.A. -- Fined Reggie Miller of Indiana $5,000 for attempting to start an altercation with Charles Smith of New York following a game Tuesday night.
SAN ANTONIO SPURS -- Placed Moses Malone, center, on the injured list.
Football National Football League  CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Named John Garrett assistant offensive coach.
DETROIT LIONS -- Announced they will not exercise their option on Pat Swilling, linebacker, making him an unrestricted free agent.
Named John Teerlinck assistant defensive coach.
Announced the retirement of Billie Matthews, assistant running backs coach.
Announced they will not offer contracts to Lamar Leachman, assistant defensive line coach, and Dave Jaumotte, tight ends coach.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Announced the resignation of Vic Fangio, linebackers coach.
Hockey National Hockey League  NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Announced that Brian Mullen, right wing, has retired and joined the front office staff.
Recalled Brett Lindros, right wing, from Kingston of the Ontario Hockey League and Zigmund Palffy, right wing, from Denver of the International Hockey League.


Congressional Pensions Need Review
Though it is clearly a subject most members would like to avoid, Congress may soon be forced to grapple with the sensitive issue of Congressional pensions.
The fact that Congress has awarded itself pensions more generous than those received by other Federal employees helps to reinforce the institution's image as a privileged little island.
Representative Dan Miller, Republican of Florida, is circulating a proposal to slash future retirement benefits.
It appears that many members of the feisty Republican freshman class may sign on as co-sponsors.
Senator Richard Bryan, meanwhile, held off this week on his proposal to amend the Congressional Accountability Act to put members of Congress under the same retirement rules as Federal workers.
But the Nevada Democrat intends to pursue the issue this spring.


'Strange Justice,' Pinups and Reporting
To the Editor:
Re Frank Rich's Dec. 29 column about my review in the January issue of The American Spectator of "Strange Justice," the Jane Mayer and Jill Abramson book:
Mr.
Rich attempts to divert attention from the issue at hand -- Anita Hill, Paula Jones and Jimmy Carter make cameo appearances -- and offers only one charge to rebut my 22,000-word refutation of the Mayer and Abramson book.


As Soldiers Battle On, Russians Plan Rule of a Postwar Chechnya
The head of Russian domestic intelligence today ruled out any negotiations with the leader of the secessionist Chechen region, and Russian troops launched one of their fiercest assaults yet on the rebel capital.
Sergei V. Stepashin, director of the Federal Counter-Intelligence Service and a member of the Russian Security Council, said in an interview that after Russian troops take the presidential palace in Grozny, Moscow will install a new government there.


The No-Fuss Approach to Stock Funds
Just as some car buyers search for a reliable vehicle that is simple to maintain, some investors want a stock portfolio that will run for 10 years with little more than annual checkups.
Forget the racy securities, forget the neighbor's broker, forget the constant trading.
These people want a dependable, no-fuss investment plan.


A New Storm Unloads Rain on California
A new storm front rolled in off the Pacific today and began giving California yet another drenching.
The front hit land first in the rugged redwood region of Humboldt and Mendocino Counties north of here, then moved steadily inland and south down a soggy coast already heavily damaged by flooding from a week and a half of rain.


Nancy Kelly, 73, Actress Noted In Hollywood and on Broadway
Nancy Kelly, an award-winning stage actress who also appeared in scores of films, died on Jan. 2 at her home in Bel Air, Calif.
She was 73.
The cause was diabetes-related illness, her family said when they reported her death yesterday.


Duran in Shape for Pazienza
Roberto Duran, a spry 43 years old, stepped onto the scale today.
Although he was said to have weighed 167 3/4 pounds, Duran, who meets Vinny Pazienza for the second time in six months Saturday night at the Atlantic City Convention Center, actually weighed 162, nearly 6 under the limit to contend for Pazienza's International Boxing Council supermiddleweight title.
The message: Duran is in tremendous shape.


Student Loan Marketing Assn. (SLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Russia Agrees to Accept Fact-Finding Mission
An envoy for the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe plans to visit Moscow on Sunday to arrange for a fact-finding mission to travel to Chechnya, the secessionist republic in the Caucasus, officials of the group said today.
The mission, which the officials said Russia had agreed to, was criticized on Thursday by a Russian Foreign Ministry spokesman, who said observers would not be welcome until a "later phase" of Russia's military operation to end the secession.


2 Officers From Staten Island Charged in Stolen-Car Ring
Searching for clues after a stolen boat was set on fire in a police pound, investigators pieced together a paper trail that led to the indictment of seven Staten Island residents -- including two police officers -- on charges of running a stolen-car ring, the Staten Island District Attorney, William L. Murphy, said yesterday.
Besides the officers, who are husband and wife, the authorities indicted the wife's father, who is a retired officer, two of her brothers and two friends.


RPM Inc.(RPOW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Library Buys the Bulk Of Cage's Manuscripts
The New York Public Library for the Performing Arts announced yesterday that it had acquired the manuscripts of John Cage.
The collection consists of 26,000 pages of Cage's scores, sketches and musical writings and constitutes about 95 percent of the output of perhaps the most influential composer of the late 20th century.
The president of the New York Public Library, Paul LeClerc, said the library bought the papers from the Cage estate for an undisclosed amount with the help of an anonymous donation to the music division.


Microship Technology Inc.(MCHP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gluck's Doomed Lovers of 1774
It is said that after a performance of Gluck's "Orphee et Eurydice," Rousseau left the Paris Opera with tears streaming down his face.
When asked why, all he could do was answer with a sotto voce version of Orphee's lament, "J'ai perdu mon Eurydice!" ("I've lost my Eurydice!") He was not alone.
Half the city of Paris seemed to be weeping along with the doomed lovers.
After an all-too-rare performance of that 1774 version of the opera at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday night, there were no tears in evidence, but there were a fair number of smiles.
This was partly a sign of how drastically different our sensibility is from Gluck's.
His sentimental tragedy now inspires esthetic pleasure instead of profound empathy.
But it was also a tribute to L'Opera Francais de New York, which under its artistic director, Yves Abel, created such a charming and well-executed concert version of this work.


CLINTON EXHORTS RUSSIANS TO HALT WAR IN CHECHNYA
President Clinton called today for an end to the Russian military onslaught in the secessionist region of Chechnya but also said that it would be wrong for the United States to respond by cutting back on aid to Moscow.
Until today, Mr.
Clinton had said almost nothing in public about the Russian assault, letting the State Department express official alarm and reserving his own criticism to a letter he sent last week to President Boris N. Yeltsin.
But White House officials said the new determination being shown by Russian forces to impose a military solution to the crisis, together with growing criticism from Congress, had led Mr.
Clinton to speak out.


State Street Boston Corp.(STBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Correction: Met Denies Blocking Sale of Painting
The Metropolitan Museum of Art said yesterday that it did not step in at an auction on Thursday to pre-empt the sale of Lo Scheggia's "Triumph of Fame" to a London dealer who had offered $2.2 million.
The New York Times erroneously reported such an action yesterday.
"We never said it's not possible," said Harold Holzer, a spokesman for the museum.
"But no decision has been made on whether or not to do so."


Coltec Industries Inc.(COT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
In his 44 years as an actor, NIGEL HAWTHORNE has never missed a performance -- until now.
On Monday and Tuesday, he will step out of the comedy "The Clandestine Marriage," which he is directing and in which he stars in London's West End, to come to New York to beat publicity drums for an Academy Award nomination or two.
He plays the title role in the film "The Madness of King George," which opened here last month.
In fact, performances of "The Clandestine Marriage" will be canceled for the two days that Mr.
Hawthorne will be in the United States.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Interpreting Philip Glass On an Appropriate Instrument  Donald Joyce, organist St.
Paul's Chapel Lower Manhattan


Police Raids Attempt to Crush A Notorious Numbers Game
When Raymond Marquez -- better known as Spanish Raymond -- was arrested last April on gambling charges, the authorities thought they had finally brought down the numbers empire they say he had built over 30 years as a legendary figure in Harlem and East Harlem.
They attached $35 million of his assets and believed, as he awaited trial free on his own recognizance, that his gambling days were over.
But last night, the authorities were seeking Spanish Raymond once again, asserting that -- unchastened by the prospect of up to 25 years in prison -- he was back working the old numbers game.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Olajuwon Scores 47 Points for Rockets  Vernon Maxwell hit a 3-pointer with four-tenths of a second to play and Hakeem Olajuwon scored a season-high 47 points as Houston beat visiting San Antonio, 103-100, last night.
Houston's victory, its eighth in nine games, snapped San Antonio's six-game winning streak. (AP) Magic 101, Hawks 96: Anfernee Hardaway hit 4 free throws in the final 15 seconds and Shaquille O'Neal blocked 2 shots in the final 46 seconds as Orlando downed the Hawks in Atlanta.
Hardaway scored 26 points and O'Neal and Donald Royal added 21 apiece as the Magic raised the National Basketball Association's best record to 28-7. (AP) Timberwolves 104, Pistons 92: The rookie Donyell Marshall scored 25 points, including 2 3-pointers during a third-quarter run, to help Minnesota snap its 7-game losing streak by defeating injury-ravaged Detroit.
Christian Laettner had 25 points and Isaiah Rider had 22 as Minnesota also ended its string of games under 100 points at 16 in a row. (AP) Pacers 113, Bullets 99: Reggie Miller scored 31 points and Dale Davis played a key role in a third-quarter surge that carried Indiana past Washington in Landover, Md., the Bullets' 10th straight loss.
Davis scored 10 of his season-high 25 points in the third period, when Indiana extended its 5-point halftime lead to a 16-point cushion. (AP) Jazz 95, Celtics 93: Utah erased an 8-point deficit with a 12-2 run in the last 5:34 and stretched its road winning streak to a club-record 11 games with the victory over Boston. (AP) Kings 89, Bulls 79: Olden Polynice scored 21 of his season-high 25 points in the first half to lead Sacramento to its fourth victory in five games.
The Bulls shot only 22 percent in the fourth quarter as their home record dropped to 10-9.
For the game, Chicago shot just 39 percent. (AP) Sonics 108, Clippers 101: At Tacoma, Wash., Detlef Schrempf scored 23 points and Kendall Gill had 20 as Seattle won its fifth straight game.
The victory pulled the Sonics within two games of the idle Phoenix Suns in the Pacific Division.
Los Angeles has lost four in a row. (AP) Lakers 115, Warriors 104: At Inglewood, Calif., Nick Van Exel had 24 points and 14 assists as Los Angeles handed Golden State its seventh straight loss. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Aouita Finishes Fourth in Comeback Run The crowd was curious to see how the runner Said Aouita of Morocco would do in his first race since he retired due to injuries in March 1992.
But Aouita's comeback was spoiled by the winner, Graeme Fell of Canada, last night in the 3,000-meter race of the Hamilton (Ontario) Indoor Games.
Aouita ran 8 minutes 10.45 seconds and finished fourth.
The Moroccan, who had established world records in the 1,500, 2,000 and 5,000 meters in his career and won a gold medal in the 1984 Olympics, was in the middle of the pack throughout the race and never seriously challenged. (AP) GOLF Ogle Struck in the Face by Splintered Club  The defending champion, Brett Ogle, apparently escaped serious injury yesterday when struck under the left eye by a splintered golf club during the second round of the Hawaiian Open in Honolulu.
There was no immediate report on the extent of the injury, but a PGA Tour spokesman said Ogle may have fractured the orbital bone under his left eye.
He also had a gash on his left arm.
Duffy Waldorf led the event after two rounds with an 11-under-par score of 133.
He was three strokes ahead of Clark Dennis, John Morse and Dan Pohl. (AP) Floyd Takes Early Lead: Raymond Floyd shot a four-under-par 68 yesterday to take a one-stroke lead after the opening round of the Senior Tournament of Champions in Dorado, P.R., the season-opening event on the tour for players 50 years and over.
Battling winds gusting up to 20 miles an hour on Hyatt Dorado Beach's East course, Floyd was one of only four players to break par on the back nine.
Jack Kiefer and Jim Dent were second at 69. (AP) TENNIS Meskhi Claims Title in Tasmanian Open  Leila Meskhi won the $107,500 Tasmanian International Women's Open today, defeating Fang Li, 6-2, 6-3.
Meskhi needed only 72 minutes to beat Fang in Hobart, Australia. (AP) SOCCER Denmark Tops Argentina to Win Cup  The European champion, Denmark, won the six-nation Intercontinental Cup yesterday in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, by beating Argentina, 2-0, on goals by Michael Laudrup and Peter Rasmussen. (AP)


Assistant Principals Aren't Bureaucratic Fat
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has demanded that 2,500 bureaucrats be pared from the New York City Board of Education payroll.
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines has cut 1,400 employees at central headquarters and is planning to cut 700 more.
While they agree in principle, disagreement over which workers constitute fat and which constitute muscle resulted in a rift between the Mayor and the Chancellor.


Corrections
Because of a production error, a picture of Gov.
George E. Pataki visiting Washington carried an incorrect caption and credit yesterday in some copies.
It showed Mr.
Pataki addressing the New York Congressional delegation, not meeting with Governors William Weld of Massachusetts and Howard Dean of Vermont.
The photographer was David Scull of The New York Times.


Man Accused in Terror Plot Bombed Gay Bar, U.S. Says
Federal prosecutors plan to present evidence that some of the 12 men charged in a terrorist conspiracy to blow up New York City landmarks were also responsible for a host of other crimes, including the 1990 bombing of a gay bar, international arms smuggling, drug trafficking and the attempted murder of Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
In a letter from prosecutors to defense lawyers released yesterday, the prosecutors accuse El Sayyid A. Nosair, one of the alleged leaders of the terrorist ring, of bombing a Greenwich Village gay bar, Uncle Charlie's, on April 28, 1990, injuring three people.
Mr.
Nosair, who like the other defendants is Muslim, attacked the bar because he objected to homosexuality on religious grounds, according to the letter.


DPL Inc.(DPL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


International Dairy Queen (INDQA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Japanese Tire Maker Clashes With Labor Chief Over Strike
Over the past week, the head of the American operations of the giant Bridgestone Corporation of Japan has rebuffed repeated appeals from Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich to discuss a six-month strike at four of the company's eight plants in the United States, and Mr.
Reich is incensed.
"Japanese companies have been model citizens in this country," Mr.
Reich said on Thursday.
"This company has just thrown that out the window." In the two years since he took office, he said, no chief executive or labor leader involved in a strike has ever turned down an appeal from him to meet and talk.


Goodfellow reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Religion Journal; A Cardinal's Order Divides Boston Abortion Foes
In a nation bitterly divided over abortion, Bernard Cardinal Law's call for a moratorium on vigils at abortion clinics has rung loud and clear as a gesture intended to defuse tensions.
But within the Archdiocese of Boston, where he has wanted it to apply, his request has been received with something less than unanimity among anti-abortion leaders.
"Absolutely, 100 percent, we are backing the moratorium," said Frances X. Hogan, executive vice president of Massachusetts Citizens for Life, the state's largest and oldest anti-abortion organization.


Rates Tumble on Weak Retail Sales
Interest rates fell sharply yesterday, pushed lower by surprisingly weak retail sales figures that reduced the odds, market participants said, of a big increase in short-term rates by the Federal Reserve later this month.
Monthly retail sales figures are notoriously volatile and are often subject to major revision.
Even so, the one-tenth of 1 percent decline in December sales reported by the Commerce Department, accompanied by a downward revision of a full percentage point to the November sales figures, left most analysts rubbing their eyes in disbelief.


Taylor Is San Francisco's Quiet Threat
John Taylor. The other guy.
The guy opposite Jerry Rice at receiver.
The guy who does not grant interviews.
The guy who caught the winning touchdown pass in the closing seconds of Super Bowl XXIII.


Reprogramming a Convicted Hacker; To His On-Line Friends, Phiber Optik Is a Virtual Hero
Three years ago, Mark Abene was a computer cowboy who roamed cyberspace when it was an unfenced frontier.
A computer geek who was "wired" long before the term was coined, he considered the Internet too easy and looked for a bigger challenge.
And he found it by breaking into the computer systems of some of the nation's biggest corporations -- a crime that landed him and three of his friends in Federal prison.
Since the four were charged in 1992 with the most extensive computer intrusions on record, the world has caught up with them.
Getting on line is the height of fashion; it has become a gathering place for everyone from the Rolling Stones to the Speaker of the House.


INSIDE
Religion Case Accepted
Resuming debate on the public display of religious symbols, the Supreme Court will rule on a cross put up by the Ku Klux Klan.
Page 11.
Hands Across the Hudson
Despite public warmth, it was by no means clear if Governors Whitman and Pataki had smoothed over recent differences.
Page 25.
Women Win in Yacht Debut
The first all-female crew in 144 years of America's Cup yacht racing won in its first race.
Page 31.


Walter Raines Tribute
A memorial tribute to Walter Raines, a principal dancer with Dance Theater of Harlem and the head of its school, is to be held on Monday at 2 P.M. at the Kaye Playhouse, Hunter College, 68th Street between Lexington and Park Avenues.
Mr.
Raines died in August.
The memorial will include performances by members of the Dance Theater company and school ensemble and the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, as well as by dancers from the Frankfurt Ballet and Netherlands Dance Theater.


Sterling Dow, 91, A Leading Scholar On Ancient Greece
Sterling Dow, a leading expert on Greek history of the fifth and fourth centuries B.C, died on Monday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 91 and lived in Cambridge.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said a grandson, Bradley M. Lown of Portsmouth, N.H.


Krone Injured in Spill, but Not Badly
Julie Krone, who surmounted a star-crossed career to become the most successful female jockey in racing history, suffered a broken finger on the left hand, a possible hairline fracture of the left wrist and a bruised right hand yesterday in a four-horse spill at Gulfstream Park in Florida.
But the 4-foot-10-inch, 100-pound rider apparently escaped more severe injuries that could have endangered her career.
She was reported in fair condition at Hollywood (Fla.) Memorial Hospital, where she was kept overnight for observation after earlier reports from the Gulfstream medical department had suggested more extensive injuries.


Issue of Racism Erupts in Simpson Trial
An emotionally charged and highly personal courtroom battle erupted today between a black prosecutor and a black defense lawyer in the O. J. Simpson trial, over whether the jury should be allowed to hear a racial epithet.
The unusually heated exchange came as defense lawyers sought a ruling allowing them to introduce evidence during the trial that Mark Fuhrman, a detective who was one of the first investigators at the crime scene, has racist tendencies.
They want to cite several instances in which Detective Fuhrman is said to have used the word "nigger."


Bridge
Playing a hand well normally generates some profit, in terms of money, master points, prestige or at worst, a pat on the back from partner.
But there are exceptions.
The diagramed deal was played in a class, with an expert in the South position and three students in the other seats.
South charged into four spades, after West had opened one no-trump and North had overcalled in diamonds, knowing that East held a virtual yarborough.
The heart king was led and allowed to win.
Shifting to a trump would not have helped, for South would have cleared all the trumps and eventually run diamond tricks.
So West continued with a low heart, encouraged by East's play of the jack on the first trick.


Too Soon to Lift Iraq Sanctions
The United Nations Security Council was right not to ease economic sanctions against Iraq this week.
France and Russia pushed for relaxation and the United States and Britain resisted.
While Iraq has inched closer to compliance with U.N. strictures on weapons of mass destruction and the means to make them, it has not yet crossed the goal line.
The case for maintaining sanctions is clear.
U.N. resolutions require Iraq to do more than destroy its Scud missiles and chemical arms before it can resume exporting oil.
It must allow U.N. monitoring of facilities capable of making nuclear, chemical and biological arms and missiles, and disclose the sources of materials used in their manufacture.
A new report by the U.N. inspectors shows that Baghdad has yet to come clean.


Social Security Primer
To the Editor:
In "Welfare Debate Will Re-Examine Old Assumptions" (front page, Jan. 2) you say that "neither Democrats nor Republicans are proposing significant changes in the largest entitlement program, Social Security." You explain the great cost of entitlements, applying the words "entitlement program" to welfare.


Teams and Players Escalate Labor War
Three weeks after major league baseball club owners declared an impasse in negotiations and implemented a salary cap, the executive council took the next step in the labor war yesterday, approving guidelines for the use of replacement players for the 1995 season.
On the other side of the front line, the players union was also escalating its efforts.
A union official said last night that all players on the clubs' 40-man rosters, not just those who went on strike Aug. 12, will be advised not to report to spring camps when they open next month.
The absence of all of the roster players would deprive clubs of their top 10 or 15 minor league prospects for the minor league season.


Should O'Donnell Line Up Right of the Center?
He doesn't throw many touchdowns.
But he doesn't throw many interceptions.
He doesn't toss long passes downfield.
He connects on the short ones.
"The Steelers' offense describes Neil O'Donnell," wide receiver Yancey Thigpen said today.
"It's conservative. He's conservative."


Region News Briefs; Statements Permitted In L.I.R.R. Trial
A Nassau County judge has denied Colin Ferguson's bid to suppress statements he made to the police and notes found in his pocket, in his trial on charges of killing six people aboard a Long Island Rail Road train in 1993.
The trial is to begin on Tuesday.
The judge, Donald E. Belfi, said today that he found no basis to suppress any of the statements Mr.
Ferguson made on the night he was arrested.


First Commerce Corp.(FCOM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Springs Agrees to Acquire Dundee
Springs Industries, which makes Springmaid and Bill Blass bedding, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the towel maker Dundee Mills Inc. for $120 million in cash and stock.
A merger of the two century-old Southern companies would continue a pattern of consolidation in the textile industry.
In the 1970's, a large part of textile makers' business was spinning yarns into fabric for apparel makers.
When garment makers began buying imported yardage, the textile makers moved into new areas like home furnishings, which are less vulnerable to imports.


Look Who's Here


Much Black Skepticism on Charges Of a Plot by Daughter of Malcolm X
The last time Richard Green saw Qubilah Bahiyah Shabazz was in New York last year during Black History Month, when she and her sisters accepted an award for Dr.
Betty Shabazz, their mother and Malcolm X's widow.
Mr.
Green, a longtime friend of the mother, remembers the grace and the kindness of the sisters, who were youngsters when their father was shot to death in a Harlem ballroom in 1965.


Top Guard Has Ankle Operation
St.
Raymond's CHARLTON CLARKE, considered to be among the top high school basketball guards in the nation, underwent surgery yesterday to insert a screw into his broken left ankle.
The 6-foot-3-inch senior broke his left ankle last Saturday while making the winning shot for the Bronx school in its 61-60 victory over Rice.
Clarke is expected to be out from 5 to 10 weeks, jeopardizing the balance of his senior year.
He has not committed to a college.
Clarke was averaging 30 points a game.


Forstmann &amp; Co.(FSTM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


A Shake-Up For Italy's Fininvest
In a management shake-up, the Fininvest group of Italy's caretaker Prime Minister, Silvio Berlusconi, is set to announce that the tough turnaround artist called in a little over a year ago to streamline the $7.2 billion conglomerate and reduce its heavy debt load will step aside as chief executive.
A Fininvest spokesman said the executive, Francesco Tato, would move next Friday to head Mondadori, Italy's largest publisher, which is 47 percent owned by Fininvest.
The duties of running the day-to-day operations of Fininvest and overseeing its restructuring are expected to be assumed by Fedele Confalonieri, the group's 57-year old president, who is a close friend of Mr.
Berlusconi.


Washington Declares War on the Environment; Wild Geese Adapting
To the Editor:
The Alabama golf course managers who are trying to get rid of Canada geese, which eat the grass and foul the greens, were wise to cancel the proposed hunts (Scottsboro Journal, Jan. 6).
Had the hunts been held, the managers would have found that the surviving geese would have soon returned and repopulated the area.


International Rectifier (IRF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hold in Position, Cessna Was Told in Tape of Runway Crash
Seconds before a Trans World Airlines MD-80 jet collided with a small Cessna plane in its path on a runway in St.
Louis last November, air traffic controllers told the Cessna to use caution and continue holding in its position.
A transcript of the conversations between traffic controllers and the two planes then show a pilot of the T.W.A. jetliner telling controllers: "T.W.A. 427 hit the other airplane on the, uh, runway. Roll the emergency equipment."


POP
Troubled Songs in a Voice That Groans and Aches  Chris Whitley Brownie's


COMPANY BRIEFS
CORPORATE EXPRESS INC., Broomfield, Colo., an office products supplier, agreed to acquire the office products division of Joyce International Inc., a private company based in New York, for about $27.5 million.
ORKLA A.S., Norway, said it was negotiating to sell 50 percent of Helly-Hansen Redmond, Wash., its outdoor apparel company, to Resource Group International, a privately held company based in Seattle, for undisclosed terms.


Remembering Martin Luther King Jr.


In Emerging Markets, Mexico Is Everywhere
IT was late 1993.
People who invest in emerging nations were impatient and jittery.
They talked about expected growth, a great need for capital and the future global role of these countries.
On the surface, things were much like today -- but only on the surface.
"Back then, people were afraid of missing the boom," said Thomas Herzfeld, a specialist in closed-end mutual funds.
"Now, instead of a buyers' panic, we're verging on a sellers' panic."


POP
A Slide-Guitar Holdout Goes Beyond Rural Roots  Dave Tronzo, guitarist The Knitting Factory


Short Circuit In Elevator Led to Death, Officials Say
The runaway elevator that decapitated a man last week malfunctioned because two small wires short-circuited, touching each other after their insulation coatings melted, city officials said yesterday.
The Department of Buildings, announcing its findings, called the defect so rare that its experts could not recall a similar case.
Commissioner Joel A. Miele expressed confidence in the safety of elevators in the city.


Davis Fuels Comeback As Knicks Save Streak
Trailing by 17 points in the third quarter tonight, the Knicks needed a Houdini-like effort to escape with a victory.
Hubert Davis set the stage with a barrage of 3-point shots.
The handcuffs were provided by the Knicks' defense.
And when the final act was over, the Knicks' road show had another successful outing.
Extending their season-high winning streak to eight games, New York (20-12) stormed back to beat the Milwaukee Bucks, 91-88, at the Bradley Center.
Davis's long-range shooting (21 points) provided the spark in the second half as he shot 5 for 7 from 3-point range.


Stryker Corp.(STRY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; The Drum Major And D. C.
Of all the speeches and essays given and written by Martin Luther King Jr., the one I find myself returning to is a sermon he gave in Atlanta in 1968, three months before his assassination.
The sermon was called "The Drum Major Instinct."


A Wall Street Engineer Tends His Money Temple
WHEN Jimmy Ahern hit the Lotto for $3 million back in 1988, Mark Sullivan also reaped significant benefit.
What happened was that just before Mr.
Ahern took his winnings and moved to Florida, he picked Mr.
Sullivan, who was then 32 years old, as the man who should replace him as the operating engineer at 55 Wall Street.
There was no question that Mr.
Sullivan was qualified.
Ten years earlier he had gone down to the financial district from the Bronx to clean buildings as a porter while studying painting and illustration at the School of Visual Arts.
Bit by bit he moved up, learning wiring, plumbing, masonry, elevators.
He learned Wall Street boiler room operations -- not the boiler rooms where salesmen tried to sell stock through high pressure phone calls, but actual boiler rooms that supplied heat.


A Restaurant in Limbo Land, With Symbolism on the Menu
Ever since William Saroyan set "The Time of Your Life" in a waterfront saloon, in 1939, the American drama has been filled with bars and restaurants where lost souls mouth off poetically and metaphysics is always on the menu.
Now the writer and director Susan Mosakowski, an artistic director and co-founder of the Creation Company, has decided to detonate the genre that gave us "The Iceman Cometh" and "Kennedy's Children."
The result is a wittily staged, peppery slice of absurdism called "The Tight Fit," which runs at La Mama (74A East Fourth Street, East Village) through tomorrow.
Set in an antiseptic-looking diner (designed by Ms. Mosakowski) that recalls the futurist fantasies of the 1960's, the one-hour play assembles four characters of allegorically significant professions who make the disenfranchised boozers of "Iceman" seem rock solid.


Nation of Islam Says It Doubts Account of Assasination Plan
The indictment of Malcolm X's daughter on charges of conspiring to kill Louis Farrakhan provoked widespread skepticism today, from the Nation of Islam, blacks around the country and former associates of the crucial Government witness in the case.
Prosecutors have declined to identify the witness, apparently the person whom the 34-year-old defendant, Qubilah (pronounced keh-BEE-lah) Shabazz, is charged with trying to hire as an assassin.
But lawyers close to the defense identified him today as Michael Fitzpatrick, 34, a friend of Ms.
Shabazz from their high school years in New York City.


Fiddling With Folk to Take It Downtown
As a dancer, Sarah Skaggs has the long-necked elegance of a woman in a Modigliani painting, an outward cool that hints at hidden emotion.
Perhaps that is why the fire-and-ice blend in her choreography seems only natural.
The two works presented by her company, Sarah Skaggs Dance, on Wednesday night in the continuing Altogether Different series at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea) were predicated on a marriage of detailed structure and exuberant energy.
In the recent "Higher Ground," this contrast between pattern and passion is still fresh, but in a premiere, "Folked Up!," it is drowned in an overload of concepts.


MGIC Investment (MTG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


St. Paul Bancorp Inc.(SPBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


War. Peace. Aid. All Issues Are Trade Issues
JUST hours after the Senate confirmed Robert E. Rubin as Secretary of the Treasury last week, he received an immediate full-immersion lesson in what life is like these days sitting under the giant portrait of Alexander Hamilton.
Rather than arm-wrestle with Newt Gingrich over the Administration's forthcoming budget, or shoot his signature over to the Bureau of Engraving for inclusion on every new dollar bill, he spent endless hours on the telephone to capitals around the world, trying to keep the United States' biggest neighbor, Mexico, from going down the tubes.
Mr.
Rubin's task was to out-psych currency speculators and nervous investors the way American policy-makers once tried to out-psych the Soviet military: Make elaborate and very public plans for coming to an ally's defense in hopes of deterring all attacks.
In this case, the plans were for loan guarantees for Mexico, stitched together Thursday night at the White House by Mr.
Rubin, President Clinton, Mr.
Gingrich and other Republican leaders, and the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Alan Greenspan.


Topics of The Times; Big Apple West
MGM Grand, evidently not content to boast that its Las Vegas hotel is the largest in the world, has an even grander idea -- to re-create New York City on 18 acres across the street.
Its partner, Primadonna Resorts, claims no less modestly that it has "the world's tallest and fastest roller coaster" at one of its resorts on the Nevada-California state line.
Some New Yorkers may be flattered, others offended, that someone would reproduce their great city in the capital of glitz and gambling.
But it shall be.
The designers of "New York-New York" -- the project's name -- promise the Statue of Liberty, the Manhattan skyline, Coney Island fun and rides, "other famous New York landmarks and attractions" and, of course, another outsized hotel-casino.


A Drama That Puts Alcatraz on Trial
"WE ARE PUTTING Alcatraz on trial," stated one of the public defenders in the case of the United States of America v.
Henri Young, in United States District Court in San Francisco in 1941.
It was those six words that piqued the interest of the writer, producers and director of "Murder in the First," a courtroom drama that opens on Friday.
Christian Slater portrays the lawyer who indicts Alcatraz in his defense of Young, a prisoner who killed a fellow convict after more than three years in solitary confinement in the dungeons below Alcatraz's main cell block.
Kevin Bacon portrays Young, and Gary Oldman plays a sadistic prison warden.
Although the movie takes liberties with the true story, the trial that it highlights was a real one, and it brings a long-forgotten case -- and the prison-reform issues it raised -- back into the spotlight.


Martin Luther King: New York Images


Janice Verderame, Glenn Hofferber
Janice Ann Verderame, a daughter of Joan Verderame of North Caldwell, N.J., and the late John A. Verderame Jr., was married yesterday to Glenn Peter Hofferber, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Hofferber of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
The Rev.
Brian Cullinane performed the ceremony at Notre Dame Roman Catholic Church in North Caldwell.
Mrs.
Hofferber, 30, graduated from Rutgers University and is studying for an M.B.A at New York University.
She is a vice president of global corporate finance at the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
Her father was the director of finance for Plessey Inc., a military contractor in Wayne, N.J.
The bride's mother is an associate professor of surgical technology at Bergen Community College in Paramus, N.J.


Latrobe Journal; Bringing In Some MIG Fighters From Cold War
Growing up amid the quiet farm lands of Grafton, W.Va., David Austin remembers lying on his back in fields near his house, listening and watching for airplanes.
He had no idea where they were headed or what kind they were.
With a well-developed interest in World War II aircraft and the Korean War still under way, he let his imagination fill in all the necessary blanks.


Business Diary: January 8-13
THE ECONOMY There Was Nothing to Inflate but Fear of Inflation Itself  Inflation, inflation, inflation -- that's all we heard about last year.
Dire warnings, hand-wringings -- and, of course, repeated Federal Reserve interest-rate increases to head it off.
But when the final '94 numbers came in last week, one couldn't help wondering what all the fuss was about.
Dread inflation, as measured by consumer prices, was a puny 2.7 percent for the year -- the fourth straight year under 3 percent.
With one exception, in fact, that was the lowest rate in three decades.
And there were signs that the mighty economy was slowing, too.
The Commerce Department reported that retail sales had slumped unexpectedly in December -- and, a bigger surprise, that November was weaker than first reported.
This was taken as a sign that the Fed might hold off on future rate increases, and stocks and bonds roared ahead.
Oh, Yes: The Minimum Wage  It's often hard to tell Democrats from Republicans these days -- from the silvery wads of hair atop Bill Clinton and Newt Gingrich to those near-unison tax and welfare cantatas.
But one issue survives: the minimum wage.
Mr.
Clinton, campaigner, vowed to raise it; Mr.
Clinton, President, shelved it as he took that messy health care detour.
Now it's back.
Al Gore and Richard Gephardt (who calls it "a metaphor for the differences" between the parties) want to raise the wage, whose buying power is slipping mercilessly, while Dick Armey, House majority leader, wants to scrap the wage floor entirely.
The case for keeping it at $4.25: raising it would mean wide job losses, and most low-wage workers are teen-agers, not breadwinners.
Economists beg to differ: their studies predict negligible job losses, and show that just a third of four million minimum-wage earners are teen-agers; nearly half provide vital family support.
California Takes a Bath  Merrill Lynch and Orange County lobbed grenades back and forth last week in their billion-dollar blame game.
First Merrill released letters showing that it had warned the county in 1992 that it was playing with fire with its explosive investment fund.
Then the county sued Merrill for $2 billion, saying the firm had misrepresented the securities -- that it was illegal to buy them anyway.
Merrill's response: the county was glad to get hefty returns for years, but now, "in effect, they're saying, 'Heads we win, tails you lose.' " . . .
As this was unfolding, the gods got impatient with all the finger-pointing and unleashed 40 days' and 40 nights' worth of rain on the entire state (all in just a few days).
Hit the Ice, Already!
With football nearing its orgasmic finale and baseball a fuzzy memory, sports addicts who suffer post-Super Bowl withdrawal faced the horrifying prospect of having only basketball to distract them. (Sports pages would probably soon be reporting basement Ping-Pong games.) But last week it appeared that there'd be a hockey season after all.
The settlement was grumpy, though -- both union and management were so dissatisfied, there wasn't even a public handshake.
Greenspan Has a Better Way  As the battle raged last week over that bit of mandated morality known as a balanced-budget amendment, Alan Greenspan unexpectedly offered to toss $150 billion into the kitty.
The Government, he insists, could save that much over five years if it would just calculate inflation more carefully.
The price index, he says, exaggerates inflation by 0.5 to 1.5 points, and since so many payments are tied to inflation -- Social Security, pensions, some union wages -- billions go out needlessly.
Republicans liked the idea, though it does involve treading on that sacred ground called Social Security, while Democrats didn't waver from their demand that would-be budget-balancers "show us the fine print," as Richard Gephardt put it.
Jobs, in Black and White  "Economic recovery" -- those are empty words to most blacks.
While the rosy numbers pile up -- on unemployment, say, or consumer prices -- blacks, as usual, are left far behind.
There's been a breakthrough of sorts, for recent data show that the unemployment rate for blacks just dipped below 10 percent for the first time since 1974.
It's probably just a statistical breakthrough, though, for if you scratch job numbers even slightly you see that they count only those looking for work, not those discouraged long ago.
After all, just 24 percent of black youths are working, and 49 percent of whites.
INTERNATIONAL Resolved: To Help Mexico  Democrats and Republicans were in clear agreement last week: they wanted a quick end to the Mexican crisis.
That $18 billion credit line announced over a week ago clearly didn't do the trick, as both the peso and Mexican stocks kept falling.
So the White House, with quick support from Congressional Republicans, came up with a big package of loan guarantees (it didn't give numbers, though estimates put it as high as $40 billion).
And -- this was vital -- the move, involving loans, didn't open up any hornets' nests by adding to the budget back home.
One thing in peril, of course, is the success of the North American Free Trade Agreement -- if the peso stays weak, there'll be precious few exports to Mexico.
Hail the Conquering Apple!
Life without apples, some say, is not worth living -- though the Japanese have somehow muddled through.
With a good apple costing up to $6 in Japan, they've been treasured gifts, not daily fare.
But salvation has arrived -- greeted by thankful hordes.
Japan, never known to open its markets lightly, lifted import restrictions a quarter century ago -- in theory.
In fact, it has kept foreign apples out all these years for fear that they'd carry disease (or so it said).
But last week was D-Day for American apples, and Japanese consumers snatched them up in no time.
At last report, no Japanese had been banished from their island Eden for partaking of this once-forbidden joy.
COMPANIES Soon It'll Be the 'Gatesnet'  Clearly, it's not enough for Bill Gates to be the nation's richest human, to dominate the software universe, to build himself a digital San Simeon.
No, he wants the world -- and since his world is computers, that means the Internet.
Last week he said Microsoft had plans to be one of the world's largest commercial providers of Internet access, through its Microsoft Network, to start later this year.
This, of course, puts strong competitive pressure on Compuserve, Prodigy and the like -- and could also provide a great lure for businesses, now computer-wary, to make the digital plunge.
Defy Microsoft at Your Peril  In case there were any lingering doubts about Microsoft's software dominance, just look at Borland International.
Philippe Kahn, who founded Borland in 1983, kept lashing out defiantly at Microsoft -- and kept getting swatted down.
It was undercut by a Microsoft desktop-application package it couldn't match, and it was late delivering key programs -- all adding up to repeated losses.
So last week, after months of demands by big investors, Mr.
Kahn resigned as chief executive -- though he'll stay on as chairman.
The next step: possibly a sale of the company, either as a whole or in parts.
Golf?
Not for Dr.
Vagelos  What do you do when you retire, at 65, from a mighty career?
You could play golf, but that didn't appeal to P. Roy Vagelos.
Dr.
Vagelos, who built Merck into a drug giant before leaving in November, joined a tiny biotech company called Regeneron Pharmaceuticals last week -- saying, in partial explanation, "I don't play golf." Is this a rerun of John Sculley's disastrous sojourn at Spectrum?
After all, Regeneron has lost millions, recent tests of one drug were unsuccessful, and its shares have plunged (though they jumped on this news).
Dr.
Vagelos sees more, calling the company's scientists "some of the best I have seen." What, No Dashboard Nintendo?
"Oh, reason not the need!" King Lear thundered.
"Our basest beggars have too many cup holders!" But did Detroit listen?
Of course not.
Back when Detroit held its head up high, any car worth its chrome had fins you could ski down, or some awesome number of "horses." But drivers barely drive these days -- they're so busy talking on the car phone, playing a CD, drinking coffee.
So at the Auto Show in Detroit last week, the big news was things like cup holders -- G.M.'s mini-vans have 14 (14!) of them -- and his-and-hers climate controls.
All, in the words of Robert Eaton, Chrysler's chairman, to give drivers "things they don't even know they want." It's Chrysler's fault, of course -- it started the Great Cup Holder War when, a decade ago, it popularized those family-rooms-on-wheels called mini-vans.
A Statement That Refreshes  Is Coca-Cola trying to buy Quaker Oats?
Opinions vary.
Dan Dorfman, of CNBC, says it is.
Investors went along, sending Quaker's stock up $4.50 on Friday.
But Coke, relaxing its policy "not to comment on rumors," said, "Dan Dorfman does not have a clue."


Britain Intones: 'You Will Obey!'
RISING in Parliament last month, Colin Pickthall, a member of the Labor Party from Lancashire West, announced he had an important matter of public safety to raise before the House of Commons: It was, he said, the unchecked mesmeric powers of reckless stage hypnotists, and the growing roster of unwitting victims they were claiming across Britain.
In Glasgow, for example, there was recently the case of Ann Hazard, a 25-year-old woman who allowed herself to be put into a trance by a performing hypnotist.
When told to leave the theater by the quickest exit, she obeyed by walking straight off the edge of the stage, breaking her leg.
In London, Christopher Gates, also in his mid-20s, joined volunteers at a stage show and was instructed to imagine he was a young child; his family says that, nine months later, he still behaves like an 8-year-old.


CALIFORNIA STORM BRINGS RETHINKING OF DEVELOPMENT
With more than half of California declared a disaster area after the punch of a 10-day storm, water experts are questioning why this state remains stuck in a predictable cycle: devastation in a known flood area, followed by Federal relief, then rebuilding in the same places.
Today, the storms for the most part started to abate after causing 11 deaths and more than $300 million in damage.
Thirty-four of California's 58 counties have been declared Federal disaster areas.


Simpson Judge Is Said to Oust 2 From Jury
Less than a week before opening arguments in the O. J. Simpson murder trial are to begin, two jurors are expected to be dismissed from the panel and replaced with alternates, a person close to the case said today.
Judge Lance A. Ito of Los Angeles Superior Court discussed the results of an investigation with prosecutors and Mr.
Simpson's lawyers on Friday and said there was evidence of juror misconduct.
While the judge did not say what he would do, the person said, he indicated that his decision would be announced when the court reconvened on Tuesday.
The disclosure of the possible dismissals was first reported by The Daily News of Los Angeles.


When Popular Music Calls the Steps
POP MUSIC -- INCLUDING everything from hit songs and show tunes to blues, jazz and rock -- attracts ballet and modern-dance choreographers for countless reasons.
Good pop can serve as cultural artifact and epitomize a moment of history; it can draw audiences who enjoy feeling hip, hep or whatever the with-it term of the moment may be for attending so-called serious dance performances.
No wonder even choreographers who are at home with the symphonic classics romp through the fields of pop music.
Twyla Tharp has been doing this for years.
Hordes of ideas are dancing in her mind these days, and they're whirling to music ranging from Gluck and Bartok to Duke Ellington and doo-wop.
This melange accompanies "Red, White and Blues, New Works," her program that opens tomorrow night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.


Sports of The Times; Settlement Didn't Put Players in Penalty Box
THE forecast was for snow, and Bob Carpenter cringed at the thought of being marooned.
He didn't want to be late reporting to work for the National Hockey League team owned by John McMullen, who locked him out more than three months and was apparently ready, at one point last weekend, to close him down.
It was Tuesday up on Lake Winnipesaukee, N.H., where Carpenter lives, where he spent most of the lockout with his wife, Julie, and their 6-month old daughter, Alexandra.
Carpenter did some fishing in the fall.
He occasionally drove south to work out with some Boston Bruins.
Mostly, he waited for the season to begin.


In Magic Kingdom: 17 Victories at Home
Magic 91, 76ers 70
Shaquille O'Neal had 31 points and 10 rebounds to lead Orlando to a 91-70 victory over the visiting Philadelphia 76ers last night, the Magic's 17th victory in a row at home.


What They Overcame
For those of us who have forgotten, Flip Schulke's HE HAD A DREAM: Martin Luther King Jr. and the Civil Rights Movement (Norton, cloth, $39.95; paper, $19.95) will jog painful memories of the South in the 1960's; for the generation that never experienced it, it will provide a moving lesson on this nation's struggle for racial justice.
No master of the written word, Mr.
Schulke is instead an insightful photographer whose shots transcend his sometimes sentimental and awkward prose.
Mr.
Schulke, a veteran photojournalist, makes the atmosphere -- the despair and the exhilaration -- palpable in his images, which begin with King's funeral in 1968, then backtrack to the 1963 funeral of Medgar Evers, whose death, Mr.
Schulke writes, was "the first murder of a black civil rights leader the media had paid any attention to." The iconography of the civil rights movement is hauntingly familiar: beefy, helmeted police officers and sheriffs' deputies, nightsticks at the ready, lips tight and implacable; demonstrators, black and white, seemingly fixed in time and place by their dedication to the cause of equal rights.
Mr.
Schulke frequently compromised his credentials as an impartial observer; even King once rebuked him with the warning, "You have to stay back and not listen to your guts." His dislike of former Alabama Gov.
George Wallace became so intense, Mr.
Schulke writes, that he felt compelled to turn down magazine assignments about him.
His pictures of Federal marshals, armed segregationists and protesters illustrate his recollections of tear gas, Molotov cocktails and sniper bullets.
This is the third book Mr.
Schulke has produced about King, with whom his relationship sounds intimate and genuine.
"He'd give you a hug," Mr.
Schulke writes, "and you would die for the man." LYNN KARPEN


Defying the Confines of Labels and Race
EMMA AMOS'S paintings have descended on the Montclair Art Museum like a flock of tropical birds -- gaudy, raucous and seemingly bent on mischief.
"Changing the Subject," as this traveling show is called, has been organized by Holly Block, who directs Art in General, an alternative space in Manhattan that specializes in emerging artists of all ages and stripes.
As a painter and printmaker who has been visible for more than a decade and whose work is in several collections, notably those of the Newark and Zimmerli Museums and the Studio Museum in Harlem, Ms.
Amos can hardly be classified as "emerging." Yet the recognition she has received is not commensurate with either her esthetic achievements or with the influence she is said to exert as a professor at the Mason Gross School of the Arts of Rutgers University in New Brunswick.


An Educator With Roots in Farm Life of the 1900's
THERE is a gentle rocking as Virginia Parker sits talking, in her white socks, very white, her feet dancing.
We are wedged rather comfortably between two very old pianos, the player piano from her girlhood in this farmhouse where Virginia Parker was born, and at right angles to it, not very many feet away, an almost equally old upright of very dark wood.
From the windows the light comes in dappled, dotting the abundance of very old lamps, unlit now in the daytime, the ones on thin poles of wrought iron, sporting wires, and the ones on glass bases, seeming to abound upon every conceivable surface.
And also, very old and worn looking, and everywhere abounding, the books.
There are, as my eye wanders, among the antiquities many pigs of all varieties, some cut out and some made of china, in all positions of sleeping and waking and snorting.
In the yard, later on, I will have a chance to visit Lucy and Left-over, two very old pigs who have bodies the size of horses.
They are remarkably clean, with stiff pinkish-white bristles.


Tax Deductions for College
President Clinton decided shortly after election to cast aside his campaign pledge to cut taxes on middle-class families for the more pressing purpose of controlling the deficit.
He has paid dearly for that act of fiscal prudence.
The Republicans seized the political low ground by promising all but the richest 1 percent of families a $500-per-child tax cut.
The promise energized their campaign -- even though the spending cuts required to offset the tax cuts would punish the poor and most middle-class families as well.
The President had little choice but to respond in kind.
To his credit, he struggled to make the best of a bad idea.
His tax cut encourages something the economy desperately needs: a better-educated work force.
Mr.
Clinton proposes a tax deduction for most families of up to $10,000 per year to cover the cost of post-secondary education.
The idea is to stimulate the type of investment that lies at the core of his economic platform.
It is easy to poke holes in the plan.
But at least the President put a constructive goal before the public.


'River Rats' Batten Down Against Winter
During one harsh winter storm, Cindy Kane's houseboat was rocked so badly that her refrigerator fell over.
During another, Joe Fitzpatrick was walking to his boat when he slipped on an icy dock and fell in the water in his overcoat.
And this year, when ice accumulations weighed down the sailboat where she lives, Jane Clegg woke up in four feet of water and had to start pumping.
Winter is by far the most difficult season for residents of the 79th Street Boat Basin.
"It can be very perilous," said Ms.
Kane, who lives with her husband, their 2-year-old daughter and an orange cat on a 40-foot boat with one bedroom.
"But the summers make it all worthwhile."


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
ONE AFTERNOON IN THE LATE 1970's, deep in the labyrinthine interior of a massive Gothic tower in New Haven, an unsuspecting employee of Yale University opened a long-locked room in the Payne Whitney Gymnasium and stumbled upon something shocking and disturbing.
Shocking, because what he found was an enormous cache of nude photographs, thousands and thousands of photographs of young men in front, side and rear poses.
Disturbing, because on closer inspection the photos looked like the record of a bizarre body-piercing ritual: sticking out from the spine of each and every body was a row of sharp metal pins.
The employee who found them was mystified.
The athletic director at the time, Frank Ryan, a former Cleveland Browns quarterback new to Yale, was mystified.
But after making some discreet inquiries, he found out what they were -- and took swift action to burn them.
He called in a professional, a document-disposal expert, who initiated a two-step torching procedure.
First, every single one of the many thousands of photographs was fed into a shredder, and then each of the shreds was fed to the flames, thereby insuring that not a single intact or recognizable image of the nude Yale students -- some of whom had gone on to assume positions of importance in government and society -- would survive.


India Economic Reforms Yield a Measure of Hope
After decades of socialist economic policies, India was confronted with a stark truth as the 1990's began: its vast public ownership, crushing taxation, and forbidding Government regulation had left this nation of more than 850 million people at an economic dead end.
Stripped of crucial trade and oil concessions when the Soviet Union collapsed, and barely able to pay the interest on the $90 billion in foreign loans that propped up the socialist system, the Government that took office in May 1991 was forced to embrace free-market policies.


In Mexico, Hunger for Poor And Middle-Class Hardship
The three weeks since the peso was abruptly devalued have not been kind to the people of Mexico.
The worst economic crisis in a decade has splashed icy water on many who thought they had worked themselves up the ladder, and on many who remain at the bottom.
Prices have risen far more than the 10 percent wage increase the Government allowed in a recent pact with labor and business.
For Mexicans who are poor -- more than 45 percent of the 90 million people -- that means staples like cooking oil, eggs and milk have become distressingly like luxuries.


Postal Business Fits Equation
Last year, Frances Clark, an accountant, was certain of one thing: far too few clients were lined up in her St.
Albans office and far too many people were lined up at the local post office.
So Ms. Clark did the only reasonable thing: she opened a post office.


Shari-Lynn Umlas and Ari Odzer
Dr.
Shari-Lynn Umlas, a resident in radiology at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, was married last evening to Ari Odzer, a reporter for WNBC-TV in New York.
Rabbi Kurt Stone performed the ceremony at the Doral Ocean Beach Resort in Miami Beach.
Mrs.
Odzer, 29, received her undergraduate and medical degrees from Brown University.
Her parents, Stephen and Marsha Umlas of North Miami Beach, are real estate developers in South Florida.


At Work; Attacking Compulsory Arbitration
LAWYERS in San Francisco filed a sex discrimination lawsuit last week challenging the legal basis for requiring employees in the securities industry to submit work-related disputes to arbitration rather than taking them into the courts.
The suit is one of a handful of related challenges in the last year or two, but it significantly broadens the scope of the attack on a securities industry practice critics say is heavily biased in favor of employers.
The new suit contends that employees are being compelled to give up the protection of antidiscrimination laws like Title 7 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 as well as a few basic constitutional rights when they sign the standard mandatory arbitration agreement, or, as it is called, the Form U-4.
The plaintiff is asking for the right to take her case to court.


Verdi Edits Himself, Grudgingly, Brilliantly
GIUSEPPE VERDI HAS THE reputation of a straight shooter, a decisive and outspoken man of conviction, and in many ways it's deserved.
But he had a peculiar psychological quirk: whenever he was ambivalent about a course of action (which was often), he tended to make up his mind by firing off a letter declaring vociferously for the contrary of what he would eventually do.
This was true of matters as weighty as accepting a contract for an opera and as slight as permitting the transposition of an aria, or even sending a list of his decorations and honors to the Italian senate.


Electronic Meters Ease Some Parking Stress
A NEW system of computerized, so-called smart parking meters that have been introduced to some streets and garages in downtown White Plains is designed to make the paid parking experience less frustrating for users and more cost-effective for the city's parking authority.
The single-space electronic meters, which are on Mamaroneck Avenue between Main and Maple Streets and on Mitchell Place and Martine Avenue, have been replacing older parking meters over the last six months or so.
Instead of watching time elapse through relentless clicks of the familiar mechanized parking meters, the electronic parking meters display a digital countdown.


Corrections
A picture on Dec. 18 showing Salzburg at Christmastime carried an erroneous credit.
The photographer was Michael Kagan, not Steve Kagan.


Nonviolence Institute Seeks Peaceful Change
THE legacy of the civil rights movement may now be the stuff of public televisiondocumentaries and history courses, but to nearly two dozen dedicated volunteers in the county, the ideals of applying strategies of nonviolence for social change espoused by the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. aren't academic, but alive and well.
The Westchester Martin Luther King Jr.
Institute for Nonviolence, based at Manhattanville College in Purchase, operates on a $25,000 yearly budget and was started as part of a statewide initiative eight years ago to develop community programs.
About two and a half years ago, the institute became an independent nonprofit organization, which sees its educational mission as an ongoing extension of Dr.
King's efforts.


Block Association Chief Battles Exile
Even in a city renowned for cramped living spaces, Elaine Schechter's 300-square-foot West Village studio seems remarkably tiny.
"It's small, but it's home," she said.
Maybe not for long.
Ms.
Schechter, who is president of the Perry Street Block Association, may become a block association president in exile.


F.Y.I.
Drawing the Line
Q.
Why does Park Avenue become Park Avenue South at 32d Street?
Why isn't the whole thing just Park Avenue?
And wouldn't it make more sense to change the name at a major crossing like 42d, at Grand Central?


Hoyas Win From Outside Against Boston College
They have lost their second-leading scorer to academic problems.
Their star center has struggled.
And today another veteran guard was sidelined.
Still, all is well with the Georgetown Hoyas -- at least in the standings -- as they head into Monday night's Big East showdown at Connecticut.
The Hoyas have not lost since their season-opening slap in the face from defending national champion Arkansas.
Today, at USAir Arena, Georgetown (11-1 over all, 5-0 in the conference) beat Boston College (6-6, 0-5), 75-60, for its 11th victory in a row.


Wall Street; Special: Half Price on Home Shopping Network
AT half price, how can you pass this up?
That is, anyway, what they might say on Home Shopping Network if they were trying to sell their own stock.
Last week it plunged $1.875, or 19 percent, to $8, trading as low as $7.25.
Just a year ago, the shares were trading above $15.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Unlocking the Chains of Love
People whose sex lives don't involve chains and padlocks may have never considered what happens when you lose the key to your chastity belt.
In Berlin, you call Andreas Hoff.
By day, a mild-mannered part-owner of Franke und Hoff Konstruktion von Sondermaschinen, by night (well, actually 24 hours a day, since passion knows no clock) Hoff becomes an emergency locksmith to the S.&amp;M. crowd.


WHICH COUNTS MORE, GENDER OR RACE?
I realize that cutting was necessary in my conversation with Bebe Moore Campbell.
However, a point I consider crucial was left out: my speculative question about what the situation of African-Americans might be today if their enslaved ancestors had not converted to their masters' religion, in which passivity, faith and a belief in a (white, masculine) savior are central.
JOYCE CAROL OATES Princeton, N.J.


World News Briefs; U.N. Appoints Prosecutor For Rwandan Tribunal
The United Nations has appointed the former president of the Supreme Court of Madagascar as chief prosecutor for an international tribunal to try people accused of atrocities in Rwanda.
The prosecutor, Honore Rakotomanana, 61, will travel to Kigali, the Rwandan capital, in 10 days to establish a prosecutor's office and appoint an investigative team, said Christian Chartier, a spokesman for the United Nations International War Crimes Tribunal at The Hague.


Hotel Ratings: Tale of 2 Series
ON a rating scale of one to five, who wouldn't want to get a five?
The management of the Boca Raton Resort and Club, apparently.
Last fall it asked to be dropped from the Mobil Travel Guide and the American Automobile Association's Tourbook, two series that annually rate hotels and restaurants around the United States and Canada.
The resort had received five stars from Mobil for 12 consecutive years, five diamonds from the A.A.A. for nine years.


For Duran, Heart Now More Critical Than Hands
He has his father's roundish face, smooth Latin complexion and expansive nose.
Adolescence may one day bring him a goatee.
For now, the piercing brown eyes, tucked beneath the steep ledge of his brow, must suffice.
The grip in his handshake is remarkably firm for age 13, but then, what would one expect from Manos de Piedra (Hands of Stone) Jr.?


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
From Bread to Chevre, Via Computer
For some computer savvy shoppers, the drudgery of buying groceries may soon be as passe as the typewriter.
Starting today, subscribers to America On-Line and Compuserve who live between 96th Street and the Battery can dial 1-800-861-7442 or the shopping queue of their on-line service to place a grocery order from Food Emporium for same-day delivery.


America's Front Lawn
AS IT BEGAN TO SLEET ON New Year's Eve, I was sitting on a bench across from the White House dreaming of Carole Lombard.
Watching the homeless who live in Lafayette Park drift around, I was reminded of "My Man Godfrey," the 1936 romp in which Lombard, as a madcap New York society girl, looks for a "forgotten man" in a scavenger hunt.
Finding one (a down-at-the-heels William Powell) in a city dump on the East River, she offers him a job, asking blithely, "Can you butle?"


Jan. 8-14: The 'Other Woman'; A Tiny Step Is Taken Toward a Tarnished Throne
Queen Camilla?
What was once a remote impossibility turned into a remote improbability this week -- that Camilla Parker Bowles, famous to tabloid readers the world over as "the other woman" in Prince Charles' life, might someday ascend the British throne.
In an announcement that was as subdued as possible given the carnivores in the British press, lawyers for Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Parker Bowles said the couple was seeking a divorce after 21 years of marriage.
No one in Britain had to ask why.
Royal biographers have had a field day in describing Mrs.
Parker Bowles' "friendship" with the future monarch.
She is said to be the only woman he has really loved.


Apocalypse Then
It's the resting place of napalm -- the Fallbrook Naval Weapons Station in the California countryside between Los Angeles and San Diego (at left).
Since the Vietnam war the last 23 million pounds of napalm, a mixture of gasoline, benzene and polystyrene, have been held here.
Now the Navy is figuring out how to dispose of it.
There is no danger of conflagration in California.
The canisters don't have detonators.
But over the years they have begun to leak, and California environmental officials want the station to get rid of the napalm because it could contaminate ground water.
Some 1,774 canisters developed leaks in 1994.
They were repaired, removed or incinerated.
Nobody seems interested in buying the napalm for recycling and incineration is expensive, so it seems the Navy will have to hire a private company to take the napalm away.
Estimated cost -- $20 million.


Layers of History in Fribourg
MARCHING up the hillsides of the medieval city of Fribourg just 17 miles southwest of Bern, straddling the border between French- and German-speaking Switzerland, are ancient houses in the Gothic, Renaissance and Baroque styles.
Only a few years ago they were considered undesirable, but now, in the throes of gentrification, they have become sought after.
Halfway up, rows of 16th- to 18th-century private residences with oaken doors and finely worked grills convey a sense of old wealth along the Grand-Rue.
From that main street of old Fribourg it's only a few steps to the panoramic Zahringen Bridge, a stone structure named for the Bernese ducal family that in the 12th century founded the city.
Some 150 feet above the snaking Sarine River, which cuts into the valley, the bridge commands a view of the oldest neighborhoods deep below and of the fortifications that ring the city.


Texaco's Diversity Debate
To the Editor:
"At Texaco, the Diversity Skeleton Still Stalks the Halls" (Dec. 11) was untimely and unfair to Texaco Inc. and also cast a shadow on all hard-working black people in America, especially those at Texaco.
I recently retired from Texaco's Middle East-Far East division, which employed about 40 people, 6 of whom were black, including 2 senior female black employees.


In Cleveland, New Glories on Top of Old
WHEN CHRISTOPH VON Dohnanyi took over the music directorship of the Cleveland Orchestra in 1983, he stepped decisively into the repertory mainstream, setting to work on a traversal of the Beethoven symphonies for Telarc Records.
It was surely not lost on him that in his first inning he was taking on competition of legendary stature, George Szell's Beethoven recordings with the same orchestra, of 30 years before.
As it turned out, Mr.
Dohnanyi and his players produced an exemplary recorded cycle.
His tempos and dynamics were more fluid than Szell's, and the orchestra's sound was sometimes better focused and more thrilling.
But perhaps because of the current recording glut, the set is now overlooked.
When critics draw up lists of favorite Beethoven recordings, they tend to skip directly from Szell and other past masters to the hottest newcomers, neglecting the middle ground.
Still available, the cycle deserves a kinder fate.


A Town's Outsized Housing Role
HARTFORD and New Haven top the list of Connecticut communities with the highest percentage of public housing.
That is no surprise.
But not many people would be able to name the third.
Windham, a town of fewer than 22,000 people, has 278 public housing rooms per 1,000 residents, more than six times the state average of 43.


Laura Siegel, Laurence Rabinowitz
Laura Rachel Siegel, a daughter of Stanley and Patricia Siegel of Washington, is to be married today at the Pierre Hotel in New York to Laurence Philip Rabinowitz, a son of Solomon and Claire Rabinowitz of Riverdale, the Bronx.
The ceremony is to be performed by the bride's father, who is a lawyer in Washington and an ordained rabbi.
The bride is a lawyer for international trade litigation in the United States Custom Service in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.


Where's Tom?
To the Editor:
Ordinarily, I would not think of taking up space in your Letters column that could otherwise be devoted to one of those uplifting exchanges between disgruntled author and self-righteous reviewer; but since it is most unlikely that the diffident Martin Seymour-Smith will soon be putting pen to paper in order to express his opinion of James R. Kincaid's kindly review of his "Hardy" (Dec. 18), the task of making the importantly obvious point seems to have fallen to another.
Instead of "Tom the Misunderstood," shouldn't the review's headline have been "Tom the Obscured"?
DAVID ZIMMERMAN  Seattle


Plainfield's Gambling, a First, in Need of New Blood
ONCE, the 4,000-car parking lot at Plainfield Greyhound Park was filled nearly to overflowing every time Ike, the mechanical rabbit the dogs chase around the track, began his run.
But today, even on a good day, there are acres of parking space available for the matinees, and within an easy walk to the door at night.


30 Years Later, Ball Might Be in Their Court
In a city where space is tight, it pays to watch out: your basketball court might be turned into a church sanctuary before you know it.
That's what happened 30 years ago at Taft Houses, a public housing development at 1740 Madison Avenue, and residents have been smarting ever since.


Too Much Power for Shareholders?
To the Editor:
The proposal by John Pound to permit shareholder referendums on the sale or acquisition of significant corporate assets ("In Mergers, Shareholders Must Speak," Viewpoints, Dec. 4) would increase the role of shareholders in such decisions.
But it would also weaken the position of other corporate constituencies that have substantial and legitimate interests at stake.


Washington Memo; Republicans Want to Renew Vision Of Reagan (Then Redo His Math)
All over the Capitol these days the talk is of a Reagan revolution redux, a triumphant return by Republicans to an era of small government and more reliance than ever on the magic of the private sector.
This time, of course, they say they will avoid running up $2 trillion in accumulated deficits.
Supply-side theories for raising Federal revenue by cutting taxes and stimulating the economy have risen anew.
Republicans say the only problem with Ronald Reagan's vision is that no one took it far enough.


Amy S. Barton, Nathan R. Newbury
Dr.
Amy Sharon Barton, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Neil Barton of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., and Dr.
Nathan Reynolds Newbury, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Newbury 3d of Wayland, Mass., were married last evening.
Rabbi Barton Shallot performed the ceremony at the Harbor Club, a reception and catering hall in Huntington, L.I.
The bride, 28, will be known as Amy Barton Newbury.
She graduated from Cornell University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and her husband received doctorates in atomic physics from Princeton University.
She is a National Research Council postdoctoral fellow at the National Institute of Standards and Technology in Boulder, Colo.
Her father is an anesthesiologist emeritus at Huntington Hospital.
Her mother, Gloria Barton, is a medical management consultant with Physician Managerial Concepts Inc. in Huntington.


Streetscapes/570 Lexington Avenue; Columbia's Restoring an Art Deco Masterpiece
THE Art Deco General Electric Building, completed in 1931 at 570 Lexington Avenue, is a suave fantasy of polished marble and modern metals.
Now the new owner, Columbia University, is beginning a $3.5 million restoration to clean up some modern intrusions and attract tenants to one of New York City's most famous landmark skyscrapers.
What is commonly known as the General Electric Building was built in 1929-1931 for the Radio Victor Corporation of America.
In 1929 the Bartholomew Building Corporation hired the architects Cross &amp; Cross to design a 50-story office building chiefly for Radio Victor at the southwest corner of 51st Street and Lexington Avenue.


Famous Braids
What's the one question creative artists are asked more often than "Where do you get your ideas?" In the case of Janet Jackson it might be, "Where do you get your hair?" And how much hair, and how long does it take to make those amazing braids that first appeared in the film "Poetic Justice" and have since gained in popularity.
The answers are: She orders synthetic hair from Nina's Hair Center in Manhattan.
It takes about nine bags of No. 8 and No. 6 (light and medium reddish brown) to do her 'do.


Foreign Affairs; Ha Noi Or Ha Loi
Every morning in Hanoi I walk around the pagodas on Hoan Kiem Lake, and every morning I stop by this little Vietnamese woman crouched on the sidewalk with her bathroom scale, and every morning I give her a dollar and weigh myself.
That woman and her scale, probably her only possession in life, pretty well sum up Asia today: Everyone is in business, and whatever you've got, no matter how big or small -- sell it, trade it, barter it, leverage it, rent it, but do something with it to turn a profit.
It is micro-entrepreneurs like my weight-watcher who are the foundation stones of what is called the "Asian economic miracle." The gains they have made here are astounding.
But there is another side to this Asian economic miracle.
It is the story of what is being lost amidst the gains.


At a Birthday Party, Insults and Affection
UPTOWN -- Joey Adams, the comedian, was honored by his wife, Cindy Adams, the New York Post gossip columnist, with an 84th birthday dinner on Jan. 5 at the Friars Club.
"At the last party for me, Cindy invited John Gotti and Bess Myerson when they were both in trouble," Mr.
Adams said as his guests sat down.
"I said, 'What a party! If you're indicted, you're invited!' That was a great line."


Building Up From Ground Zero
HERE in southwest North Dakota, the population peaked decades ago and signs of economic decline are as commonplace as winter blizzards.
Farmers abandoned vast reaches of marginal cropland during the 1980's in return for Federal conservation payments, the latest in a long line of blows to farm equipment dealers, hardware stores, fuel supply companies and other local businesses.
Most high school graduates move away to find work.
In towns like Mott, which has 950 or so residents, commercial districts are pocked with empty storefronts and the surviving merchants cobble together diverse enterprises to make ends meet.
The laundromat here is also the television repair shop.
The florist rents tuxedos to bridegrooms and high school graduates.


Journal; Jo Rodham March
But you don't have to go to the movies to see this scenario play out.
Just take another look at the great Connie Chung-Kathleen Gingrich dust-up of '95.


The Twin Cities
By late January, most inhabitants of boreal cities are weary of water in its solid state.
In St.
Paul, which shares the banks of the Mississippi River with its sister city, Minneapolis, they simply make castles out of their nemesis.
In 1886, St.
Paulites inaugurated the Winter Carnival, whose main event was the construction of a palace out of 20,000 ice blocks cut from the river.
Every year since then -- barring those marred by warm weather, world wars or the Great Depression -- St.
Paul has built some sort of icy edifice or objet d'art and made a pageant of the season everyone else loves to hate.


Family Life Education In Ridgewood
Re: "How a Much-Praised Drug Program to Fight Drugs Lost Its Glow," Dec. 18:
The reason the DARE program did not win acceptance is that the existing Ridgewood program is better -- because it focuses on many age groups, is more broad in scope and is designed for Ridgewood.


Newt Age Music
Legislature sets the stage,
Social slaves caught in my rage
-- Slayer, "Dittohead"


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CLEOPATRA'S NOSE  Essays on the Unexpected. By Daniel J. Boorstin. Random House, $23.


QUEENS UPDATE
*
WHITESTONE When two ramps linking the Cross Island Parkway to the Throgs Neck Bridge were closed for repairs last week, officials from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority told drivers -- and radio traffic reporters -- to use other highways, but to keep using Throgs Neck.
Don't use the Bronx-Whitestone.
But on the first day of repairs radio traffic reporters followed their usual practice of redirecting drivers to one bridge whenever the other was under repair.
Predictably, the Whitestone was bottlenecked.
"Meanwhile, the Throgs Neck Bridge was quite empty," said Frank Pascual, an M.T.A. spokesman.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
HARLEM Forming Prints And an Identity
Two exhibitions open Wednesday at the Studio Museum.
"Sam Gilliam: Recent Monoprints" com prises 18 monoprints (examples above), which incorporate a variety of printmaking techniques -- like combining drypoint and etching.
With monoprints only one is made (hence the name).
The prints are multicolored and play on geometry, patterns, and texture.


POSTINGS: Transformation on Staten Island; A Former School Becomes Homes for the Elderly
Vacant for years, the P.S. 20 building in Port Richmond on the north shore of Staten Island has been renovated into low-income housing for the elderly.
The conversion of the 103-year-old building into the Parkside Senior Housing at 160 Heberton Avenue was initiated in 1987 by the Northfield Community Local Development Corporation of Port Richmond, which also became the primary developer of the $4.8 million project.
Financing and assistance came from a variety of state, city, borough and private sources.


WILL A FLYING DOLL FLY?
Once upon a time, when I was a little girl, I was crazy about dolls.
When I read Marshall Sella's intriguing article "Will a Flying Doll Fly?" (Dec. 25), about Sky Dancer, I asked myself if I would have wanted such a doll.
My response was mixed.
Something was missing.
The doll is active in a delightful way.
Yet, its activity seems repetitious, even pointless.
Sky Dancer needs a story.
Perhaps a little booklet, packaged along with the doll, could give some story lines (about how she has important missions to perform) to spur some meaningful purpose to Sky Dancer's flight.


Pitch by Swindell Sends Different Message
Houston Astros pitcher GREG SWINDELL apologized Friday to 130 striking major leaguers and DONALD FEHR, the union chief, for saying he would consider breaking ranks, although he did not say for certain what he would do this spring.
Last month during a television interview, Swindell said he would think about crossing the picket line.
He said his house and alimony payments, plus the costs of raising three children, were concerns.


The Perfect Paragraph
THE GREEK ORATOR Demosthenes owes me a favor.
His oration "On the Crown," ripping into one of his detractors in an early example of negative campaigning, is rated by many classicists and students of rhetoric as the greatest speech by the greatest public speaker of antiquity.
However, in the translations I've seen, he goes on and on in massive blocks of type with no paragraphs.


Doctor Who Vanished Is Found Dead in Her Car's Trunk
The body of a wealthy obstetrician from Queens who had been missing for more than a month was found in the trunk of her car on a Bronx Street early yesterday, and the police said she had been shot two times in the head.
The physician, Teresita Valera Costello, 64, was discovered stuffed inside her 1977 Mercedes-Benz 450-SEL after the police were directed to the vehicle by a man who had seen accounts of the case on television.


Willie, Mickey and the Duke, Part II
MICKEY MANTLE, WILLIE MAYS and DUKE SNIDER, the center fielders who represented the golden era of baseball in New York, saw that era end when the Dodgers and Giants left in 1957.
Next Sunday, the three will return for their first joint public appearance in Manhattan when they will be honored by the New York chapter of the Baseball Writers Association at the Sheraton New York Hotel.


Correction
Because of an editing error, the "Taking the Children" guide in the film pages on Jan. 8 referred incorrectly to the use of language in the film "Dumb and Dumber." It does contain some profanity.


Analyzing an Alarming Rise in AIDS Cases
RECENT reports show that the number of new AIDS cases in Westchester soared in 1993: to almost 600 from 200 the year before.
Health officials say they are alarmed, particularly about the disease's spread among women and children.
The county's Health Commissioner, Dr.
Mark S. Rapoport, who said the increase in numbers could be attributed in part to broader criteria being used for defining the disease, called AIDS "the No. 1 health problem in Westchester."


What's Up -- and What's Going Up
A YEAR ago, Costas Kondylis, one of the city's most employed, most pragmatic apartment tower architects, had 13 people working for him.
Today, he has 31.
A year ago, Edward Malloy, president of the Building and Construction Trades Council of Greater New York, was "sitting around with my feet up on the desk looking out the window -- there was nothing going on." Nowadays, he said, he spends his time "a lot more optimistically; I talk a lot on the phone and I go to a lot more meetings with developers."


Word for Word/Amnesty International; A Grim Glimpse at Oklahoma's Thoroughly Modern Death Row
GRIPPED by fear and anger over violent crime, the United States is in the midst of a prison building boom in which the creation of tolerable conditions for inmates hardly seems of paramount concern.
Amnesty International offers as an egregious case in point Oklahoma's H-Unit, a 3-year-old, maximum-security installation housing death row and other "problem" inmates that is mostly buried in the earth at the Oklahoma State Penitentiary in McAlester.
It was conceived by prison officials as a state-of-the art, electronically controlled lockup partly in response to attacks on guards.


Data Bank/January 15, 1995
Data Bank/January 15, 1995
Producer Prices
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.5
-0.5
Sales at Retail Outlets
Monthly percent change
-0.1
0.2
1.1
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.3
0.1
Consumer Borrowing
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Annual rate of change
17.3
15.9
14.3
Weekly Jobless Claims
Jan. 6
Dec. 30
Dec. 23
In thousands
355
338
321
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Jan. 13
Jan. 6
Dec. 30
Yield in percent
7.78
7.86
7.87
Municipal Bonds
Rate in percent
6.80
6.90
6.92
Steel Production
Jan. 6
Dec 30
Dec. 23
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,985
1,992
1,995


Dysphemisms
THE START OF A NEW CONGRESS IS A good time to check on the current fashion in political euphemisms -- words that create a soothing image for what in more candid language would be harsh or offensive thought.
The substitution of blunter expressions -- a few dysphemisms -- could be salutary.
For example, in the Capitol's changed climate (a liberal euphemism for now that the Republicans control both houses of Congress), you can expect to read and hear less about affirmative action, meaning reparation or compensation for past discrimination, and a lot more about tax breaks for capital gains, meaning the income that mostly rich people earn on certain kinds of investment.
You can also expect a lively struggle over words that describe new issues; when referring to certain aliens, some politicians and members of the media will insist on calling them illegal while others cling to undocumented.


Seeking Flamenco At Its Source
THE night I visited Corral de la Moreria in Madrid, probably the world's most famous flamenco bar, the show was a stirring example of the best in flamenco.
The stars were a pair of well-established dancers, the regal El Camborio and his fiery partner, Lucia Real.
They clattered across the floor loudly and rhythmically, their hips and torsos swaying and shaking in creative combinations of classic flamenco moves.
Like all outstanding flamenco artists, they kept their arms, hands and fingers in ceaseless, evocative motion.
This aspect of flamenco is perhaps the most direct evidence of its roots in southern Asia, the original home of the Gypsies who developed it.
Modeled after the 16th-century popular theaters known as corrales de comedias, Corral de la Moreria is musty with tradition.
A full menu is available, but most patrons around me made do with glasses of red wine, counting on the show to provide the evening's sensory delights.
They were not disappointed.
The dancers overflowed with emotion, and they were expertly accompanied by stylized guitar music and jaleo, the clapping and calling that is integral to the performance.
The jaleadores achieved a perfect balance between spontaneity and restraint, keeping rhythm while adding a rustic element that recalls flamenco's rural origins.
Theirs is a practiced art, and a patron would no more join in the clapping than he would bring a toy banjo and strum along with the guitarists.
Flashy and colorful, wild but also highly ritualized, flamenco dancing has become an instantly recognized symbol of Spanish culture.
Its rich history reflects that of Andalusia, the sunny and fertile region of southern Spain where it was born.
It shows influences from the Islamic and Jewish cultures that once flourished in the region, and even from Roman dances, which arrived 20 centuries ago.
But it was the Gypsies who were to flamenco "like rice to paella," in the words of the historian Fernando Quinones, "the unifying and fundamental element."
Flamenco has become an international art form, with schools all over the world, including several hundred in Japan.
Less overtly erotic than other Latin forms, like the tango and the samba, still it is nothing if not sensual.
According to Andalusian tradition, the best dancers are not young or conventionally attractive, but mature and heavy-set, their legs thick and muscular from years of practice.
Foreign interest in flamenco began as part of the wave of fascination with Spain kindled by the Romantic movement, and attracted artists ranging from Gustave Dore to Rimsky-Korsakov to Washington Irving.
They and other early tourists in Spain often sought to visit academies where flamenco was taught, and in response to their interest, "cafes cantantes" opened in many Andalusian towns.
It was their successors that I wanted to find.
My appetite whetted in Madrid, with three companions I set out for Seville, home port of conquistadors and Andalusia's largest and most important city.
We traveled aboard the high-speed train that was built to serve visitors to the 1992 world exposition there.
The trip, which only four years ago lasted the better part of a day, now takes just two and a half hours.
The ride was smooth and the airline-style service courteously efficient as we sped southward.
Romances between dancers and bullfighters are the stuff of countless legends and stories still told in Andalusia, so it was fitting that both of the flamenco bars we visited in Seville were in the shadow of the famous Maestranza bullring.
The shows reflected very different aspects of flamenco's modern face.
El Patio Sevillano is a large room decorated in Andalusian patio style, with ceramic tiles and engravings of the city.
Patrons are often packed close together, although on the night we visited the place was not crowded.
We sat by the side of the stage, near an elegant Spanish gentleman, clearly an enthusiast, who called out encouragement to the dancers at the right moments.
The show was centered on but not limited to classical flamenco.
Some of the numbers were closer to ballet; others resembled popular dance.
One was even performed to the recorded strains of the overture from "Carmen," which outsiders often take to be the quintessential Andalusian anthem but which was in fact composed by Georges Bizet, who was French, and has little if anything to do with flamenco.
The troupe at El Patio Sevillano totaled 14 dancers, guitarists and jaleadores.
As soon as one number was over, the dancers rushed upstairs to change into new costumes while others took the stage.
This was a highly polished show, ready to be lifted intact by some ambitious promoter who wanted to introduce Spanish dancing abroad.
Purists might scorn some parts of it, but the per formers were accomplished professionals.
The jaleadores added an air of authenticity to a show that was aimed mainly at tourists.
The next night we visited a smaller tavern, El Arenal.
Housed in a 17th-century building on a small, hard-to-find alley, its walls are covered with drawings of flamenco dancers and scenes of senoritas flirting with bullfighters.
While the show was not as seamlessly choreographed as others we had seen, it was probably the most authentic we saw in Spain.
The dancers performed with unbridled emotion, seemingly heedless of the audience.
"This time I feel like I'm sitting around a Gypsy campfire," one of my companions said as we sipped our sangria.
We were disappointed to find no flamenco being performed in Cordoba during our visit, and traveled with high hopes from there to our final stop, Granada.
Home to the legendary Alhambra, the Moorish castle that is the most popular tourist attraction in Spain, Granada is always packed with tourists, and flamenco shows are part of the standard fare.
Following the recommendation of the concierge at our hotel, we chose a place called Jardines de Neptuno.
We should have balked when the concierge told us that a bus would pick us up at the hotel.
We began to worry when the bus stopped at several other hotels, filled up with tourists, and then parked at our destination behind two other full-sized buses.
Inside, the showplace was a three-sided arena with sloping rows like those at a sports stadium, and seats for 800 patrons.
As far as we could tell, there was not a single Spaniard in the house, and understandably so.
The show was painfully commercial, a virtually unrecognizable mixture of flamenco, salsa and various other Latin styles.
Most of the performers at Jardines de Neptuno were Hollywood-pretty, but the choreographers were evidently unconcerned with authenticity.
The spectators didn't seem to mind.
They chattered loudly in English and German, and one man in the front row clapped incessantly along with the jaleadores as if he were at a sing-along festival.
We confronted the concierge later, and he replied with a philosophical shrug.
"If flamenco is alive today," he said, "it is because of tourists."
In 1922, the composer Manuel de Falla and the poet Federico Garcia Lorca, among others, organized a flamenco festival in Granada to revive its classical roots.
Aficionados in the city this year for the weeklong Flamenco Encounter in Granada (to be held in either June or October) or in Cordoba for the Flamenco-Guitar Festival (two weeks in July, still to be designated) can follow suit by immersing themselves in the art of flamenco.
Those in Seville may catch sight of the filming, beginning next week, of "Flamenco," a movie by Carlos Saura.
"Other forms of popular music come and go," he said, "but flamenco is constantly renewing itself. This is an especially good moment -- lots of exciting new performers." WHERE TO GO TO WATCH THE DANCERS
For information about flamenco festivals, write to the National Tourist Office of Spain, 665 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022. (212) 759-8822, fax (212) 980-1053.
The country code for Spain is 34.
Prices are calculated at 133 pesetas to the dollar.
Madrid
Corral de la Moreria, 17 Calle Moreria, Madrid; telephone (1) 365-1137, fax (1) 364-1219.
Reservations are necessary.
Situated near the Royal Palace in the old part of Madrid, the Corral de la Moreria is one of the best known cafes in Spain and probably the world's most famous flamenco bar.
The decor is modeled after that of the 16th-century popular theaters known as corrales de comedias.
Flamenco is performed nightly, 10:45 to midnight (group dancing) and 12:15 to 1:15 A.M. (star soloist dancer).
Price for both performances about $30 a person, including one drink.
Dinner, including performances, costs about $70 a person.
Seville
El Patio Sevillano, 11 Paseo de Cristobal Colon; (95) 421-4120, fax (95) 422-5591.
Reservations are recommended.
Next to the Maestranza bullring, this flamenco spot is decorated in the typical Andalusian patio style, with ceramics, tiling, and engravings of the city.
Patrons are often packed close together.
Flamenco shows nightly, March 1 to Oct. 31, 7:30, 10 and 11:45.
From Nov. 1 to Feb. 28, at 7:30 and 10 only.
Price per show: about $25 a person, including one drink.
Dinner also costs about $25 a person.
El Arenal, 7 Calle Rodo; (95) 421-6492, fax (95) 421-0468.
Reservations are recommended.
Situated in the old part of Seville, on a narrow street between the Giralda and the Torre de Oro, this flamenco club is in a 17th-century building.
The decor is meant to capture the authentic 18th- and 19th-century Sevillian atmosphere.
Flamenco shows nightly at 9:30 and 11:30.
Price per show about $25 a person, including a drink.
Dinner also costs about $25 a person.
Granada
Jardines de Neptuno, Calle Arabial; (958) 252050, fax (958) 522469.
Reservations are recommended but not necessary.
Granada's largest flamenco establishment, a three-sided arena with sloping rows and a seating capacity of 800, Jardines de Neptuno is strictly commercial.
Shows nightly at 10 and 11:45.
Price per show, including a drink, is about $25 a person.
Dinner costs about $55 a person.
ANA WESTLEY


New York May Be Tough, But Yes, It Can Be Fixed
To the Editor:
In the Jan. 8 Coping column, Jane Fritsch's warmed-over cynicism about New York may or may not have been tongue in cheek, but her comment, "New York cannot be fixed," should not pass unnoted.


Dead Books
To the Editor:
Lois Heyman's letter in the Book Review (Dec. 18) reinforced a totally false assumption found in Steven Levy's essay about CD-ROM versions of children's books, namely, that they discourage children's interest in reading real, "dead" books.
If my two young children are any indication, this notion is simply not true.
My 7-year-old son, an avid reader, was inspired by the CD-ROM version of "Arthur's Teacher Trouble" to make a special trip to the library for half a dozen of the Arthur books.
My 3-year-old daughter sleeps with our copies of "Ruff's Bone" and "The Tortoise and the Hare." They love the humor of the CD-ROM versions, and I think their desire to read has increased through their exposure to this new form of literary exploration.


Israel Eyes Iran in the Fog of Nuclear Politics
NUCLEAR politics is being played with a vengeance across the Middle East, and, while it obviously beats nuclear war, it has had its own unsettling effects.
In recent days, new and disturbing questions have risen about Iran's nuclear program, most of them boiling down to one mind-focusing issue: How close are the anti-Western mullahs in Teheran to getting the bomb?
Are they really close, five years or less, as some American and Israeli specialists warn?
Or, as others insist, do they have a way to go, perhaps until the year 2010, assuming they take no shortcuts like buying plutonium or actual weapons from nuke-rich but cash-poor countries like Russia?


E. T. Loftus, W. G. McInerney
Elizabeth Tesson Loftus and William George McInerney, both vice presidents at Chemical Bank in New York, are to be married today at the Inn at Pound Ridge, N.Y.
The Rev.
Russell E. Gundlach, a Baptist minister, is to perform the ceremony.
The bride, 32, is an assistant vice president in Chemical's service management department, and the bridegroom, 36, is a division credit officer for the bank's Manhattan branches.


The Courage of His Confections
If it's proof you need that restaurants are important, consider the elaborate and erudite cooking of Charlie Trotter, the 35-year-old chef and owner of Charlie Trotter's restaurant in Chicago.
Who but the master of his domain, laboring with a staff of 17 in a spotless, state-of-the-art kitchen, would dare to saute a single duck liver, balance it on a tower of wilted mustard greens and drizzle it with a teaspoon of beet juice?


WHICH COUNTS MORE, GENDER OR RACE?
I am not sure that Bebe Moore Campbell and Joyce Carol Oates actually had a conversation, as your title suggests ("Which Counts More, Gender or Race?" Dec. 25).
A conversation implies an exchange of thoughts and feelings.
"An Interview of Ms. Campbell by Ms. Oates" might have been a more appropriate title.
Oates assumed an intellectualized stance, from which she commented on Campbell's views with statements like "yeah," "hmmm," "right" and "interesting." These are the sorts of comments therapists often use to convey empathy.
While there is nothing wrong with this, I was disappointed at Oates's reluctance to express her own thoughts.
Campbell, on the other hand, spoke forthrightly.
I appreciated her observations.
ANN EICHEN EPSTEIN Baltimore


Power Authority And Lilco's Rates
In "Lilco Takeover Plan May Fade Away"  [ Dec. 4 ]  one of the most important points which I made seems to have gotten somewhat turned around.
As envisioned by me and many of the Long Island Power Authority trustees our intention has been to acquire all of Lilco's assets and, after disposing of many of the salable assets, ultimately wind up owning only the transmission and distribution system.
We could then open up this system to energy suppliers who would have to compete for the customers' business at the lowest possible price.
In the article it stated that "Lilco could lower rates by delivering the least expensive electricity available over its transmission lines." However it should have said L.I.P.A., since this would occur post L.I.P.A.'s acquisition of Lilco.
SHELDON R. SACKSTEIN Melville


Nightclub Needs Home (With Room to Slide?)
At the end of this month, a hot two-year-old midtown nightspot, Club USA, will vacate its home at 218 West 47th Street.
The owner, Peter Gatien, says he wants to stay in the neighborhood and is looking for theater space.
But one possibility comes as something of a surprise: the Nederlander, the namesake theater of the Nederlander Organization, one of the city's top three theater owners.


Solar Power Unit At Work in Valhalla
THE sun is now powering the lights and equipment of the Westchester County Public Health Building in Valhalla as part of a demonstration project run by the New York Power Authority.
The 36-kilowatt power system on the roof of the building consists of 180 solar panels.
Each panel measures 26 square feet and faces south at a 19-degree angle.
The system produces 36,000 watts of power.


School Board Meetings for the New Year
THE BRONX DISTRICT 7 Next meeting: TBA.
Superintendent: Pedro Crispo; President/Chairwoman: Feliciano Ramirez Jr.; (718) 292-0164.
DISTRICT 8 Next meeting: Feb. 8, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 182, 601 Stickball Blvd.
Superintendent: Max Messer; President/Chairman: Ciro Guerra; (718) 409-8801.
DISTRICT 9 Next meeting: Jan. 25, 6 P.M.; P.S. 114, 1155 Cromwell Ave.
Acting Superintendent: Arthur Aronstein; President/Chairman: Carmelo Saez; (718) 681-8558.
DISTRICT 10 Next meeting: Jan. 26, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 56, 207 Hull Ave.
Superintendent: Irma Zardoya: President/Chairman: Charles Williams; (718) 584-8338.
DISTRICT 11 Next meeting: Jan. 17, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 83, 950 Rhinelander Ave.
Superintendent: Joseph Kovaly; President/Chairwoman: Loretta Y. Jones; (718) 519-2647.
DISTRICT 12 Next meeting: Jan. 25, 7 P.M.; C.S. 66, 1001 Jennings Street.
Superintendent: Robert Henry; President/Chairman: Israel Cruz; (718) 328-2310.
QUEENS DISTRICT 24 Next meeting: Jan. 26, 8 P.M.; P.S. 87, 67-54 80th Street Middle Village.
Superintendent: Joseph Quinn; President/Chairwoman: Mary P. Crowley; (718) 417-2693.
DISTRICT 25 Next meeting: Feb. 1, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 200, 70-30 164th Street.
Superintendent: Dr.
Arthur Greenburg; President/ Chairwoman: Arlene Fleishman; (718) 480-4200.
DISTRICT 26Next meeting: TBA.
Superintendent: Dr.
Aaron Friedman; President/Chairwoman: Arlene Pino; (718) 631-6981.
DISTRICT 27 Next meeting: Jan. 19, 8 P.M; P.S. 100, 111-11 118th Street, Ozone Park.
Superintendent: Brenda Isaacs; President/Chairman: James Egan; (718) 642-5805.
DISTRICT 28 Next meeting: TBA.
Superintendent: C. Raseh Nagi; President/Chairwoman: Lynn Gross; (718) 830-5775.
DISTRICT 29 Next meeting: Jan. 26, 8:30 P.M.; I.S. 192, 109-89 204th Street, St.
Albans.
Superintendent: Celestine Miller; President/Chairwoman: Claudette M. Webb; (718) 978-5961.
DISTRICT 30 Next meeting: Jan 17, 8:30 P.M.; P.S. 148, 89-02 32d Avenue, East Elmhurst.
Superintendent: Dr.
Angelo Gimondo; President/Chairman: Donald Stewart; (718) 777-4680.


Strip Show
About 180 cars disappear in the United States every hour.
Talented "chop shop" crews can skeletonize a stolen one in 10 minutes or less.
But the insurance industry is even quicker.
"We've had a team of professionals do it in 7 minutes and 44 seconds," says Dave Warstler of Allstate.
He is the director of the company's safety program, and he wants people to know how quick the bad guys are.
His three-man auto dismantling team has been giving performances from coast to coast for five years, "usually at the request of local police departments." The three auto body technicians use only hand tools.
They remove hoods, front ends, hubcaps, wheels, tires, radios, trunk lids, seats, headlights and anything else that might sell.
"They leave the kind of stripped-down hulk you see along the West Side Highway," Warstler says.


Tenant Group Seeks Ouster of Co-op's Directors
Esplanade Gardens in northern Harlem is a pristine complex of six high-rise apartment buildings, a swimming pool and parking garage, a picture of middle-class serenity.
But politics at the complex is anything but peaceful.
Members of the board of directors have been at war with one another for years, despite annual elections.
Now, a group of tenant leaders is trying to oust the current directors.


Problems With Goliath? Boycott the Philistines!
David, in the form of Boycott Quarterly, is alive and well and has a circulation of about 3,000.
The magazine of indefatigable ambitions, now on its seventh issue, encourages boycotts as a form of political action and publishes a list of about 100-150 boycotts it feels are worth supporting.
Among the targets are the Goliaths of China and the Disney company.
Chinese-made toys made the list because of Tiananmen Square, and Disney's Dolphin Resort in Florida is under attack because of an English-only policy for its employees.
Zachary D. Lyons, the editor and publisher of Boycott Quarterly, based in Seattle, insists that boycotts can succeed even in the face of enormous odds.
His motto, "One Dollar/One Vote" seems like a recipe for grass roots power at first glance.
But how many votes does that give Disney?


Q and A
Visiting Caves in Sweden
Q.
I would like to fly from Stockholm to Visby, on the island of Gotland, for a 24-hour visit in July but cannot find information on hours of admission for planning a visit to the caves at Lummelunda.
And to avoid the high cost of renting a car is it possible to get around the island by public transportation? -- M. Ross, Avon Park, Fla.


Why Not Heed Fathers, Too?
"Idea of 'Grandparents' Rights' Is Gaining Wider Attention"  [ Dec. 18 ]  illustrates the fact that while it is very nice that grandparents are gaining attention as potential custodial caregivers for children in the court system, fathers have yet to be even recognized on that level, insofar that their rights as parents are virtually nonexistent.
True, a possible argument is that if fathers were around to raise their children then there wouldn't be that need to search out foster parents.
However, current research reveals that many fathers do, in fact, seek custody of their children, and more often than not their children are given to the care of relatives and others before fathers.


Corner of Utah
To the Editor: Judith Anderson's article made San Juan County come alive again for me.
However, I would like to add one important accommodation to her listing, the Bluff Bed &amp; Breakfast.
Situated just north of town at the junction of Route 191 and Utah 163 in a red-rocked box canyon, the Bluff B &amp; B is a two-bedroom house constructed from a Frank Lloyd Wright design.
The rates are reasonable, the homemade bread with ample breakfast delightful and the host, Rosalie Goldman, knowledgeable and enthusiastic.
The address is Box 158, Bluff, Utah 84512; (801) 672-2220.
Thanks again for the great article and splendid photos.
RONALD P. SPARK  Tucson, Ariz.


Sailing in the 90's
To the Sports Editor:
Anna Huntington's "Women's Team Swears Like . . . Well, Sailors," (The Times, Jan. 8) was an interesting insight into the life and times of a modern America's Cup crew.
Aside from having a women's team, which I applaud, much of what she reports seems strange to this alumnus of three America's Cup campaigns (1958, 1967 and 1970).


Community Seeks Single Board
Westchester Square has sat for years at the meeting point of three community boards.
But now, after Mayor Giuliani recommended it belong to only one, no one wants it.
When the board boundaries were drawn in the late 1970's, roughly half of Westchester Square's commercial streets were placed in Board 11 to the north; the remaining commercial areas and most of the residential streets were in Board 9 to the south.


Houseplants Like to Put Their Feet Up, Too
IS your Clivia resting?
It should be.
Many house plants need a break just as much as people do.
One of the greatest mistakes that plant hobbyists make is overcare.
The plants are pushed and pushed with water, fertilizer and warm rooms.
There is never any time off, never a time to luxuriate in a dormant period.
But a dormant period is often just what house plants, like their outdoor cousins, are in need of.
Not all of them, of course, but most of them, and foremost of all, Clivia.
In fact, if these plants are pushed all year long, they never bloom.


Newtonian Misnomer
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 11 front-page article describes the thoughts and actions of House Speaker Newt Gingrich as "Newtonian." Though meant in fun, this misnomer is a disservice to one of the world's great minds and confuses science lovers everywhere.
It's like calling Robinson Jeffers's poetry "Jeffersonian." May I suggest "Newtian."  MARSHALL WILLIAMS  New Haven, Jan. 11, 1995


World Markets; But Haven't They Ever Read Genesis?
WHAT was billed as a year of steady growth and low inflation has opened ominously with a seasonal fire sale of stocks and currencies from emerging markets and the weaker industrial nations as capital flees the unstable peripheries of the global financial system to the safety of the center.
Will 1995 really be the second of those biblical "seven fat years," with a sustainable 3.6 percent expansion rate, which the International Monetary Fund's managing director, Michel Camdessus, cheerfully proclaimed at the annual meeting in Madrid last October?


Man on Horse Faces Sherman (From Behind)
You can't miss it: a larger-than-life nude male figure astride a larger-than-life horse, a rough-hewn wooden monument at the southeast entrance of Central Park.
Commissioned by the Public Art Fund, "The Other Monument" sits at 60th Street and Fifth Avenue, just yards behind Augustus Saint-Gaudens's gilded monument to the Civil War general, William Tecumseh Sherman, which has stood at Grand Army Plaza for almost a century.


Trade Isn't Just About Dollar Signs
To the Editor:
When Thomas L. Friedman bought a compact disk of Walt Disney's "Lion King" in China for $4.50, he stumbled onto something of more consequence than the fact that American producers are being cheated out of their royalties by Chinese factories producing CD's without permission (column, Jan. 8).


Interface; A New Digital Air-to-Ground Link Gets an In-Flight Test
MANY companies are scrambling to get onto the cliche-strewn information highway, but the USAir Shuttle is testing the information skyway.
Last Wednesday, the USAir Shuttle, which operates hourly between New York and Washington and New York and Boston, rolled out a plane equipped with a new digital air-to-ground data communications link for business travelers who want to fax a note or check E-mail while in flight.


Corner of Utah
To the Editor: Having returned in late September from a two-week trip to the Southwest, including several days in southeastern Utah, my wife and I found Judith Anderson's "Wild Corner of Utah" (Dec. 11) right on target.
The Valley of the Gods was fascinating, mysterious, a bit awesome and quiet (we saw one other car).
Thanks to Budget Rent a Car at the Albuquerque airport, we navigated the valley in a 1994 Lincoln Town Car, same price as other models.
Although not mentioned in her article, we presume Ms.
Anderson has also taken the "pretty thrilling" drive down Moki Dugway on Route 261, going south from Natural Bridges National Monument.
The switchbacks can, indeed, elicit any latent acrophobia.


One of the Nets' Owners Is Lending Some Support
According to one of the franchise's principal owners, Derrick Coleman and Kenny Anderson won't be leaving town soon, Butch Beard's job is not in jeopardy this season and for every questionable personnel move Willis Reed has made, several others may have cemented his position as the Nets' general manager for the remainder of his contract.
David Gerstein, vice chairman of the board of directors, who along with the chief executive officer, Alan Aufzien, represent controlling interest among the franchise's seven owners, issued sweeping support for the Nets' most-prominent figures during an informal interview last Thursday.


Workers Expected To Stay Longer And Delay Retirement
FOR decades, as Long Islanders aged, they tended to retire earlier than the traditional 65.
Now demographic experts and economists expect them to be part of the work force for years beyond the previous average of 63.
People who want to work longer will generally be able to do so because they are healthier, the jobs typical of today's service economy are less strenuous, and efforts by advocacy groups and others to find those jobs for the reservoir of skilled older people on the Island are increasing, albeit slowly.


UConn in Close Call Over Providence
Connecticut demonstrated anew tonight that it hardly needs another nearby rival in the form of top-ranked University of Massachusetts.
Not when the No. 2 Huskies have Boston College and Providence to deal with.
UConn, which escaped with a 4-point victory over Boston College on Dec. 6, had a similar close call against Providence tonight before prevailing, 70-62, in front of a capacity crowd of 8,241 at the Gampel Pavilion.
It was the 12th straight victory for unbeaten Connecticut and put it in a three-way tie with Georgetown, its next opponent, and Syracuse for first place in the Big East with a 5-0 conference record.


Tupperware Walks on the Wild Side
TIMOTHY WHITESIDE slouched in his folding chair, chomping on a chip straight from the Pringles can, a jumble of keys hanging from the belt loop of his jeans.
But when Phyllis Gobetz said it was time for "a little recognition," his 6-foot-6 frame shot up.
"Yeeeesssss!" he whooped, clapping madly.
"Uh-huh!"
It was the early January rally for Kings Bay Sales, a southern Brooklyn Tupperware distributorship, and the "recognition" -- the round of applause -- was by, and for, 70 or so sales consultants (formerly known as Tupperware Ladies), including Mr.
Whiteside.
A Sanitation Department worker who started selling Tupperware in September, after his wife sponsored a party, he offers his catalogues and spiels to fellow workers, friends and neighbors in his building in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
He also goes to coin laundries and is, as he put it, "working the streets."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  RUSSIAN DRIVE CONTINUES  Russia continued to put its full strength against the fighters in the capital of a breakaway region, and fighting is likely to continue in the city for some time.  1  PESO CRISIS HURTS MEXICANS  For the Mexican middle class, interest rates on loans and credit cards have ballooned in the peso crisis.
But for the poor, staples like eggs and milk have become luxuries.  1


Forgive Me, Father, for I Am A Lapsed Pianist
THE AMERICAN MUSIC CRITIC James Huneker told a tale about a musician on his deathbed.
A priest approached and asked whether the man was a Catholic or a Protestant.
"Father," came the reply, "I am a pianist."
Samuel Lipman, who died of leukemia late last month at 60, retold the story in an essay and might once have given the same response.
After all, he was a pianist of great promise as both a child prodigy and an adult performer, passionately devoted to his instrument and its repertory.
But he also harbored much cynicism about the music business, and he described his solo piano career as a chimera, offering the dictionary definition: "1. (Gk. myth.) Monster with lion's head, goat's body and serpent's tail. 2. Bogy: thing of hybrid character; fanciful conception."


Not in Love With Amy
To the Editor:
I read Caryn James's comments on "Little Women" with great delight and amusement.
The sweet simplicity of the novel's names stayed with me, and a vow secretly made to myself at age 11 came true.
I have four wonderful daughters -- Beth, Amy, Meg and Jo -- and a beloved son, Eric.
CHRISTINE MONTGOMERY  Nantucket, Mass.


Officials to Act
Gov.
Pete Wilson of California called a special session of the Legislature to handle problems caused by the flooding that has killed 11 people and caused more than $300 million in damage.
The Legislature will meet on Thursday under rules allowing measures to be voted on immediately after introduction.
Article, page 20.


Disagreement On Fire Boxes Reveals 2 Sides Of Safety Issue
Five years ago, when a gas explosion engulfed Christine Costa's two-family house in the Bronx in flames, everyone on the block ran out into the street and somebody pulled the fire box alarm.
"During the fire, my phone melted," the 70-year-old Ms.
Costa said.
"So how could I have called 911?"
But the Giuliani administration says it is rare that the boxes are used to report emergencies like the Costa fire.
It says they are expensive and inefficient, and mainly used by people who falsely report fires, so it has resolved to remove them.


Brawler of Howard Beach Returns; Stephen Murphy, the Lawyer Prosecutors Love to Hate
It was as a 20-year-old college senior, sitting in a county jail in Maryland on manslaughter charges, that Stephen G. Murphy, now a noted New York lawyer, came to appreciate his power to make people crazy.
Mr.
Murphy, who represents Edward J. Leary, the man arraigned last week on charges of setting off a firebomb in the subway, had been imprisoned when he refused to identify a fellow student who had joined him in a brawl at a county fair that left a local youth dead.


Paris Seafood Legend Reborn
The historic Paris fish restaurant Maison Prunier has reopened after a five-year closing.
The restaurant, an Art Deco landmark created in 1925 to celebrate the Exposition des Arts Decoratifs, eventually fell upon hard times and served its last meal on Aug. 15, 1989.
It was later bought by Sogo, a Japanese company, which entrusted the restoration and management to Jean-Claude Vrinat of Taillevent in Paris.
Situated at 16 Avenue Victor Hugo, Maison Prunier is an example of the purest Art Deco style, with a sparkling blue-green mosaic exterior, luxurious interior walls of onyx and black marble encrusted with bits of glittering gold, an elegant scalloped white marble oyster bar, as well as Cubist-inspired bronze plaques suspended from the ceiling, guiding diners to various areas on the main floor -- the oyster bar, a section for prepared fish items, a display of fresh shellfish, and an informal dining area.
Upstairs, white embossed table linens create a more formal, exclusive atmosphere.


Sports of the Times; Newt Should Put Baseball on His List
THANK goodness the hockey lockout is over.
Now we can turn our full attention to something truly atrocious, the baseball strike.
At least when the hockey owners took a hostage, it was their own commissioner.
Gary Bettman was forced to fend off the union and a band of rogue owners at the same time.
At least the hockey owners had the ultimate sanity to preserve their heritage even if they did not achieve this panacea called the salary cap.
As Neil Smith, the greatly relieved general manager of the Rangers, put it: "I kept seeing 'No Decision' on the Stanley Cup for 1995. We could have lost some franchises. Players could have formed their own leagues. It would never have been the same."


Knicks Bow And Starks Feels Pain
The comeback fell short.
The eight-game winning streak ended.
And the Knicks became the latest road victim of the Utah Jazz, who continued to be one of the surprising teams in the National Basketball Association.
Not only did the Knicks lose Saturday night, 86-81, at Madison Square Garden, but John Starks was headed to the hospital after the game for X-rays on his left shoulder.
Starks said his shoulder popped out of place during the first quarter, and while it quickly popped back into the socket, X-rays were taken as a precautionary measure.


Not in Love With Amy
To the Editor:
As a member of "the cult of Jo" since reading Louisa May Alcott's "Little Women" at age 8, I read Caryn James's essay "Amy Had Golden Curls; Jo Had a Rat. Who Would You Rather Be?" (Dec. 25) with chagrin.
I guess the reader should agree that it is better to be a shallow, mediocre artist who sponges off others than to be an earnest, talented writer who earns her own keep.
A sad message for young women, particularly those whose ethnic backgrounds did not provide them with golden curls.


A 50's Musical Sendup in 'Forever Plaid'
ONCE a faltering little show took a wrong turn in Teaneck before finding the route to the superhighway of hits.
Some New Jersey theatergoers may remember the plot-heavy play that was looking for a premise to lump together pop songs of the 50's guy-group kind.
It was about four hopeful crooners with day jobs.
On Feb. 9, 1964, the night the Beatles made their historic noise on "The Ed Sullivan Show," the four fictional wannabes were killed in a crash on the West Side Highway.
While the "fabulous four" from London dealt the American group a symbolic death blow, it was a nun driving a school bus who wiped them out literally.


Walter J. Sheridan Is Dead at 69; Helped Build Case Against Hoffa
Walter J. Sheridan, a Federal investigator who was an associate of the Kennedy family and pursued the teamsters' union leader James R. Hoffa, died on Friday at his home in Derwood, Md.
He was 69.
The cause was lung cancer, friends said.


BENEFITS
Tea Party at the Lighthouse  TUESDAY -- The Lighthouse, the rehabilitative agency for people who are blind, will benefit from a tea party that will include hair and makeup consultations from 4 to 6 P.M. at 111 East 59th Street.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 319-7818.
Benefit for Spence-Chapin  TUESDAY -- A performance of "Sunset Boulevard" will benefit Spence-Chapin Services to Families and Children, the adoption and family services agency.
Curtain time at the Minskoff Theater, 200 West 45th Street, is 8 P.M.
Tickets, $160, from (212)369-0300.
Honor for Elizabeth Dole  TUESDAY -- The Raoul Wallenberg Committee of the United States will honor Elizabeth Hanford Dole for her work as the president of the American Red Cross at a black-tie dinner at the Pierre Hotel.
The event will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner at 8 and an address by Mrs.
Dole.
Proceeds will benefit the committee's course on nonviolent heroes, developed for children in kindergarten through eighth grade.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 272-7790.
Dinner with Hillary Clinton  WEDNESDAY -- United Cerebral Palsy will present humanitarian awards to Hillary Rodham Clinton and Walter V. Shipley, the chairman of the Chemical Banking Corporation, at a black-tie dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The evening will begin at 6:30 with cocktails, followed by dinner at 8 and the awards ceremony with Barbara Walters as master of ceremonies.
Frank Bennack Jr., president and chief executive of the Hearst Corporation, and Katharine Graham, chairwoman of the Washington Post Company, will present the awards.
Tickets, $750, from (212) 683-6700, extension 207.
For Children's Health  THURSDAY -- A black-tie dinner-dance honoring Tina Brown, the editor of The New Yorker, and Harold Evans, the president and publisher of the Random House Adult Trade Group, will be held at the Pierre Hotel, and will benefit the Children's Blood Foundation.
A 7 P.M. reception will be followed by dinner at 8.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 685-1095.
East Side House Settlement  THURSDAY -- A preview party of the Winter Antiques Show will be held from 4:30 to 9 P.M. and will benefit the East Side House Settlement, a social services agency in the South Bronx.
The show, at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th Street, will be open from Jan. 20 through 29.
Tickets for the preview, $150, from (718) 665-5250.
Benefit for Manhattan College  THURSDAY -- Manhattan College will award its De La Salle Medal to J. W. Marriott Jr., chairman of Marriott International, at a dinner to benefit the college.
The black-tie event will begin with cocktails at 6:45 P.M., followed by dinner at 7:45 at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Tickets, $500, from (718) 920-0232.
Antiques at Sacred Heart  FRIDAY -- The Convent of the Sacred Heart School will hold a cocktail reception and preview of its annual charity antiques show to benefit the school's landmarks preservation fund.
The preview will be from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Otto Kahn house, 1 East 91st Street.
The show, also in the Kahn house, is open to the public on Saturday and Sunday.
Preview tickets, $50, from (212) 722-4745, or at the door.
A Viennese Ball  SATURDAY -- The Philharmonic of New Jersey will benefit from a Viennese ball and champagne supper at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The event, which is to include a silent auction, begins with a cocktail reception at 6 P.M., followed by dinner.
Then the 60-piece Philharmonic will provide music for dancing.
White or black tie.
The wearing of masks is suggested.
Tickets, $200, or $165 for those 29 or younger, from (908) 356-6165.
Citymeals-on-Wheels  JAN. 23 -- The Professionals' Alliance will sponsor a party to benefit Citymeals-on-Wheels from 6:30 to 10:30 P.M. at Wollman Rink in Central Park.
The evening will include a buffet dinner, a beer tasting, a raffle, ice skating and hot chocolate.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 687-1290, or at the door.
Drama League Benefit  JAN. 23 -- A black-tie dinner and evening of theater to benefit the Drama League, which helps artists and seeks to enlarge the audience for theater, will be held at the Pierre Hotel.
The show, saluting the works of Richard Rodgers, Oscar Hammerstein 2d and Lorenz Hart, will include performances by Madeline Kahn, Mark Jacoby and Liliane Montevecchi.
Proceeds will benefit the league's a program to nurture young directors and to develop new works.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 7:30, followed by dinner at 8:30 and the show at 9:30.
Tickets, $350, or $75 for the show alone, from (212) 302-2100.
For Bank Street College  JAN. 23 -- The Bank Street College of Education will honor Dennis Weatherstone, the chairman and chief executive of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, at a black-tie dinner-dance at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The evening will begin with a cocktail reception at 6, followed by dinner and dancing at 7.
Proceeds will benefit the college.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 838-2660.
Dinner With Gerald Ford  JAN. 23 -- Former President Gerald R. Ford will be the guest of honor at the Korea Society's annual fund-raising dinner at the New York Hilton.
The black-tie evening, which will benefit the society's cultural outreach programs, will begin at 6 with cocktails, followed by dinner at 7.
Mr.
Ford will speak on the 1974 Vladivostok summit and will be introduced by Henry A. Kissinger.
Tickets, $450, from (212) 686-2200.


Frozen in Memory: The Defeat in the Ice Bowl
Their equipment manager is just back from the ski shop, where he bought wool masks, scuba gloves and insulated socks.
The San Diego Chargers do not need a second Ice Bowl to learn their lesson; they shoved off for Pittsburgh Friday prepared for rain, sleet, snow, wind tunnels.
The organization had an anniversary this week -- 13 years since their frostbite.
On their last visit to a championship game, Jan. 10, 1982, they were frozen solid in minus-9-degree temperatures in Cincinnati, and it has been a long thaw.
The Chargers have waited nearly a decade and a half to be league semifinalists again, and -- if the Steelers leave them out in the cold -- they will at least have body circulation.


The Whole World Is Waiting: How Is Emmitt Smith?
Emmitt Smith walked out of the trainer's room at the Dallas Cowboys complex late last week with an electronic muscle stimulation device hooked up to his left leg.
With all those electrodes attached, he looked like the Six Million Dollar Man.
The device was designed to stimulate muscle growth in the leg, specifically his strained hamstring.


In the Theater of the Dark
NIGHT Night Life, Night Language, Sleep, and Dreams.
By A. Alvarez.
Illustrated. 290 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $23.


Fair Lawn, Past and Present
To the Editorr:
Having spent part of my youth in Fair Lawn, N.J., I, too, have observed how the town has changed through the years.
I was fascinated to learn in your article on the community last Sunday that Fair Lawn "has become a magnet for Jews from all over the United States as well as Jewish immigrants from Israel and the former Soviet Union."


Danbury Gets a Third Tasting of Thai
A VISIT to the new Thailand Princess in Danbury evokes a strong sense of deja vu.
In fact, the sense of familiarity is real, for this small, spotless storefront Thai restaurant is the former Fork and Spoon.
But not just the name is new, so are the partnership, the kitchen staff and the higher prices.
The new menu is fairly small, with some Chinese dishes layered among the Thai ones.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
98.40
101.40
111.00
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5330
1.5645
1.7500
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.4107
1.4003
1.3244
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5691
1.5495
1.4930
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$378.50
$371.80
$389.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


In Scabs There Is Strength
COPPER CRUCIBLE How the Arizona Miners' Strike of 1983 Recast Labor-Management Relations in America.
By Jonathan D. Rosenblum.  256 pp.
Ithaca, N.Y.:  ILR Press.
Cloth, $38.
Paper, $16.95.


Global Congress? Not in Congress.
CALL it a sign of the times.
Years ago, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee was the most prestigious panel on Capitol Hill; Presidents courted its chairmen and senators with presidential aspirations maneuvered for years, even decades, to get a seat.


Dorothy Mizia, Richard Scheyer
Dorothy Mary Mizia, the daughter of Walter Mizia of Huntington, Conn., and the late Olga S. Mizia, is to be married today to Dr.
Richard David Scheyer, a son of Daniel and Audrey Scheyer of Sands Point, L.I.
Rabbi Gerald Brieger is to perform the ceremony at Temple Emanuel in Orange, Conn.
The bride is a nurse at the West Haven (Conn.) Veterans Administration Medical Center.
A graduate of Albertus Magnus College, she received a master's degree in education from the University of Bridgeport.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


An Elusive Picture of Violent Men Who Kill Mates
Is O. J. Simpson's history of wife battering an indication that he murdered his wife, as the prosecution suggests?
While prosecution and defense lawyers battle over the question, social scientists have an answer: Yes and no.
Virtually all men who kill their wives have assaulted them at least once in the year before the murder, data show.
Yet of the men who severely batter their partners -- close to two million a year -- only a tiny fraction kill them.


Sharon Lazarow, Laurence Moelis
Sharon Renee Lazarow, a daughter of Burton and Cynthia Lazarow of Bethesda, Md., and Laurence Stephen Moelis, a son of Herbert and Rita Moelis of Hewlett Harbor, L.I., are to be married today in New York.
Rabbi Morris Friedman is to perform the ceremony at the Manhattan Penthouse.
The bride, 27, graduated cum laude from the University of Rochester.
She is the conference manager for the Risk and Insurance Management Society Inc. in New York.
Her father is the associate executive vice president of operations of B'nai B'rith International in Washington.
Her mother is a clinical social worker and a lecturer on stress managment, also in Washington.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Linda M. Wilder-Curtis; Nurses, Too, Face More Legal Expenses
NURSES, increasingly starting up their own practices or ones in collaboration with physicians, are finding they need legal advice more often these days.
That is the message from Linda M. Wilder-Curtis, of Glastonbury, who is both a nurse and a lawyer.
The nurse midwife, nurse anesthetist and clinical nurse specialist in mental health are examples of the sort of professionals who set out on their own and need the same legal advice as any entrepreneur in health care.


An American Cafe Striving for Success
A RESTAURANT'S name can be as deceptive as it is revealing.
There is no doubt about Joe's Pizza and Pasta, but how about Cilantro's, in Blue Point?
It is neither owned by a family named Cilantro, nor does its name identify the food served.
There are no Southwestern or Latin American dishes here.
In fact, cilantro, so pervasive in those cuisines, is largely absent.
It is in just one dish on the menu.
Cilantro's is an American cafe with an Italian accent.
It is a restaurant on the move, impressing diners with homemade fare like garlic rolls, a cranberry sorbet intermezzo, herb butters, pesto, fresh pasta, lavish desserts and gratis chocolate truffles at meal's end.
Last month the year-and-a-half-old spot introduced a more sophisticated and ambitious menu.
Most, but not all of the time, the culinary striving succeeds.
When it does, it can be exceptional, like the standout appetizer of roasted wild mushrooms atop tricolor salad.


Childless? Don't Blame The Women's Movement
To the Editor:
In the Jan. 8 article "Tough Choices: In Vitro Vs. Adoption," a woman who has spent years trying to get pregnant says, "I was misled by the women's movement. The message was: you can have it all. I would have had a better chance back then."


TV Celebrity In Germany Was Informer
When a television station announced last Saturday that it would broadcast a special program that evening featuring Lutz Bertram, high ratings were all but guaranteed.
The station, ORB, is one of the principal news sources in eastern Germany, and the acid-tongued Mr.
Bertram is its most popular moderator.
But instead of being treated to one of his biting interviews with the famous, fans were stunned by a rambling confession in which he acknowledged having been an informer for the East German secret police in the 1980's.


Friendly Urban Megaliths of the Future


Deal Would Keep the Bucs in Tampa Bay
MALCOLM GLAZER, a Palm Beach millionaire, is close to buying the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in a deal that would keep the team in Tampa for at least two years.
The deal could be completed by early this week if two financial issues can be resolved.


About Those Roach Traps
To the Editor:
In 1993, the doors of the New-York Historical Society's exhibition halls closed in financial crisis and most of the collection was placed in costly storage.
Around that time, Michael Kimmelman wrote several essays in The Times saying that "it would be a cultural tragedy if the society were to die." Yet in his essay "Should Old Masters Be Fund-Raisers?"  [ Jan. 8 ] , Mr.
Kimmelman attacked our deaccessioning of European Old Masters by suggesting that "the society has outlived its usefulness and should be allowed to die." If Mr.
Kimmelman really still thinks the death of the Historical Society a cultural tragedy, what other remedy would he suggest?


Rock 'n' Roll Rarities on the Auction Block
YEARS ago, a young singer walked into a recording studio in Memphis, paid $3.95 to have a song recorded and left with the acetate (what was used before the vinyl version of a record was made).
The singer was Elvis Presley, and that acetate "I'll Never Stand in Your Way" b/w "It Won't Be the Same Without You" -- the first known recording of any Presley performance -- will be on the auction block this week for somewhere around $200,000.


Deals and Discounts
LONDON PACKAGES The 10 Radisson Edwardian Hotels have introduced a Simply London package offering double rooms starting at $119 a night, including English breakfast, tax and service charge, through April 20.
Several extras are also included, such as a choice of four guided walking tours.
There is a two-night minimum stay, and the first night must be guaranteed by a credit card.
If a a reservation is canceled within 72 hours of scheduled arrival, one night's rate will be charged.


A Special Counsel's Special Burden
THE scandal at the Department of Housing and Urban Development should qualify now as history: it was two administrations ago that HUD and its leader, Samuel R. Pierce Jr., were awarding the contracts that resulted in the investigation.
Now it's the leader of the investigation who is obliged to make explanations.
After five years and a cost of $17 million, the independent counsel, Arlin M. Adams, announced last week that Mr.
Pierce will not be formally charged with any crimes.
And if that is somehow unsatisfying, it is because of the dual role that the independent prosecutor has been assigned in American Government's efforts to fix itself.


QUEENS UPDATE
*
WHITESTONE When two ramps linking the Cross Island Parkway to the Throgs Neck Bridge were closed for repairs last week, officials from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority told drivers -- and radio traffic reporters -- to use other highways, but to keep using Throgs Neck.
Don't use the Bronx-Whitestone.
But on the first day of repairs radio traffic reporters followed their usual practice of redirecting drivers to one bridge whenever the other was under repair.
Predictably, the Whitestone was bottlenecked.
"Meanwhile, the Throgs Neck Bridge was quite empty," said Frank Pascual, an M.T.A. spokesman.


Louise Randolph and John Graziano
Before Louise Randolph, 38, and John Graziano, 41, even went out on a first date, they knew as much about each other as longtime lovers.
They met four years ago in an autobiographical writing workshop at the 92d Street Y in Manhattan.
In each session, students composed soul-searching essays on anything from their childhood fears to thoughts on the human condition and read them aloud.


POSTINGS: A Customer-Service Center; Tiffany Plans New Building In New Jersey
Tiffany &amp; Company, the New York jeweler, is to begin construction this spring on a $40 million customer-service center at the Prudential Business Campus, which straddles Parsippany-Troy Hills and Hanover Townships in New Jersey.
Tiffany will consolidate four customer-service operations now operating elsewhere in Morris County into a 280,000-square foot building on a 40-acre site.
It will be the first project to rise within the 367-acre undeveloped eastern portion of the 600-acre development at Interstate 287 and Route 10; the western section contains buildings with 1.4 million square feet of commercial space .
The undeveloped land could accommodate up to 2.25 million more square feet.


Pope Offers the Chinese a Deal on the Church's Role
In a radio message beamed to China on Saturday, Pope John Paul II offered a hard-nosed bargain to Beijing: recognize papal authority over China's Catholics in return for the Vatican's acknowledgement of the country's officially sponsored church.
If accepted, the Pope's offer would represent a major departure for the Chinese authorities, who have long resisted any foreign intrusion into their affairs and who maintain rigorous controls on the country's millions of Catholics.


Next Eagles Coach? It Won't Be Vermeil
The on-again, off-again courtship between the Philadelphia Eagles and former coach DICK VERMEIL ended because Vermeil's contract demands were too far out of line, the team's owner, JEFFREY LURIE, said yesterday.
Lurie, who announced that he had broken off negotiations that would have seen Vermeil return to the team as coach and general manager, said Vermeil didn't come very far off his initial contract demand: a five-year deal worth $20 million and 5 percent of the team.


Getting Our Train To Run on Time
The train glides out of a curve and accelerates so smoothly that the teacup on the cherry-wood table in front of you barely rattles.
The seat is so soft it makes a Lexus feel like a Jeep bouncing along a gully.
There's nothing to do but stare out the spotless picture window at a long cornfield bobbing in a slow breeze. . . .
Same route, different ride.
Ducking between two elderly ladies holding each other to keep from falling, their arms shaking slightly as they grab for luggage racks that have no handholds, you hunch over and squint through a tiny, smeared, dark brown lozenge of a window for some idea of where you are.
Is that a cornfield or a parking lot?


The Kindnesses of Strangers
Going out on the town in 1994, with train in tow (or sometimes underfoot).
Fashion often glances back before moving ahead, but the most surprising nostalgic sight at big evening parties last year was of women in new dresses with old-fashioned trains.
It is a style often at odds with life at the end of the 20th century, and the wearers struggled to keep waiters and other guests from walking on their trains.
For some, it was a fantasy trip, not unlike getting dressed in a costume for the rare occasion when women have the chance to really dress up.


Wall Street; Playing Games With Names
WONDERING whether you misheard the name of the company your stockbroker works for?
Did you mistakenly think the check you wrote was to one of Wall Street's long established, top bracket firms?
Better ask for ownership information along with a prospectus next time a stockbroker calls with a pitch.
Look-alike or sound-alike names that create an instant aura of credibility are not new to financial institutions, according to state securities regulators.
But new brokerage firms with names that resonate with an illustrious history, perhaps even unintentionally, offer the opportunity for confusion among investors.


Poland's Foreign Minister, His Overtures to West Impeded, Resigns
Poland's Foreign Minister, who has been among the strongest advocates of Warsaw's joining Western military and economic institutions, has resigned, raising questions about the direction of the country's international outlook.
Known at home and abroad for his tireless courting of the West and his efforts to chip away at Western ambivalence toward embracing Eastern Europe, Foreign Minister Andrzej Olechowski had been undermined by the Government of former Communists.
On Friday, he said that he had had enough of what many in Poland perceived as a campaign by Prime Minister Waldemar Pawlak to force him out.


21 Are Killed in 4 Fires


Jan. 8-14: Hello. Goodbye.; The Short History Of a House Historian
The teaching of the Holocaust in public schools was a particular bete noire for Phyllis Schlafly and other extreme conservatives in the 1980's.
Their argument -- that it was morally corrosive for high school students to dwell on such events and that they should study the brutalities of Communism instead -- gained currency in the Reagan Administration.
After Mrs.
Schlafly attacked one program that included a study of the Holocaust, "Facing History and Ourselves," it was denied Federal funding in 1986.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column last Sunday about a kosher restaurant directory misstated the telephone number of its publishers, the Kosher Club of Middletown, N.Y.
It is (914) 344-1933.


Music America Returns as King Tribute
MUSIC AMERICA is back.
The yearly concert meant to serve as a rallying point for blacks and whites was canceled last year, but the event, to be held here Friday at 8 P.M. in the Performing Arts Center of Purchase College, has been embraced anew by its chief sponsor, Pepsico, and by 15 nonprofit community groups that will share proceeds.
Music America, which was held for the first time in 1992 and again in 1993, is the Westchester Philharmonic's tribute to the memory of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
The programs have emphasized black composers or works reflecting themes in black history and are presented as a paean to diversity.
About 1,000 people are expected to attend.


Allyson R. Abel, Steven J. Davis
Allyson Renee Abel, a daughter of Harriette and Jerry Abel of Plainview, L.I., is to be married today to Steven John Davis, the son of Helen and Symon Davis of Westcliff-on-Sea, Essex, England.
Rabbi Brooks Sussman is to perform the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 29, was formerly an associate at the New York law firm Willkie, Farr &amp; Gallagher.
She graduated from Washington University and received her law degree from Emory University.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 A mezzo-soprano instills discipline at the Harlem School of the Arts.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Pushing Tupperware in Brooklyn.
MOVIE CLOCK 12 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 13 Rock 'n' roll rarities on the auction block; a gathering of poets.
GOOD EATING 14 The treats of Queens: Fresh octopus at Elias Corner; beguiling Golden Monkey.
SOAPBOX 15 Williamsburg's old Yiddish culture.


Change at Bankers Trust: Easier Said Than Done
CHARLES S. SANFORD JR. once described the essence of Bankers Trust to a close adviser as "250 smart guys who all have monkeys on their backs that force them to come in every day and say, 'Never mind what I did yesterday. What's next?' "
An intense, analytical, hurry-up approach is precisely the environment Mr.
Sanford has fostered at the Bankers Trust New York Corporation since he became chairman in 1987.


A Saxophonist Who Doesn't Wear Armani
BEGINNING IN THE EARLY 80's, the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis rejuvenated and refashioned jazz in his own dapper, neo-conservative image.
Thanks to Mr.
Marsalis's talent, ambition and marketability, jazz became very hospitable to dexterous young black men who looked great in Armani suits.
So who could have predicted that a leading voice on tenor saxophone among the under-50 set would belong to Joe Lovano, a heavyset 43-year-old Italian-American with a receding hairline and a goatee?
It may be considered an act of bad faith to divide the jazz world along racial lines, jazz being America's great monument to racial synthesis.
But the simple fact is, Mr.
Lovano sticks out.
He will play the Village Vanguard for six nights beginning on Tuesday, and if past gigs are any indication, he will sell out the club for virtually every show.


The Life of a Small Landlord
OSCAR PEREZ, landlord to the poor, compares his precarious calling to that of a family farmer.
So much is out of his control.
The other day, a seemingly respectable tenant was arrested on child abuse charges, and another apartment was empty.
The week before, he thought he finally had a fifth-floor walk-up rented until the prospective tenant climbed the endless stairs one last time.
So the owner of four small South Bronx buildings with 38 units now has six empty apartments, and feels like a farmer gazing at a hail-ravaged field.


The Rangers: Old Lineup, New Bosses
On a wall in a corner of the Rangers' locker room in Playland Ice Casino is a big, beautiful picture of the instant the team won the Stanley Cup last June.
The wide-angle lens captures goalie Mike Richter extending his arms as if signaling an N.F.L. field goal as the blue light behind him blazes brightly to indicate the end of the period, the game, the series, the tournament, the season and the 54 years of deprivation.


BETTER WORK THAN WELFARE
I applaud your decision to write a story about a poor African-American woman, that juxtaposes the complexity of her life choices with the sophomoric thrust of proposed political solutions to welfare as income support.


Corrections
A listing last Sunday with an article about infertility treatment and adoption misstated the address of an adoption counseling group, Families With Children From China.
It is 255 West 90th Street, Apartment 11C, New York, N.Y. 10024, not 20th Street.


Throw a Bit? Hit a Little? Majors Want You
On the one hand, the fellow showed ingenuity; on the other, he showed how desperate major league clubs are to find replacement players for their replacement season.
The fellow was the Philadelphia Phillies' employee that Andy McGaffigan had called to invite to play in his golf tournament in Lakeland, Fla., a tournament that would benefit the baseball team at his alma mater, Florida Southern College.


BETTER WORK THAN WELFARE
After reading DeParle's article, I was stunned to realize that, apart from the reference to the subject's first pregnancy at age 19 as "unplanned," there was a total absence of reference to contraception, with regard to the following two pregnancies.
This level of thoughtlessness helps to explain the growing appeal for whatever is "necessary to help, cajole, lure or force adults off welfare and into paid employment." THE REV.
LAWRENCE D. RUPP New London, N.H.


Suzanne Sugarbaker Is the Best Revenge
EVER SINCE THEY LEFT Washington's stuffy society and bloodthirsty press behind in mid-1993, Linda Bloodworth-Thomason and Harry Thomason, the Hollywood sitcom producers and friends of Bill and Hillary Clinton, have been promising to create a network series that shows the nation's capital for what it really is.
This month they have made good on the threat, and as a result, viewers who tune into CBS at 8 P.M. on Wednesdays are getting a peek at the true Washington.
It turns out to be a stuffy town that looks down on sitcom producers who are friends with the President.


Rosanne Thomas, Gregory Matzat
Rosanne Marie Thomas, a daughter of Fred and Lucy Thomas of Midland Park, N.J., and Gregory Mark Matzat, the son of the Rev.
George and Rowena Matzat of Amityville, L.I., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
Dale D. Hansen performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Lutheran Church in New York.
The bride, who will be known as Rosanne Thomas Matzat, graduated from Manhattan College and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is a partner at Hahn &amp; Hessen, a law firm in New York.
Her father owns a business-equipment distribution company in Midland Park.
Her mother retired as a benefits clerk at the Fisher Scientific Company, a chemicals manufacturer in Fair Lawn, N.J.


Young Designers of an Urban (and Suburban) Future
Students at a South Bronx junior high school have adopted a bold strategy to cut crime, improve residential life, increase commerce and recycle waste.
The most toxic waste will be rocketed to the sun, where it will be incinerated into nothingness.
"Our city's for the future," declared Cynthia Santana, an eighth-grader at the school in the Morrisania section.


For the Neighborhood, a 4th Time to Hope
On the streets around Lincoln High School, the three oldest Marbury brothers have been treated like celebrities for all their winning seasons under the hoops.
One by one, though, Eric, Donnie Jr. and Norman disappointed the school and the Coney Island neighborhood when they failed to reach the National Basketball Association.


Bank Plans For Mideast Scaled Back
Plans for a Middle East development bank, widely seen as an important vehicle to promote peace efforts in the region, are being scaled back in an attempt to overcome opposition from Saudi Arabia and some European countries, American and Middle Eastern diplomats say.
The fate of the bank, which was proposed with great fanfare shortly after Israel and the Palestinian Liberation Organization made peace in 1993, was cast in doubt two months ago when Saudi Arabia opposed Washington's proposal at an international conference in Casablanca.
As the region's economic giant -- but with financial problems of their own -- the Saudis feared that they were going to be pressed to provide billions of dollars for the bank.


Finding the Bargains Amid the Peso's Decline
AT last count, the battered Mexican peso had lost somewhere near 40 percent of its value against the dollar in less than a month..
Although it may seem predatory to think of bargains while Mexicans are trying to recover from the economic shock of the devaluation, the misfortune of America's neighbor opens a world of possibilities for travelers -- at least for the short term -- especially those willing to explore.
As of Jan. 9, one peso was worth less than 20 cents.
If the Government's emergency plan to rescue the economy can be enforced, prices on most items that have not been imported will stay about where they were before the peso dropped.


Jan. 8-14; It Takes One To Know One
BACK when postwar American horizons stretched forever, a boy could grow up to be anything he wanted -- President of the United States, even.
Or if he could think really big, Speaker of the House.
But first he wanted to be a cowboy.


Cod's Versatility and Delicate Flavor
AMERICANS eat more cod than any other fish.
Because it is less expensive than salmon, tuna or swordfish, some people mistakenly assume it must be inferior.
But the fish in this family, which includes haddock and scrod, are extraordinary, with large, firm white flakes that have a delicate flavor.
They can be baked, poached, broiled or fried and go with a wide variety of sauces.
Despite overfishing and trawlers that drag the seabed clean, leaving no younger fish to grow, cod is still widely available and is the most important saltwater fish besides herring.
"There are grounds for thinking that the European colonization of North America was prompted to a large extent by the existence of cod on that side of the Atlantic," writes Alan Davidson in "North Atlantic Seafood" (Viking).
"Cape Cod was, of course, named for the cod; and Boston, 'the home of the beans and the cod,' has an effigy of the 'sacred cod' from which the city derived much of its wealth, hanging in the State House." Mr.
Davidson added, "Shed, therefore, any ideas that the cod is an ordinary fish and invest the next piece of cod you buy with the exciting qualities which are its by right."


The Neediest Cases; Turning Potential Into a Possibility
The apartment she grew up in was overflowing with family, and she never lacked someone to talk to.
But when Shavon Glover became pregnant at 14, she did not tell a single relative, for fear they would stop loving her.
Later, when her son was 2, her aunts assigned her the task of chaperoning her younger sister and cousins around their Harlem neighborhood.
The point, she said, was to make sure they did not end up like her.
At 16, Ms.
Glover escorted her sister and cousin to a nightly dance class at the Dunlevy Milbank Center in Harlem, which is run by the Children's Aid Society.
While they danced, she would wait alone in a hallway.


THE LAST VICTIM
As Prime Minister of England, Margaret Thatcher was one of the most powerful women of this century.
Yet, most people don't even know what Denis, her husband, looked like.
Hillary Rodham Clinton is unpopular not because she was "demonized . . . by an organized campaign of vilification" but because she arrogantly assumed that, as First Lady, she too had the right to power and privilege.
She doesn't.
AMY CHEN New York


Topics of The Times; Where Are the Snows of Last Year?
Three Connecticut communities -- East Hartford, Torrington and Derby -- bought snow insurance this winter.
After last year's storms, when dozens of towns went far over their snow-removal budgets, it seemed a good bet.
Last winter East Hartford spent an extra $250,000.
A policy covering this month and next cost only $8,250.
If it snows a lot, the city collects.
But it hasn't snowed a lot, and with El Nino pushing temperatures into the 60's it looks less and less likely.
Insurance against foul weather that might spoil a wedding or a fair or a parade is nothing new, but snow insurance for towns is.
The Good Weather Insurance Agency in Salem, Mass., handled two of the three Connecticut contracts for Reliance National Insurance.
Each policy is different, but they all require at least two or three storms before they kick in.
East Hartford needs three storms with at least three inches of snow.
If there are any more three-inchers (or deeper) the city gets $50,000 a storm, with a $200,000 limit.


Germany's Awful Anniversary
FOR reasons that all can understand, modern Germany looks toward the future much more enthusiastically than it looks at the past.
This is one of the world's most successful societies.
With its future bright and its recent history shadowed by enormous horrors, it is no wonder that Germans confront the past as seldom as possible.
For the next few months, however, they will be forced to.
This period will mark the 50th anniversary of the final months of World War II, and hardly a week will go by without a commemoration of one sort or another.
The culmination will come on May 8, the 50th anniversary of the final defeat of Nazi Germany by Allied armies.
The federal government has not yet announced how it will mark that date.


Community Boards: Coming Meetings
MANHATTAN  DISTRICT 1 Battery Park, TriBeCa.
Next meeting Jan. 17, 5:30 P.M.; Merrill Lynch, 250 Vesey Street; (212) 442-5050.
DISTRICT 2 SoHo, Little Italy, West Village, Greenwich Village, parts of Chinatown.
Next meeting Jan. 19 7 P.M.; Cronin Auditorium, St.
Vincent's Hospital, Seventh Ave. and West 11th Street; (212) 979-2272.
DISTRICT 3 Lower East Side, East Village.
Next meeting Jan. 24, 6:30 P.M.; Educational Alliance, 197 East Broadway; (212) 533-5300.
DISTRICT 4 Chelsea, Clinton.
Next meeting Feb. 1, 6:30 P.M.; St.
Luke's Roosevelt Hospital Center, 1000 10th Ave. between 58th and 59th Streets, Meade Educational Conference Center; (212) 736-4536.
DISTRICT 5 Central Park South, central business district, theater district, Gramercy Park, Little India, Rockefeller Center.
Next meeting Feb. 9, 6 P.M.; Fashion Institute of Technology, 227 West 27th Street; (212) 465-0907.
DISTRICT 6 Murray Hill, Turtle Bay, Stuyvesant Square, Peter Cooper Village, Beekman, Sutton.
Next meeting Feb. 8, 7 P.M.; New York University Medical Center, 550 First Avenue at 31st Street; (212) 679-0907.
DISTRICT 7 Upper West Side.
Next meeting Feb. 7, 7 P.M.; Jewish Home and Hospital for the Aged, 120 West 106th Street, between Amsterdam and Columbus Avenues; (212) 362-4008.
DISTRICT 8 Upper East Side, Yorkville, Roosevelt Island.
Next meeting Feb. 18, 7 P.M.; Beth Israel Medical Center North, 170 East End Ave., between 87th and 88th Streets; (212) 427-4840.
DISTRICT 9 Morningside Heights, Manhattanville, Hamilton Heights.
Next meeting Jan. 19, 6:30 P.M.; Community Board Office, 565 West 125th Street. off Broadway; (212) 864-6200.
DISTRICT 10 Central Harlem.
Next meeting Feb. 1; 6:30 P.M.; Adam Clayton Powell State Office Building, 2d Floor Art Gallery, 163 West 125th Street; (212) 749-3105.
DISTRICT 11 East Harlem.
Next meeting Jan. 17, 7 P.M.; La Guardia Memorial House, 307 East 116th Street, between First and Second Avenues; (212) 831-8929.
DISTRICT 12 Washington Heights, Inwood.
Next meeting Jan. 24, 7:30 P.M.; New York State Psychiatric Institute, 8th Floor Auditorium, 722 West 168th Street; (212) 568-8500.
QUEENS DISTRICT 1 Astoria, Long Island City.
Third Tuesday of the month; next meeting Jan. 17, 7 P.M.;, Variety Boys and Girls Club, 21-17 Thirtieth Road; (718) 786-3335.
DISTRICT 2 Sunnyside, Woodside.
First Thursday of the month; next meeting Feb. 2, 7 P.M.; location to be announced; (718) 533-8773.
DISTRICT 3 East Elmhurst, North Corona, Jackson Heights.
Meetings are usually held the third Thursday of the month; next meeting Jan. 19, 7:45 8 P.M.; I.S. 227, 3202 Junction Boulevard, at 94th Street; (718) 458-2707.
DISTRICT 4 Corona, Corona Heights, Elmhurst.
First Tuesday of the month; next meeting Feb. 7, 7:30 P.M.; Joseph Lisa Center, 51-13 108th Street; (718) 760-3141.
DISTRICT 5 Glendale, Ridgewood, Middle Village, Maspeth, South Elmhurst.
Second Wednesday of the month; next meeting Feb. 8, 7:30 P.M.; To be announced; (718) 366-1834.
DISTRICT 6 Rego Park, Forest Hills.
Fourth Wednesday of the month; next Jan. 25; 7:30 P.M.; Central Queens YM-YWHA, 67-09 108th Street, Forest Hills; (718) 263-9250.
DISTRICT 7 Flushing, Bay Terrace, College Point, Whitestone.
Second Monday of the month; next meeting Feb. 6, 7:30 P.M.; Bowne Street Community Church, 143-11 Roosevelt Ave. at Bowne Street; (718) 359-2800.
DISTRICT 8 Flushing, Jamaica, Jamaica Estates, Jamaica Hill, Kew Gardens Hills.
Second Wednesday of the month; next meeting Feb. 8, 7:30 P.M.; Borough Hall, Room 213, 120-55 Queens Boulevard; (718) 591-6000.
DISTRICT 9 Richmond Hill, Woodhaven, Kew Gardens, Ozone Park.
Meetings usually held the second Tuesday of the month; next meeting Feb. 14; 7:45 P.M.; Le Cordon Bleu, 96-01 Jamaica Avenue; (718) 286-2686.
DISTRICT 10 Howard Beach, Ozone Park, Richmond Hill.
First Thursday of the month; next meeting Feb. 2, 7:45 P.M.; Knights of Columbus, 135-45 Lefferts Boulevard; (718) 843-4488.
DISTRICT 11 Bayside, Douglaston, Auburndale, Hollis Hills, Little Neck, Oakland Gardens. first Monday of the month; next Feb. 6, 8 P.M.; Middle School 158, 46-35 Oceana Street; (718) 225-1054.
DISTRICT 12 Jamaica, South Jamaica.
Third Wednesday of the month; next meeting Jan. 18, 7 P.M.; Family Life Center, 172-17 Linden Boulevard; (718) 658-3308.
DISTRICT 13 Queens Village, New Hyde Park, Springfield Gardens, Cambria Heights, Floral Park, Bellerose, Glen Oaks.
Usually fourth Monday of the month; Jan. 23, 7:30 P.M.; Queens Reformed Church Parish Hall, 94-79 Springfield Boulevard; (718) 464-9700.
DISTRICT 14 Far Rockaway, Rockaway Beach, Neponsit, Broad Channel, Breezy Point, Arverne, Bayswater, Edgemere.
Second Tuesday of the month; next meeting Feb. 14, 7:45 P.M.; American Legion, 301 Beach 92d Street; (718) 471-7300.
THE BRONX DISTRICT 1 Port Morris, Melrose, Mott Haven; last Thursday of the month; next Jan. 26, 6:30 P.M., Lincoln Hospital, 234 East 149th Street; (718) 585-7117.
DISTRICT 2 Hunts Point, Longwood; last Wednesday of the month; next Jan. 25, 6 P.M. ; 1029 East 163rd Street; (718) 328-9125.
DISTRICT 3 Morrisania; second Tuesday of the month; next Feb. 14, 6:30 P.M., Junior High School 98, 1619 Boston Road; (718) 589-6300.
DISTRICT 4 East and West Concourse, Mount Eden, Highbridge, Concourse Village; fourth Tuesday of the month; next Jan. 24, 6 P.M., 1650 Selwyn Avenue, Community Room; (718) 299-0800.
DISTRICT 5 Mount Hope, Morris Heights, Fordham University Heights; fourth Wednesday of the month; next Jan. 25, 6 P.M., East Concourse Hebrew Center, 236 East Tremont Avenue; (718) 364-2030.
DISTRICT 6 Bathgate, Belmont, Bronx Park South, Crotona Park North, East Tremont and West Farms; first Wednesday of the month; next Feb. 1, 6:30 P.M., St.
Barnabas Hospital, East 183d Street and Third Avenue, auditorium; (718) 579-6990.
DISTRICT 7 University Heights, Norwood, Fordham, Bedford and Bedford Park; third Tuesday of month; next Jan. 17, 7 P.M., Cosmopolitan Church of the Lord Jesus Christ, 39 West 190th Street, between Davidson and Grant Avenues; (718) 933-5650.
DISTRICT 8 Kingsbridge, Marble Hill, North Riverdale, Spuyten Duyvil, Fieldston; second Tuesday of the month; next Feb. 14, 7:30 P.M., Methodist 4499 Manhattan College Parkway; (718) 884-3959.
DISTRICT 9 Bronx River, Castle Hill, Clason Point, Harding Park, Parkchester, Bruckner, Soundview and Unionport; last Thursday of the month; next Jan. 26, 7 P.M., Community Board Office, 1967 Turnbull Avenue, off of Bruckner Boulevard; (718) 823-3034.
DISTRICT 10 City Island, Throgs Neck, Pelham Bay, Country Club, Co-op City; third Thursday of month; next Jan. 19, 7:30 P.M.; Middletown Plaza Senior Center, 3033 Middletown Road; (718) 892-1161.
DISTRICT 11 Allerton, Eastchester, Pelham Parkway, Morris Park; third Thursday of the month; next Jan. 19, 7:30 P.M., Knights of Columbus, Mary Queen of Peace Hall, 1919 Williamsbridge Road, between Rhinelander and Neill Avenues; (718) 892-6262.
DISTRICT 12 Wakefield, Woodlawn, Williamsburg, Baychester, Eastchester; fourth Thursday of the month; next Jan. 26, 8 P.M., Cardinal Spelman High School, 1 Cardinal Spelman Place; (718) 881-4455.
Schedules for meetings of community boards in Brooklyn will appear in subsequent issues.


The Art of Illusion and Allusion
FOR THE FIRST TIME SINCE 1937, the Museum of Art at the Rhode Island School of Design is displaying its entire collection of 47 costumes relating to Japanese No theater, in an aptly conceived illusion of a 16th-century temple stage.
In "Patterns and Poetry: No Robes From the Lucy Truman Aldrich Collection" (through next Sunday), Susan Hay, curator of costume and textiles, sought to make a virtue of limited gallery space by using a compact design that would show the costumes in a dramatic context.
Though the original proposals called for concrete structures, David Harvey, the exhibition designer, credits budgetary constraints with forcing an appropriate solution -- the illusion of an architectural setting, in this case a 16th-century No stage at the Nishi Honganji Temple in Kyoto, Japan.
In so doing he followed the Japanese principle that finds beauty in the absence or elimination of everything unnecessary.
Unlike the designs of museum mega-shows that depend on quantity and showmanship, Mr.
Harvey's suggestion of architecture enhances an exhibition devoted to a theater of allusion.


Cod's Versatility and Delicate Flavor
AMERICANS eat more cod than any other fish.
Because it is less expensive than salmon, tuna or swordfish, some people mistakenly assume it must be inferior.
But the fish in this family, which includes haddock and scrod, are extraordinary, with large, firm white flakes that have a delicate flavor.
They can be baked, poached, broiled or fried and go with a wide variety of sauces.
Despite overfishing and trawlers that drag the seabed clean, leaving no younger fish to grow, cod is still widely available and is the most important saltwater fish besides herring.
"There are grounds for thinking that the European colonization of North America was prompted to a large extent by the existence of cod on that side of the Atlantic," writes Alan Davidson in "North Atlantic Seafood" (Viking).
"Cape Cod was, of course, named for the cod; and Boston, 'the home of the beans and the cod,' has an effigy of the 'sacred cod' from which the city derived much of its wealth, hanging in the State House." Mr.
Davidson added, "Shed, therefore, any ideas that the cod is an ordinary fish and invest the next piece of cod you buy with the exciting qualities which are its by right."


'Shadows of ther Mind'
To the Editor:


On Sunday; The Race Is to the Swift And Culinary
NEW YORKERS know the feeling.
A good little neighborhood restaurant opens up with such low prices and fine food that there is a tacit conspiracy among the regulars to keep it a secret, especially from the gourmet food reviewers, the palate-meisters who prowl the city with the dedication of learned locusts.
"This guy said his name was Zagat," Neil Ganic was explaining, putting aside his chef's whites in his Brooklyn restaurant in favor of his running clothes.
He was sipping some chardonnay before darting out between lunch and dinner to run to Manhattan and back across the Brooklyn Bridge.
"And it was him. And now, there we are."


Ave Maria Brennan, Michael Burns
Ave Maria Brennan, an assistant corporation counsel in the New York City Law Department, was married yesterday to Michael J. Burns, a lawyer in New York.
The Rev.
Pierce A. Brennan, the bride's brother, performed the ceremony at St.
Anthony's Roman Catholic Church in Oceanside, L.I.
Ms.
Brennan, 42, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School.
She is the daughter of Evelyn B. Brennan of Brooklyn and the late Edward A. Brennan.
The bride's father was a marine engineer in Brooklyn for the United States Navy.


Gimme an 'S' -- for Safety
Football has been getting safer -- causing 36 deaths (from peewee to pro) in 1968, down to zero in 1994 -- but cheerleading has been getting more dangerous.
Frederick Mueller, a physical-education professor at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, follows serious sports accidents.
In a recent study he documented several cases of accidental deaths and paralysis that have resulted from cheerleading's becoming more acrobatic.
Federal statistics also show a growing number of emergency room visits for less severe injuries (15,600 in 1993).


Giving Aid and Comfort To the Graffiti Writers?
To the Editor:
I'm not sure it was particularly wise for the cops who were profiled in the Jan. 8 article "When City Walls Speak" to boast that they can "tell what a gang is up to by what its members write."


Not in Love With Amy
Yes, it was Christmas Sunday, but your cover did not picture an angel.
Rather, your cover article demonstrated a concern for the doubtful success of Sky Dancer: Will this be the toy of the year in 1995?
Do you really believe that Toys "R" Us?
JAMES A. KELLY Scranton, Pa.


Panthers Add a Defensive Coordinator
VIC FANGIO, who recently resigned as linebackers coach of the New Orleans Saints, will become the defensive coordinator of the Carolina Panthers, The Charlotte Observer and television station WBTV reported. (AP)


Doo-wop Memories: The Chords' Moment
IN a city of dreamers, Jimmy Keyes knows the score.
Literally.


'Shock Value'
To the Editor:
Leadbelly did occasionally appear in concert wearing his prison stripes  [ "How Real Is 'Realness' in Rap?," Dec. 11 ] , but it was done unwillingly and at the insistence of his manager, John Lomax, solely for its shock value.
Unlike some of today's rappers, Leadbelly never sought to capitalize on his episodes of violence.
HENRY SAPOZNIK  New York


Votes in Congress; Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate  1.
Gift Ban: Vote to kill an amendment to a bill subjecting Congress to the same labor laws that govern private employment that would set a May 31 deadline for consideration of legislation to bar lawmakers from accepting free meals, trips and other gifts from lobbyists.
Approved 55 to 44, Jan. 10. 2.
Campaign Funds: Vote to kill an amendment to a bill subjecting Congress to the same lawbor laws that govern private employment that would bar members of Congress from converting campaign funds to personal use.
Approved 64 to 35, Jan. 10. 3.
Welfare: Vote to kill an amendment to a bill subjecting Congress to the same labor laws that govern private employment that would put Congress on record as pledging not to enact legislation that would increase the number of hungry and homeless children.
Approved 56 to 43, Jan. 10.
1
2
3
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
Lieberman (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
Lautenberg (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
New York
D'Amato (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Moynihan (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a picture caption on page 1 of the Arts and Leisure section today about UPN, a new television network that will begin broadcasting tomorrow night, renders the full name incorrectly.
It is the United Paramount Network, not the Universal Paramount Network.


CORRECTION
A report in the Postings column on Dec. 25 about projects in the New York metropolitan area cited by the American Institute of Architects for its 1995 Honor Awards misstated the number of New York firms honored.
In addition to the firms cited for local projects, three based in Manhattan were cited for work done elsewhere.
They were Ehrenkrantz &amp; Eckstut, Kohn Pedersen Fox Associates and Polshek &amp; Partners.


Legal Double-Parking? That's the Ticket, Some Say
Almost nothing would shake the lives of city car owners more than aggressive ticketing of double-parked cars on alternate-side days.
In the city's densest neighborhoods, from Morningside Heights to Sunset Park, lines of double-parked cars form to make way for street sweeping.


Louisa Ashmead, Stephen Robinson
Louisa Harral Ashmead, an assistant district attorney in Philadelphia, and Stephen Richard Robinson, a management consultant with Ernst &amp; Young, in New York, were married yesterday in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
Judge Mary DiGiacomo Colins of the Court of Common Pleas in Philadelphia performed the ceremony at Wyndham, the alumnae house of Bryn Mawr College.
Ms.
Ashmead, 37, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Haverford College and received a law degree from Temple University.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Ann Harnwell Ashmead of Haverford, Pa., and the late Dr.
John Ashmead.
Her mother, who is an archeologist, is a research associate at the University of Pennsylvania Museum in Philadelphia.
Her father was a professor of English at Haverford and an author.


Israel Derails Peace With New Settlements
To the Editor:
Israel's Labor Government is looking more and more like Yitzhak Shamir's, which massively built up settlements in the West Bank and Gaza from 1988 until 1992.
While Israel has made some important concessions to Palestinians at the negotiating table, its slow movement "on the ground" has prompted a Palestinian move to the right.


THE LAST VICTIM
It was useful to find every arrogant hate fantasy, dreamt up by wounded liberals in recent weeks, concentrated in Susan Estrich's screed "The Last Victim" (Dec. 18).
Her sullen stew of Rush Limbaugh, male backlash, Newt, Jesse Helms, etc. was just the bracer we needed, if we had any illusions that the news media got the message on Nov. 8.
RALPH D. WARD Riverdale, Mich.


Retailing's New Shade: Gray
Glancing at the changes on White Plains Road in the last year, a student of local economies would have guessed that Pelham Parkway's small commercial strip was booming.
After all, a Dress Barn and a SuperCuts opened outlets; Radio Shack moved into a bigger store, as did two local women's clothing stores.
What's more, the strip's 106 stores linked arms in a business improvement district.
But a more diligent student would have focused on the empty store next to Strawberry's, which the clothing chain has rented for more than a year.
Uncertain of its expansion plans, Strawberry's is unwilling to relinquish the empty space.


It's Not Enough to Mend the Ill and Injured
RADICAL SURGERY What's Next for America's Health Care.
By Joseph A. Califano Jr. 364 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $25.


Curator Shows Style By Juxtaposing Works With Similarities
NARDIN GALLERIES here have acquired a director in the person of Alyn Cosgrove, formerly assistant to the owner, Concetta Nardin.
With the current show of sculpture and drawings, Mr.
Cosgrove is showing off his paces as curator.
Since this is not the season for contemplating sculpture outdoors, all but one of the three-dimensional works are maquettes.


Holes in the Xerox Game Plan
To the Editor:
Paul Allaire's strategic maxim that "you cannot make a commodity out of a system" may work for Xerox ("Xerox's New Strategy Will Not Copy the Past," Dec. 18), but it is not an unqualified formula for success.
In fact, the same digital networks that are enabling Xerox to be "the Document Company" will create new competitive threats to the systems offered by many large companies.


We've Come Far Since the Victorians . . .; Sweatshops, Etc.
To the Editor:
Re "The Victorians Get a Bad Rap" (Op-Ed, Jan. 9): What a pity to see scholarship distorted by ideology, to see crumbs amassed to support arguments for a social agenda.


...But the More Things Change, the More They Stay the Same
To the Editor:
During 1932-33 my mother was forced by economic circumstances to place my brother and me in a diocesan orphanage for boys, Toner Institute, just outside Pittsburgh.
He was 9, and I was 7, and we were there about a year.


Protestant and Paranoid in Northern Ireland; By John Darnton
When the Protestant paramilitaries decided to proclaim a cease-fire late last year, they chose Gusty Spence to announce it.
Spence, at 61, is a retired terrorist.
He is the father figure -- if that's the right term -- of modern-day loyalist violence in Northern Ireland.
In 1966 he founded the Ulster Volunteer Force, a murderous gang that took its name from a private army of unionists that sprang up just before World War I to provoke a civil war rather than break from Britain.
Later that year, after he had killed a young Catholic barman, Spence was sentenced to life in Long Kesh prison.
Somewhere along the way he repented, turned his back on violence and, after 18 years, was released.
To the extremists he's still a revered figure.
Watching him on television, I was impressed by the way Spence read out the cease-fire statement.
His voice seemed to tremble as he offered "abject and true remorse" to "the loved ones of all innocent victims over the past 25 years." So I went to look him up.
I found him in West Belfast inside the Shankill Historical Society, a fortresslike building with several locked doors of reinforced steel and, like many homes and offices in the city, an external camera to beam the image of callers onto a snowy black-and-white monitor deep inside a windowless control room.


Doing Business on Line, the Old-Fashioned Way
ALL that talk by the new Republican majority in Congress about tapering the waist of a bloated Government just sounds like more meat and potatoes to Chris Van Horn.
Mr.
Van Horn is president of the CVK Group, a company that saves seats for lawyers and lobbyists at Capitol Hill hearings.
Because the Republicans are determined "to get things accomplished," he said, it will be a busy session for Congress and a profitable one for his small army of "place savers."


Youth and the Legacy of the Holocaust
IT WAS CALLED OFFENSIVE, irreverent and anti-Semitic when it was shown abroad.
Now "Balagan," a documentary about the legacy of the Holocaust in contemporary Israel, will be shown this afternoon, on Tuesday and Thursday, and on Jan. 25, as part of "Beyond Perestroika: Jews and History in the Global Village," a series of 12 films at the Jewish Film Festival at Lincoln Center.
Directed by Andres Veiel, the son of a German Army officer during World War II, the 90-minute film takes its name from the Hebrew word for chaos.
It presents a portrait of a younger generation of Jews who, while not rejecting their parents' suffering, refuse to let their lives be dominated by that pain.
For many Jews in Israel, where the Holocaust is still an open wound, this revision is tantamount to heresy.


Paris Premier To Start Run For President
His main rivals have long been defying him to enter the ring, but Prime Minister Edouard Balladur has remained studiously aloof, preferring to watch his "non-candidacy" for the French presidency gather momentum while appearing to focus his energies on running the country.
The strategy has worked well until now.
Polls place him so far ahead of other contenders on left and right that this spring's elections are beginning to resemble a coronation.
And this month, as if following a script, important conservatives, including much of his Cabinet, have been urging him to run.


Sara R. Bucholtz, Adam S. Feldman
Sara Robyn Bucholtz, a daughter of Dr.
Harvey and Joan Bucholtz of Maplewood, N.J., and Adam Scott Feldman, the son of Leonard and Nikki Feldman of Mount Laurel, N.J., are to be married today.
Rabbi Yakov Hilsenrath is to perform the ceremony at the Sheraton Tara Hotel in Parsippany, N.J.
The bride, 25, graduated magna cum laude from a dual degree program at Barnard College and the Jewish Theological Seminary of America, and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a first-year law student at New York University.
Her father is an endocrinologist in Edison, N.J.
Her mother is a nurse and a diabetes educator associated with her husband's practice.


Tackling the New Jersey Agenda; In Trenton
AS the Republican-dominated Legislature heads into the second half of its session, it has become clear that Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman will be setting the legislative agenda in the coming year.
"The ball is in her court," the Senate President, Donald T. DiFrancesco, said in an interview, adding that he did not plan to propose "any new policy measures that have not been initiated by the Governor."


Maloney's Future and Islanders' Success Are an Entry
The recently concluded 103-day owners' lockout did much to blur the images of last season.
"Which is good, as far as I'm concerned," Islanders General Manager Don Maloney said today after he watched his team practice at the Long Island Skating Academy.
"That is something all us Islanders fans are trying to forget."


INSIDE
Fire Boxes Get Reprieve
A judge has issued an order preventing the Giuliani administration from removing fire alarm boxes from the city's streets.
Page 27.
Passing the Torch in Haiti
The United States is moving ahead to transfer control of the peacekeeping force in Haiti to the United Nations despite some qualms.
Page 8.
Mideast Aid Compromise
Plans for a development bank to aid Mideast peace have been cut back to overcome objections.
Page 15.
Manhattan Buildings Rise
A new optimism has residential developers dusting off plans for sites in Manhattan.
Real Estate, section 9.


Exit Laughing
MY MOTHER CALLS TO TELL ME she doesn't want the plots.
At first I think she's saying plotz.
"We live in Florida now," she says.
"It doesn't make sense to be buried in Westchester."


BEST SELLERS: January 15, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
30
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
2
2
46
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
3
20
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
4
4
13
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work in their small Maine town.
5
5
7
WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World War II America.
6
7
127
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
7
8
10
THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote themselves to solving crimes.
8
9
8
DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful Government agency.
9
11
15
TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching Hour" and "Lasher."
10
6
27
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
11
10
25
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's visit to a small town changes many lives.
12
14
15
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
13
12
17
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
14
1
SELF-DEFENSE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware undertakes to discover whether a woman's fear that she is being stalked by a killer is imagined or real.
15
15
6
A CUP OF CHRISTMAS TEA, by Tom Hegg. (Waldman House, $10.95.) A book of verses, illustrated by Warren Hanson.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
11
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of belief, suffering and hope.
2
2
15
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
3
3
19
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
4
4
56
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
5
7
14
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
6
5
16
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.
7
10
7
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
8
9
11
THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence affect American life.
9
6
18
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the present.
10
8
14
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the country singer.
11
12
45
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
12
15
13
NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World War II.
13
3
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters of varied callings and backgrounds, reported in words and pictures.
14
14
10
ALL THE TROUBLE IN THE WORLD, by P.J.
O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.) A humorist considers problems like overpopulation, famine and plague.
15
13
5
IT WASN'T ALWAYS EASY, BUT I SURE HAD FUN, by Lewis Grizzard. (Villard, $20.) A collection of essays by the late Southern humorist.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
38
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
86
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
3
3
ILLUMINATA, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $20.) A celebration of the power of prayers, with examples of those fitting a variety of situations.
4
4
16
MAGIC EYE III, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Oscillating designs in color.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 31, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE ART AND ARCHITECTURE OF ISLAM, 1250-1800, by Sheila S. Blair and Jonathan M. Bloom. (Yale University, $65.) A bold, competent and fresh attempt to rewrite the history of later Islamic art from scratch, with plenty of splendid color illustrations and other useful graphics.
BOREDOM: The Literary History of a State of Mind, by Patricia Meyer Spacks. (University of Chicago, $24.95.) A persuasive account of a concept invented in the 18th century; its roots include a growing concentration on "inner experience" as the locus of personal reality.
FELICIA'S JOURNEY, by William Trevor. (Viking, $21.95.) Mr.
Trevor's latest novel concerns an unmarried, pregnant, vulnerable Irish girl, wandering England's industrial Midlands until she encounters an awesomely predatory Englishman whose monstrosity is all the scarier for remaining long undefined.
THE HOLLOW YEARS: France in the 1930s, by Eugen Weber. (Norton, $25.) The author, a historian devoted to France, rises from immersion in the documents, bearing this scintillating, entertaining account of an unworthy but fascinating period in French life.
THE INFERNO OF DANTE: A New Verse Translation, by Robert Pinsky. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) A gripping and near-symphonic rendition of the tour through hell attains a truly Dantean velocity without missing a jot or a tittle.
IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War, by Tobias Wolff. (Knopf, $23.) The follow-up volume to Mr.
Wolff's memoir "This Boy's Life" is a series of small, elegant, personal sketches of his year in Vietnam.
LONG WALK TO FREEDOM: The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela, by Nelson Mandela. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The President of South Africa comes across not as moralist or messiah but as a pragmatic politician who chose what might work over what was ideologically agreeable.
THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG, by J.M.
Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.
NELSON: A Personal History, by Christopher Hibbert. (Addison-Wesley, $30.) A biography that visits many familiar scenes but brings clarity, reliability, convincing judgments and enthusiasm to Horatio Nelson, a unique British hero whose personal defects could never tarnish his glory.
ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON: A Biography, by Frank McLynn. (Random House, $30.) A thoroughly detailed life, taking the most recent scholarship into account, of the great Scottish writer of English prose who died at 44 in 1894.
THE ROCKET AND THE REICH: Peenemunde and the Coming of the Ballistic Missile Era, by Michael J. Neufeld. (Free Press, $25.) A chronicle of the Nazis' brutal V-2 rocket program and the German scientists who became the American space technologists of 1945 and after.


Sarah J. Berger and Gavin W. Miles
Sarah Jane Berger, an instructor at the New York University School of Law, is to be married today to Gavin Wentworth Miles, a senior assistant district attorney for Kings County in Brooklyn.
Rabbi Joel Goor is to officiate at the Penn Club in New York.
The bride, 37, graduated from Brown University and received her law degree from Boston University.
She is a daughter of Mary Berger of New York and Dr.
Abraham Berger of Marion, Mass.
Dr.
Berger, a chemist, is an environmental consultant based in Marion.
The bride's mother, now retired, was a senior development executive and the director of the real estate division of the New York UJA-Federation of Jewish Philanthropies in New York.


Budapest's Nonstop Night Scene
OF the cities that have been reborn in Eastern Europe in recent years, Budapest has probably bounced back with the most verve and vitality for explorers of the night.
There is a lot to choose from along both banks of the Danube: ritzy restaurants, trendy bars, raging clubs, jazz spots and gambling casinos.
A visitor is confronted with long listings of night life in the English language newspapers.
It is a sign of how far Budapest has come in its new incarnation that residents describe a night scene that is constantly changing and evolving.
Some clubs that were determinedly outre four years ago are now considered standard fare.
New places attract a following that, in the fickle way of young revelers everywhere, soon moves on.


Deborah Putnoi and Joshua Berlin
Deborah Lisa Putnoi, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald W. Putnoi of Cambridge, Mass., was married last evening to Joshua Daniel Berlin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald A. Berlin, also of Cambridge.
Rabbi Bernard Mehlman officiated at the Peabody Essex Museum in Salem, Mass.
The bride, 29, is a painter based in Cambridge.
She graduated from the combined Tufts University/School of the Museum of Fine Arts program, and she and her husband received master's degrees in education from Harvard University.
Her father is an ophthalmologist in Waltham, Mass.
Her mother, Frances Putnoi, is an art consultant in Cambridge.


More Than One Norma Desmond
To the Editor:  What fools were those who left the Minskoff Theater so abruptly on the evening of Dec. 21 upon hearing that Glenn Close would not be appearing in that performance of "Sunset Boulevard." I would like to remind those theatergoers, who nearly trampled one another racing to the box office for their refunds, that "Sunset Boulevard" is not a one-woman show.
What all of those people missed was a bravura performance by the entire company, led by Ms.
Close's standby, Karen Mason.
Ms.
Mason was a consummate Norma Desmond, acting and singing the role to perfection.


One Person's Trash Is Another's Garden
WHEN Rebecca Cole saw the big, blue All detergent can on top of the trash mountain at her favorite town dump in New Hampshire, she was sorry she had a dress on. (Why had she worn a dress? Church? A wedding? Ms. Cole, who makes trash detours at any time, can't remember.) But not to worry.
The woman who runs the dump with her husband offered to climb the tin mountain.
The All can was worth it.
The woman appreciated somebody with a good eye.
Besides, Ms.
Cole has the right lineage.
Her grandparents, who never threw anything away, used the same dump.
(I know this place. My sister happens to go there on Sundays, to swap junk, but you'll never get the name out of me. Too many trash hounds from New York could ruin the place.)


This Time, UMass Has A Grip On No. 1
In a season where college basketball has been as unsettled as the weather, the No. 1 ranking has been less a reward for victory than a prelude to defeat.
Arkansas, Massachusetts and North Carolina have all climbed to No. 1, only to tumble down the polling ladder.
But UMass has been given a second chance atop the ranking, and this time the Minutemen appear sufficiently proprietary to stay around for a while.


Malayan Tastes
PENANG CUISINE MALAYSIA ++ (718) 321-2078; 38-04 Prince Street, Flushing; $; no credit cards


Houseplants Like to Put Their Feet Up, Too
IS your Clivia resting?
It should be.
Many house plants need a break just as much as people do.
One of the greatest mistakes that plant hobbyists make is overcare.
The plants are pushed and pushed with water, fertilizer and warm rooms.
There is never any time off, never a time to luxuriate in a dormant period.
But a dormant period is often just what house plants, like their outdoor cousins, are in need of.
Not all of them, of course, but most of them, and foremost of all, Clivia.
In fact, if these plants are pushed all year long, they never bloom.


Is Everyone Destined To Get Rich?
THE poor, Jesus said, shall always be with us.
The financial markets of the world are beginning to suspect he might have had a point.
For the past several years, the big story in international finance was the willingness of those with money to believe that poor countries would soon become rich.
It had worked with the export-led booms of such countries as Singapore and South Korea, and with rich countries feeling beset by cheap imports, it became fashionable to think that those success stories would be repeated time after time.


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and the satellite booth at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold, beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


Octopus, Braised Beef and Maine Lobster
ELIAS CORNER


Reporter's Notebook; Despite Terror-Thriller Plot, Bomb Trial Opens as a Dry Documentary
It was the end of a long and not very interesting debate among lawyers about the transcripts of telephone conversations -- the Government says there are about 1,100 in all -- when the judge seemed finally to have had enough.
"This is getting us no place very fast," said Judge Michael B. Mukasey, who is presiding in the trial of 12 men accused of plotting a "war of urban terror against the United States." Then, Judge Mukasey, a quiet, restrained man with a dry sense of humor, reconsidered.


In Defense of America's Competence
To the Editor:
In "Is Japan's Sam Walton Up to the Job?" (Dec. 4), Isao Nakauchi recalls that his life was saved in World War II by American incompetence and slipshod workmanship when shells failed to explode.
Many American service personnel, especially prisoners of war of the Japanese, as well as Chinese, Koreans and others, owe their lives to the competence of America's scientists and the atomic devices that performed flawlessly and helped bring World War II to a speedy and satisfactory end.
HANS WIMPFHEIMER  Poughkeepsie, N.Y., Dec. 5 The writer, a retired physicist, is a World War II veteran.


Hall Controls Overtime After Hurley Creates It
Seton Hall guard Danny Hurley buried his demons yesterday at the place where they had haunted him most.
For one afternoon, Madison Square Garden belonged more to Hurley than it did to the St.
John's Red Storm or Felipe Lopez.
Hurley, who walked off the Garden floor 13 months ago emotionally shattered to the point that he didn't play again for the rest of the season, emerged as the hero in Seton Hall's 91-81 victory over St.
John's before a crowd of 14,295.
It was a desperation 3-pointer at the buzzer by Hurley that sent the game into overtime and demoralized a Red Storm team that was tasting victory.


Free Opera at St. Patrick's
The Richard Tucker Music Foundation is to give a free concert at St.
Patrick's Cathedral (Fifth Avenue and 50th Street) today at 7 P.M. to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the tenor Richard Tucker's Metropolitan Opera debut and the 20th anniversary of the foundation, which was established after his death in 1975.


Bookshelf
NICK OF TIME.
By Anne Lindbergh.
Little, Brown. $14.95. (Ages 12 and up) The Mending Wall school is an eccentric place, but still, this new boy Nick does seem to be going through walls into the future.
A hilarious time-tripping novel.
WAR GAME.
Written and illustrated by Michael Foreman.
Arcade. $16.95. (Ages 8 and up) The companion volume to "War Boy," the author's own affecting illustrated memoir of World War II, this handsomely illustrated and harrowing book tells about his four young uncles, who were all killed while serving in the British Army in World War I. One Christmas Day, the youthful British and German soldiers put battles aside and play soccer.


Surrounded by Zealots
ALLAH O AKBAR A Journey Through Militant Islam.
By Abbas.
Illustrated. 319 pp.
San Francisco: Phaidon Press/Chronicle Books. $60.


Funny Southerners
To the Editor:
Roy Blount Jr.'s essay "There's More to Southern Humor Than Foot-Long Pecan Rolls" (Dec. 11) was fine, but I wondered why it didn't mention early Southern humor writers like Joseph Baldwin, who wrote "The Flush Times of Alabama and Mississippi" (1853), and A. B. Longstreet, who wrote "Georgia Scenes" (1835).
Aren't they and others of that era the ones who showed Samuel Clemens and his generation of writers the way?


In Britain, Bookish Passions
ONLY in England would I pounce with delight upon a second-hand copy of "Down Among the Donkeys." Browsing through the hodgepodge bookstalls outside the National Theater in London, I certainly wasn't looking for anything on donkeys.
But attracted by its odd title, I leafed through Elisabeth Svendsen's 1981 memoir, a lively and well-written account of how she came to found a donkey sanctuary in Devon.
Then, paying the hovering bookseller $:2, I wedged the book into my crowded shoulder bag and managed to ignore my husband's muttered query: "More books?"
When I'm in Britain, I always buy more books.
Some travelers worry about what reading material to carry with them; I obsess about what I can bring home.
Together with crumpets and three-fruit marmalade, a certain kind of book -- quiet, circumscribed, intensely local -- has become my favorite British souvenir.


Medley of Voices in All Manner of Song
SINGERS, no doubt refreshed from their holiday break, raise their voices in all manner of song this week.
This afternoon at 4, for instance, there is a production of "The Fantasticks" by Tom Jones and Harvey Schmidt at the Schoolhouse in Croton Falls and a performance of the Pergolesi "Stabat Mater" by the Somers Chorale in St.
Luke's Church in Somers.
For tickets or driving directions to Somers, call 248-7357.
"The Fantasticks" will be repeated at 8 P.M. next Friday and Saturday and next Sunday afternoon at 4.
The Schoolhouse number is 277-8477.


Consensus on Ethics in Research Is Elusive
After a year of reports about possibly unethical psychiatric research, professionals representing all sides of the debate met here for three day to consider their differences.
When the heated discussions were over, they still disagreed about what is ethical and what is not, but they concurred that some things can and should be done to help prevent ethical problems.


State Orchestras Are Back on Stage
CONNECTICUT orchestras are back on stage again, with the Greenwich, Stamford and Waterbury Symphonies, the Fairfield Orchestra and Orchestra New England, and the Yale Philharmonia all performing next weekend.
At Woolsey Hall at Yale on Thursday, the cellist Yo-Yo Ma plays two Haydn Concertos with the Yale Philharmonia under Aldo Parisot.
The 8 P.M. concert, a benefit for the Aldo Parisot Scholarship Fund, also finds Mr.
Parisot leading his Yale Cellos in works of Vivaldi and Ezra Laderman, while Mr.
Ma adds a performance of the Debussy Sonata with the conductor's wife, Elizabeth Sawyer Parisot.
For tickets, the Yale Concert Office number is 432-4158.


Nureyev Auction Tops Estimates
The contents of Rudolf Nureyev's Dakota apartment in Manhattan fetched almost $8 million in a two-day buying frenzy at Christie's, far higher than the auction house's estimate of $3.3 million to $4.8 million.
The sale brought a number of record prices for Old Master artists and a record for a Roman marble torso.
Nearly 2,000 people flocked to Christie's on Thursday night and Friday to watch and to buy ballet slippers and costumes, furniture and paintings that belonged to the dancer, who died in 1993.
"Portrait of George Townshend, Lord de Ferrars," by Sir Joshua Reynolds, estimated to bring $350,000 to $450,000, was bought by an unidentified collector for $772,500, a record for the artist.
Johann Heinrich Fuseli's "Satan Starting from the Touch of Ithuriel's Lance," sold to another anonymous buyer for $761,500 (the estimate was $500,000 to $700,000).
And a Roman marble torso of the Diadumenos of Polykleitos, estimated to fetch $300,000 to $500,000, sold to an unidentified collector for $310,500. (Final prices include the auction house's commission, which is 15 percent of the first $50,000 and 10 percent of the rest. Estimates do not reflect commissions.)


We've Come Far Since the Victorians . . .
To the Editor:
Gertrude Himmelfarb suggests in "The Victorians Get a Bad Rap" (Op-Ed, Jan. 9) that a return to the values of Victorian Britain might help solve America's social problems.
Her article only illustrates, however, how bad history makes for bad politics.


Faith Reinforces Hate in the Caucasus
IT has been hard during a month of fighting in the Caucasus to find a Chechen rifle without a strip of green ribbon wrapped around it.
Some soldiers just pin the ribbons to their shirts, right above the heart.
Others tie them like bandanas across their frayed woolen caps.
But they are almost always there, because green is the color of Islam.
When 40,000 Russian soldiers swarmed across the border of the seccessionist republic of Chechnya last month, the Moscow view of Chechen life was simple enough: It was the mob capital of the world; armed thugs ran free there; order was impossible and discipline less so.


Antonio Pagan Supports Housing for the Poor
To the Editor:
Yes, the East Village is a quirky, offbeat and entrepreneurial neighborhood, as you point out in your Jan. 1 article "Caffeine and Crackdowns: Dispatches From '94." And local politics are notoriously fractious.
Dealing with the extremes of demographic and ideological diversity in this part of town is no small feat.
Yet Councilman Antonio Pagan has managed to be elected not once but twice to represent this district.


EXPRESSIVE JUSTICE IS ALL THE RAGE
Remember Willie Horton?
His ghost haunted American politics this election year, as Republican candidates sought to make Democratic opponents look soft on crime.
In New York's gubernatorial campaign, George Pataki ran ads attacking the incumbent, Mario Cuomo, because the state parole board released a man who later committed murder.
In Florida, Jeb Bush, son of the President who benefited from ads about Horton, attacked Gov.
Lawton Chiles because he had refused to sign a death warrant for the murderer of a 10-year-old girl.
And in Pennsylvania's gubernatorial race, Representative Tom Ridge attacked Lieut.
Gov.
Mark Singel for a decision he made as chairman of the State Board of Pardons to free Reginald McFadden, who served 24 years for killing a woman during a burglary.
After his release, McFadden was charged with the kidnapping, rape and robbery of a woman and was a suspect in the fatal stabbing of another.


Case Cited as Example of Need for Gay Rights
The Pennsylvania Superior Court has upheld the right of a business owner to dismiss an employee on the grounds of homosexuality and then collect damages from the employee for opening a competing business.
Although the case involves a small concern in the town of Camp Hill, near Harrisburg, it has been cited by gay and lesbian leaders nationally as an example of how vulnerable homosexuals can be without an equal rights law.


What Are They Really Saying?
DOWN with sexual harassment and war!
Freedom for fashion victims!
The current crop of films is loaded with such Oscar-ready messages.
But those bannered ideas often cloak something less politically polite.
Look at "Disclosure," for one.
On the surface it condemns harassment, as Demi Moore throws herself at her employee, Michael Douglas, until he cries "Uncle!" The film's veiled message is slyer: if you want harassment to seem serious, do it to a man instead of a woman.
By the time "Disclosure" makes its way to a dinner party conversation, the most urgent question it evokes is, "Come on, would Michael Douglas really have said no to Demi Moore?" From ideology to common sense, it's one long tumble down the entertainment food chain.


Jan. 8-14; A Stuggle, a March, a Man, a Memory


N.C.A.A. Wish
To the Sports Editor:
After seeing the movie "Hoop Dreams," and reading several articles about the National Collegiate Athletic Association's propositions 6 and 48, I propose that the current admission standards be maintained at SAT scores of 700 and grade point averages of 2.0 for all athletes.
At the same time, any university that admits athletes at this standard would provide scholarships for black academic achievers with the same scores, at a ratio of one athlete to five nonathletes.
Thus, the university and the N.C.A.A. could continue this exploitation while exercising some social responsibility.
GARY A. ZELAZNY
Austin, Tex.


Decaying Boat Basin Getting New Lease on New Life
After decades of being essentially a closed community, under siege from city authorities and decaying under a series of private operators, the 79th Street Boat Basin is on the verge of a new life.
A reconstruction project, financed by the city, is beginning to transform the basin, with new, wider slips to attract transient boaters, restrooms and sailing lessons for the public.
And the city is preparing to apply for a permit to dredge the marina, a long-anticipated task.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
DR. KING TRIBUTE
A tribute to the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. will take place tomorrow at the Bushnell in Hartford, open to the public free of charge from 4 to 9 P.M. and presented by the Connecticut Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities and the United Technologies Corporation.
In the Promenade Gallery an exhibition of photos chronicling Dr.
King's work in the civil rights movement, accompanied by a video of his speeches, will be on view.


Sports of The Times; Risking Instant Injustice
IN trying to justify the absence of instant replay, Commissioner Paul Tagliabue has insisted that its required delays disrupted "the flow" of the game.
And when Jerry Seeman, the National Football League's director of officiating, was asked about the two incorrect calls that instant replay would have reversed in last Sunday's Chargers-Dolphins playoff game, he parroted the commissioner's words.
"The pace of that game, the flow," Seeman said, "to stop the game to check instant replay, it would've detracted from the excitement."


BETTER WORK THAN WELFARE
In "Better Work Than Welfare. But What if There's Neither?" (Dec. 18), Jason DeParle writes that Mary Ann Moore moved her family from Illinois to California, where her aunt lived in the early 1980's, with California's higher Aid to Families With Dependent Children benefit levels "on her mind." Moore moved back to Illinois (and its lower benefits) a few years later.
It would be unfortunate if this anecdote helped lend credence to the "welfare magnet" myth that poor families move from state to state in search of higher welfare benefits.
This myth has often been cited as a reason for cutting benefits or not increasing them, and for penalizing those who move with lower benefits.
Yet, A.F.D.C. benefits are well below the official poverty level in every state in the country, and the median benefit for a family of three is a mere $366 a month.


Houseplants Like to Put Their Feet Up, Too
IS your Clivia resting?
It should be.
Many house plants need a break just as much as people do.
One of the greatest mistakes that plant hobbyists make is overcare.
The plants are pushed and pushed with water, fertilizer and warm rooms.
There is never any time off, never a time to luxuriate in a dormant period.
But a dormant period is often just what house plants, like their outdoor cousins, are in need of.
Not all of them, of course, but most of them, and foremost of all, Clivia.
In fact, if these plants are pushed all year long, they never bloom.


The Music in Discipline
ASK Betty Allen what she thinks of rap music and quicker than you can say LL Cool J, she will tell the story of the adolescent who, professing his love of singing, auditioned for the Harlem School of the Arts.
His offering: a rap piece.
Ms.
Allen watched as the choral teacher, Yvonne Hatchett, listened for a moment.
"What are you doing?" the teacher asked.


Albany Tax Cuts Seem Certain, but How Deep and for Whom?
It is virtually certain that most New Yorkers will get a tax cut from the state this year.
The question now is how deep the cut will be and which taxpayers will benefit most.
The choices are sharply different.
Under a four-year plan proposed by Gov.
George E. Pataki, personal income taxes would be reduced across the board.
Another plan would cut taxes for more affluent New Yorkers but raise them for some middle-class and poor people.
And a third plan being prepared by Assembly Democrats would give cuts to the middle-class and poor, though it is not yet clear how.


Mystery Of an Old Carousel
OLD habits die hard.
Perhaps that explains why Northrop Grumman has cloaked its carousel in a mantle of mystery befitting a military secret.
The carousel nestles in a wood shelter in a grove of trees at Calverton, where Grumman once tested aircraft.
Now that the plant is being decommissioned and the Navy has announced its intention to give the site to the Riverhead Community Development Agency, the fate of the carousel is in question.


Brazil Comes Down Hard on Cigarette Ads
No longer will a Brazilian soap opera villain drag on a cigarette while plotting perfidy.
No longer will a Brazilian economist puff on camera while explaining Government perfidy.
In one of the widest attacks on smoking in the third world, Brazil's Health Ministry is banning cigarette advertising from sporting and cultural events and on television until 11 P.M.
Prime-time shows and television news programs will also be forbidden from showing people smoking.


In the Name of Preserving History
Tiffany's Antiques Show homage, Upper East Side evening, Historical Society sale preview.


M.T.A., in Compromise, Seeking Short-Term Tenants for Coliseum
Ending an impasse with City Hall about what to do next with the vacant New York Coliseum, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority is seeking proposals from prospective tenants who would use the complex's vast exhibition hall for up to three years and finally generate some income for the authority.
The request for proposals comes six months after long negotiations broke off between the authority and the building's prospective developer, Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the owner of The Daily News, who had planned to build a huge complex of offices and apartments at the site.


Urban Gardeners, Firmly United by Loss of a Garden
Twice a day, 94-year-old Marta Porta used to set out fresh food and water for the cats that populated the garden on West 84th Street between Amsterdam and Columbus Avenues.
Mary Atwood grew herbs there, offering clippings to neighbors and fellow gardeners.
And Audrey Roberts grew all her winter vegetables there, showing local children how bean plants grow and how to peel and quarter kohlrabi.
Over 18 years, the patch of land became a second home to the gardeners, neighbors who brought lunch and a book, and students from Louis D. Brandeis High School across the street who lingered in the garden after school.
Last year, when the New York City Housing Authority proposed to close the garden and build apartments for the homeless there, residents stood in front of bulldozers to try to stop what they viewed as an assault on their community.


Putting Cheery Greeters at the Front Door
THE smile-serving store from Arkansas has arrived on Long Island, and Long Islanders may never be the same.
Eileen Hawkins of Centereach now starts every workday participating in a group cheer.
At the top of her lungs, the petite Ms.
Hawkins, 59, shouts, "Give me a W-A-L!" then pauses to join her colleagues in a "squiggly," a movement that looks like a cross between Chubby Checker twisting and a hen laying an egg.
That is followed by a robust "M-A-R-T!" and a few more yells. (Who is No. 1?) "Wal-Mart!" (Whose store is No. 1?) "Twenty-one 56!" the number of a new store in Middle Island, which brings on "21 56, we're the store Long Island picks!"


Jan. 8-14: Dismantling a Buffer; Croatia Asks U.N. Troops To Leave, Saying They Only Shield the Serbs
Croatia's impatience with Serbs has roots deep in history, and last week that impatience overflowed as President Franjo Tudjman ordered United Nations forces out of Croatia, in order to speed the recovery of land held by secessionist Serbs.
He said the 12,000 peacekeepers, who police the tenuous truce that ended the Serbian-Croatian war of 1991, had become a buffer shielding the Serbs.
His decision to remove them after March 31 makes a new war between Serbs and Croats more likely.


The Wind Shifts, and Women's Crew Loses Round 2
It was time for Dennis Conner to re-establish his mastery of America's Cup sailboat racing.
After a crushing defeat Friday by the first all-female crew in the history of the America's Cup, Conner today brushed off his time-honored skills.
In a trials race sailed in mostly light, shifty breezes off San Diego, Conner and his Stars &amp; Stripes team defeated America  , the all-women's team, by 5 minutes 47 seconds.
It was a classic one-on-one match, with Conner dominating as he has done scores of times in his two decades of America's Cup competition.


On Tap at New Microbrewery
AFTER a hearty welcome from a robust fellow with a bushy handlebar mustache, the two-story gleaming silver-and-gold vats, pipes and hoses of a microbrewery greet all who enter the new Long Island Brewing Company in Jericho.
Nine fresh-brewed beers and ales plus a few seasonal specialities are on tap.
Bags of malt are stacked next to the big masher.
A display of hops, yeast, barley and water occupies a prominent position in the lobby.
Red neon beer signs and pictures of famous old breweries dot the walls, along with beer labels, steins and cans.
Yes, this place is about beer.


A City Asks For a Return On Its Dollar
MAYOR RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI'S new urban agenda is a political alchemist's ingenious formula for coping with diminishing returns from Albany and Washington: He argues that New York, like many other American cities, is a well-capitalized national economic resource that would be largely self-sufficient if only the state and Federal governments got out of its way.
The logical, if unlikely, extension of that agenda is another political retread that dreamers recycle periodically: statehood.


A Champion on the Court and Only 12
A FEW years ago, tennis players at Scalzi Park in Stamford marveled at the stroking ability of a boy who would spend hours volleying with his father.
It was obvious to everyone that the sessions were far more than just a father and son at play.
They were very serious, and noisy, training drills, meant to hone the skills of the youngster, then barely tall enough to see across the net.
Last summer and fall, the park's regulars still got to see the boy, Alexandru Popescu, practicing with his father, Sherban.
But there were notable differences: Alexandru, now 12, has grown to 5 feet 2 inches, weighs 90 pounds and developed into a genuine professional prospect, good enough to beat some of the best grown-ups on the park courts.
And his father has quieted down.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tues.
Industrial production, Dec., pct. change
0.5
0.5
Capacity utilization, Dec., percent
84.7
84.9
Wed.
Business inventories, Nov., pct. change
0.4
0.4
Thur.
Trade balance, Nov., $ billions
-10.1
-10.1
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
355
345
Fri.
Housing starts, Dec., mils., ann. rate
1.54
1.49
This Week's Developments
Mon.
Martin Luther King Jr. Birthday
Wed.
Two- and 5-year Treasury note auction announcement
*4*Federal Reserve releases beige book
Thur.
Philadelphia Fed January business outlook survey


FOOTWEAR
Vasque hiking boots: These bulky boots have joined the ranks of outdoor gear that has become street wear.
Along with Timberlands, they're the urban boots of choice. (Vasque)


Habitats/Long Island City; In the Shadow of the El
CRAIG Spooner, pencil stuck behind his ear, perched on the edge of the old stool in the parlor of the house he bought this summer in Long Island City, Queens, a late-19th-century rowhouse in the shadow of the Flushing line el.
As he talked of his plans for the house, the sounds of workers downstairs ripping pieces of plywood with circular saws competed with the metallic rumbling of the trains overhead.
To Mr.
Spooner, who purchased his house at 44-69 23d Street from an estate for $100,000, the house is exactly what he was seeking.
"It's a brownstone with a lot of landmark features, like the six fireplaces," he said.
"It's equivalent to nice houses in Brooklyn Heights or on Manhattan's Central Park West -- without having to pay those prices.


Tracy S. Casper and Eric J. Lang
Tracy Sharon Casper, the daughter of Frances Casper of Virginia Beach, Va., and Dean Casper of Chesapeake, Va., is to be married today to Dr.
Eric Jonathan Lang, the son of Deanna Lang of New Rochelle, N.Y., and Ronald Lang of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Rabbi Howard Jaffe is to perform the ceremony at the Park Savoy, a restaurant in Florham Park, N.J.
The bride, 28, graduated from Princeton University.
She is an associate director of "One Life to Live," the soap opera on ABC-TV.
Her father is a manufacturers' representative in the audiovisual and restaurant-equipment industries in Portsmouth, Va.
Her mother is a consultant at Consultants in Nutritional Services in Norfolk, Va.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
T.G.I.F. CABARET
Brian Christopher and his trio will be the opening attraction in three programs to be presented by the New Rochelle Council on the Arts on Friday.
Mr.
Christopher, whose former classmates at New Rochelle High School will remember him as Brian Demos, has been appearing at Isabel's, the Surf Club, Bitter End, Kenny's Castaways and La Cave in Manhattan, in concert with Randy Klein on keyboard, Frank Wagner on acoustic bass and Tony Lewis on drums.
The cabaret series is called T.G.I.F., and two performances will be given at 8 and 10 P.M. in the Wildcliff Center for the Arts, 44 Wildcliff Road at Hudson Park.
The vocalist Lynne Vardamann will be the headliner on Feb. 3, and Janet and Hugh Berberich, a vocal duo who specialize in operetta excerpts a la Nelson Eddy and Jeanette MacDonald, will be featured on Feb. 24.


Aristide Weakens Army and Makes It Dependent on Him
Having whittled the Haitian Army down to a fraction of its former size, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide has now embarked on an effort to replace its leaders with officers whose primary loyalty is to him, Haitian officials and foreign diplomats here say.
Since his return to power on Oct. 15, President Aristide has been under constant pressure from Haiti's political left, his original constituency, and some of his advisers to abolish the military altogether.
But at the same time, the United States, which supplied the troops that restored him to office, has been insisting that Haiti needs to maintain some sort of professional, apolitical military force.


With Some Reservations, Water Is Still Called Safe
Is New York City's water safe to drink?
The question would have been unthinkable for most of the century; New York's water was the envy of the nation's cities, a pure, bountiful supply stored in pristine mountain reservoirs as much as 100 miles from the boroughs' man-made bustle and delivered through a far-flung network of aqueducts and mains that was an engineering marvel.


Bric-a-Brac Art: The Obsessions Of a Collagist
KURT SCHWITTERS HAS always inspired fanatical devotion in his admirers, but the retrospective of his work now at the Pompidou Center in Paris takes this devotion to new extremes.
Organized by Serge Lemoine, head curator of the Musee de Grenoble and a professor at the Sorbonne, it includes well over 300 works of art by Schwitters (paintings, collages, assemblages, sculptures and drawings), as well as 150 typographic works (poems, postcards, magazines, bureaucratic forms).
The obsessive quality of the exhibition seems perfectly appropriate to its subject.
Schwitters (1887-1948), best known for his collages mixing snippets of typography with colored geometric shapes, was an obsessive kind of artist.
His lifelong friend and collaborator, the German Dadaist Raoul Hausmann, recalled encountering Schwitters in a train station, kneeling on the floor with a bag full of paper strips that looked like entrails of a butchered animal.
Schwitters was working with scissors and glue on a scrap of cardboard.
"Kurt, what are you doing?" Hausmann asked.
Schwitters answered that he had suddenly realized that he needed to add a piece of blue paper to the corner of a collage and so had set to work there and then.


In the Region/Westchester; Lower Prices Bringing Buyers Into the Co-op Market
IN August, when Matthew Bavoso and Laura Shenman started looking for a rental apartment in Westchester, they were sure they would be settled in their new place by the start of the school year in September.
Mr.
Bavoso had just been accepted at the Pace University School of Law, in White Plains.
"We wanted something between the school and New York City," Mr.
Bavoso said.
It was also important to be near a train station for Ms.
Shenman's commute to Manhattan, where she works as a human-resources counselor for a financial firm.


New Law Is Used to Bar New Bars
Alan Whelan had big plans.
His dream was to turn an old brownstone at 64 West 10th Street into a four-star restaurant, where diners would sup on scallops with lemon sauce and portobello mushrooms with lemon tarragon dressing.
His patrons would wash down their sublime meal, prepared by his French-trained chef, with imported wine and champagne.
"I've restored the building, which was literally littered with crack vials and hypodermic needles before I leased it," said Mr.
Whelan, director of the Greenwich Village Chamber of Commerce.
"I've already hired a chef. He's champing at the bit to get started."


An In-Your-Face Style Working for Cowher
Bill Cowher pulls up a chair. He sits down next to you. His face is inches away.
Now, he can make his point.


Madden Minuses
To the Sports Editor:
I feel that I must reply to Richard Sandomir's ranking of the television football announcers, not to question his ability to place people according to his criteria, but to subject us to more Madden madness ("One Sofa Yam's Guide to Football Announcers," The Times, Nov. 29).


Moten and Syracuse Rally As Pitt Blows Another Lead
Syracuse 65, Pittsburgh 63
Lawrence Moten finished off a 19-point game with what proved to be the 2 decisive free throws with 10 seconds left and eighth-ranked Syracuse nearly blew a 19-point lead before winning at Pittsburgh, 65-63, yesterday in the Big East.


French Air Travel Becoming Competitive
Pricing on two popular domestic French airline routes is becoming more competitive, with at least one carrier promising to beat the train fare.
The monopoly on domestic flights that was long held by Air Inter, the Air France subsidiary, is scheduled to end this month with the opening of routes from Paris to Marseilles and Toulouse to other airlines.


Krone Is Expected Back Within a Month
Julie Krone underwent surgery yesterday to repair a fracture of the little finger on her left hand.
But it was the only reminder of the violent four-horse spill she endured at Gulfstream Park on Friday, and she was expected to return to racing in two to four weeks.
"When you ride," she reasoned from her bed in Hollywood Memorial Hospital in Florida, "you don't need your pinky too much."


Maintain a Public Access Pipeline
To the Editor:
If we think of on-line bulletin boards as the public libraries of the next generation, the point of "Why Federalize Legal Information" (Viewpoints, Dec. 18) falls flat.


Q. &amp; A.
The Noises From the Courtyard Q I live in a first-floor apartment overlooking a small yard with a ramp leading from the building's basement to the street.
All six windows of the apartment overlook this courtyard.


Lorraine Dobbs and Eli Yamin
Lorraine Maybel Dobbs, a daughter of Doris A. Belaval Flores of Ringwood, N.J., and Jay Dobbs of Leland, N.C., is to be married today to Eli Benjamin Yamin, the son of Rebecca Yamin of Philadelphia and Peter Yamin of Port Jefferson, L.I.
The Rev.
Loren Stell, a minister of the United Church of Christ, is to perform the nondenominational ceremony at the AYH Hosteling International building in New York.
The bride, 30, and the bridegroom, 26, graduated from Rutgers University.
She is completing a master's degree in early childhood special education at the Bank Street College of Education.
Mr.
Yamin is a jazz pianist and a music teacher, and is an announcer at WBGO-FM, a radio station in Newark.


Weevil's End
In 1892 the cotton boll weevil crossed the border from Mexico near Brownsville, Tex.
Within 20 years it had spread across the South in a Shermanesque rampage, devastating the land o' cotton.
Now, according to the Department of Agriculture, the end of the weevil is in sight.
An eradication plan begun in 1978 should eliminate the pest by the end of the century or at least push it back to Mexico.
The plan, run by the Agriculture Department, requires total cooperation of growers in a target area, and is based on spraying insecticides at key moments in the insect's breeding and hibernation cycle.


Governor Get-a-Job; Tommy Thompson
TWO YEARS AND YOU'RE OUT.
THE words stand poised at the top of Gov.
Tommy Thompson's trachea and march forth like a battle cry in his war on welfare.
As career criminals are supposed to cower under the threat of "Three strikes and you're out!" so "recidivist" welfare mothers are meant to hear Thompson's slogan and shake a leg.
The phrase is the core of the Republican Governor's "Work Not Welfare" experiment, which as of Jan. 1 put a 24-month limit on cash benefits through Aid to Families With Dependent Children.
Nobody has a clue to how many families will beat the clock or what will happen if they don't, but Wisconsinites appear downright ecstatic about Thompson's two-county test run, small scale though it is.
Three-quarters of those polled support it, and last November a whopping 67 percent of the voters swept him into a third term.
His eight-year war on welfare has given the G.O.P. a viable organizing principle in the post-Communist world; now Newt Gingrich and his counterrevolutionary forces have finally caught up with Tommy Thompson.
"Tommy's a real hoss," says Haley Barbour, chairman of the Republican National Committee.
"He's the leader of the country and the Republican pathfinder on welfare reform."


Fetisov Isn't at Front of Line
The chances of Slava Fetisov joining the Devils in the immediate future were somewhat reduced this evening when Lou Lamoriello, the president and general manager, said a defenseman from Albany would join the team instead.
Lamoriello had been talking with Fetisov about the possibility of the 36-year-old Russian defenseman playing for the Devils after the season-ending injury to Jason Smith left New Jersey with just six defensemen.
Fetisov has played out his option with the Devils.


Differences


IN SHORT: FICTION
SHATTERED VISION  By Rabah Belamri. Holmes &amp; Meier, $19.95.


QUEENS UPDATE
*
WHITESTONE When two ramps linking the Cross Island Parkway to the Throgs Neck Bridge were closed for repairs last week, officials from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority told drivers -- and radio traffic reporters -- to use other highways, but to keep using Throgs Neck.
Don't use the Bronx-Whitestone.
But on the first day of repairs radio traffic reporters followed their usual practice of redirecting drivers to one bridge whenever the other was under repair.
Predictably, the Whitestone was bottlenecked.
"Meanwhile, the Throgs Neck Bridge was quite empty," said Frank Pascual, an M.T.A. spokesman. *
COLLEGE POINT Pricecostco, the country's second largest chain of warehouse club stores, is looking at an unoccupied piece of land in the College Point Corporate Park.
Regina Colletta, Community Board 7's district manager, said some local residents received postcards from the chain.
The area's small merchants are likely to put up a fight. *
LONG ISLAND CITY The Q-67 and Q-103 have begun dropping off commuters in the Hunters Point terminal in an effort to raise ridership on the three-month-old ferry to midtown Manhattan.
And until Feb. 10, riders will be allowed on the ferry free.
The normal fare has already been cut from $4 to $3 each way, and the parking from $5 to $4.


In Paris, Le Jazz Hot
AN American roaming Paris in search of jazz has to wrestle with celluloid phantoms.
The city early on adopted jazz as a spiritual cause, and it was manifested in French films -- the soundtrack for Louis Malle's "Ascenseur Pour l'Echafaud," with its chillingly moody music by Miles Davis, or Jean-Luc Godard's "Breathless," with music by Martial Solal.
Though American jazz musicians moved to Paris early on, and were performing there by 1919, it was after World War II that jazz blended with existentialism and was imported to the United States through film with a European beat sophistication.
But the bohemian vision created by the movies isn't quite right any more, as jazz has blended as easily with bourgeois society as it did with beat culture.
In Paris, jazz is all over the city, and its audience isn't enveloped in a romantic Gauloise haze.
Parisians still get nostalgic about the golden age, but their city today has an astounding variety and richness to its music.
Jazz has become part of the city's consciousness in a way that challenges even New York.
People go out, and they go out to relax, and listen.
If you want to hear music on Saturday night (weeknights are less crowded), better reserve early.
And plan to stay out late.


THE FIRST HOROSCOPE
Maureen Dowd's "The First Horoscope" (On Washington, Dec. 25) was inspiring.
Why not have every potential political candidate submit to having his horoscope read?
Only the "best charts" would run.
The one with the best horoscope wins the election.
RENEE J. SCHNUR New City, N.Y.


AN OBSESSION, A CARAVAGGIO
As one who is interested in the life of Caravaggio, I found Jonathan Harr's "A Hunch, an Obsession, a Caravaggio" (Dec. 25), about the discovery of the lost painting "The Taking of Christ," an inspiration.


Try Not to Stare At the Ceiling
LAST Wednesday night, a shoulder-to-shoulder crowd of 400 celebrated the opening of Zut!, a French bistro-style restaurant on Duane Street in TriBeCa.
The focal point of the packed dining room was a pair of six-feet-wide chandeliers by Marta Baumiller, each fitted with 13 foppish hats that conceaed incandescent light bulbs and were trimmed with wide black grosgrain ribbon.
The walls were covered with 1940's paper found in France, depicting little animals doing things like wearing hats and sipping martinis.
Ms.
Baumiller, a 36-year-old milliner-turned-lighting artist, described her wall sconces for the restaurant as "abstract wiggles made of straw." She said the interior was "very Alice in Wonderland-ish." She may have been inspired by the Mad Hatter.


Debate on Role Played By Anti-Abortion Talk
Proudly displaying a laminated poster of a bloodied fetal head pinched by forceps, Father Matthew Habiger said, "This is one of our most popular items."
Anti-abortion pamphlets, posters, and plastic fetus dolls surrounded Father Habiger here as he walked through the brick warehouse headquarters of the organization he leads, Human Life International.
The materials they publish -- including a pamphlet that proclaims, "Abortion is the greatest war of all time" -- are among the most widely distributed in a nationwide network of radical anti-abortion publications.


Kotite's Role
To the Sports Editor:
There is another way to interpret Rich Kotite's career as coach of the Philadelphia Eagles and it is quite different from the way Thomas George does ("Kotite Was Winning While He Was Losing," The Times, Jan. 6).


Magazines That Take Parents Seriously
WHEN Felice met Susan, there was immediate rapport.
"Susan was part of a Pepsico team interviewing me for a job, and she was the one who asked the most interesting questions," said Felice H. Shapiro, who later began working with Susan Ross Banamram in 1984 in Pepsico's Strategic Planning Department at the company's headquarters in Purchase.
"We were doing forecasting for the Pepsi-Cola Bottling Group," Ms.
Banamram said.
"A terrific job for two new M.B.A.'s in their 20's, which we then were. We learned how a successful corporation operates while we were at Pepsico."


For Priestly Archbishop, His Day of Resignation
Sometime today, on his 75th birthday and in his 50th year as a priest, John Cardinal O'Connor plans to dispatch from his private residence the simple, single-paragraph letter of resignation required of him by the Vatican as he heads toward the end of his tenure as Archbishop of New York.
"I cannot imagine that I have had this opportunity and haven't made a lot more of it than I have," Cardinal O'Connor declared with measured regret in an interview as he surveyed his 11-year record in the most prominent church post in America and prepared to hear what Pope John Paul II intends next for him.


Jan. 8-14; A New Look in the Mirror
In 1982, to help her husband recapture the state house, she took off her glasses and took his name.
In 1992, to help him win the Presidency, she took off her headband and baked cookies.
Last week, reflecting on her role in the biggest policy failure of her husband's White House, Hillary Rodham Clinton took off on herself.
"I think I was naive and dumb, because my view was results speak for themselves," she said over a White House lunch with female reporters at which she professed surprise and distress at the perception that she is tough and unlikable.
"I regret very much that the efforts on health care were badly misunderstood, taken out of context and used politically against the Administration. I take responsibility for that, and I'm very sorry for that."


Stacey Jarvis, Michael Schlesinger
Stacey Lyn Jarvis, a critical care nurse at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York, was married last evening to Dr.
Michael Hamilton Schlesinger, a chief urology resident at Beth Israel.
Rabbi Daniel Alder performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Schlesinger, 28, graduated cum laude from Pace University, from which she also received master's degrees in business management and in nursing administration.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
Brian Johnston of Oakdale, L.I., and of Richard Jarvis of St.
Maarten, the Netherlands Antilles.


Having a Bad Hair Day? It Doesn't Matter
SIAN PHILLIPS'S ELABORATE Edwardian hair style is reduced to a sodden bird's nest in "An Inspector Calls." Under the incessant beating of the Yorkshire rain that seems to be trying to wash the Birling family clean of its many sins, Ms.
Phillips, who recently took over from Rosemary Harris, veers from imposing matron to water-soaked Clytemnestra, cackling in the mud.
"Of course," a theatergoer observes at the Royale Theater, "she's wearing a very strong wig."


Leapin' Lizards
USING oversize tweezers in his left hand to drop crickets into the eager jaws of three Australian frilled lizards, Dominique Nadel held out his right hand to expose the wrist.
He pointed to the dime-shaped scar he has had since he was 5.
"It's a telltale sign of a reptile collector," he said.
"I was collecting worms to feed a frog, and I tripped on a piece of rock and fell on the jar."


Getting to Pisa
To the Editor: My wife and I have been commercial airline passengers since the DC-2, but never had this experience.
We purchased round-trip tickets on Delta from Los Angeles to Kennedy International to Pisa, Italy.
We left the West Coast on Delta Flight 1982 on Sept. 25, 1994, and arrived in Rome on Delta 148 on Sept. 26.
We checked in at Alitalia for Flight 1106 to Pisa.
Our luggage had been checked through and was on the plane to Pisa.


An American Cafe Striving for Success
A RESTAURANT'S name can be as deceptive as it is revealing.
There is no doubt about Joe's Pizza and Pasta, but how about Cilantro's, in Blue Point?
It is neither owned by a family named Cilantro, nor does its name identify the food served.
There are no Southwestern or Latin American dishes here.
In fact, cilantro, so pervasive in those cuisines, is largely absent.
It is in just one dish on the menu.
Cilantro's is an American cafe with an Italian accent.
It is a restaurant on the move, impressing diners with homemade fare like garlic rolls, a cranberry sorbet intermezzo, herb butters, pesto, fresh pasta, lavish desserts and gratis chocolate truffles at meal's end.
Last month the year-and-a-half-old spot introduced a more sophisticated and ambitious menu.
Most, but not all of the time, the culinary striving succeeds.
When it does, it can be exceptional, like the standout appetizer of roasted wild mushrooms atop tricolor salad.


Correction
CORRECTION: An article on Jan. 1 about Richard M. Nixon's "enemies list," and a related picture caption, misstated the given name of a journalism professor at the University of Southern California who was the national news editor of The Los Angeles Times from 1965 to 1977.
He is Edwin O. Guthman, not Edward.


Hunt for Archives Leader Focuses on Former House Historian
Dismissed by Speaker Newt Gingrich from his job as the House historian, Raymond W. Smock has landed in another dispute, this one over the search for a new National Archivist.
Mr.
Smock's former boss, the previous Speaker, Thomas S. Foley of Washington, has recommended him for the archivist's position, which has been vacant for almost two years.


The Executive Computer; New Software Promises to Make the PC a Viable Fax Option
IF, as every management consultant since Benjamin Franklin has said, time is money, then the fax machine is the savings bank of the American workplace.
Despite being one of the most popular time savers in the office, though, the departmental fax machine may also be the most aggravating piece of modern office equipment.
In a hurry?
Take a number behind the guy from accounting with the 30-page report, and your boss waiting to fax her deli lunch order.


Hoop Dreams: Truly a Long Shot


Cod's Versatility and Delicate Flavor
AMERICANS eat more cod than any other fish.
Because it is less expensive than salmon, tuna or swordfish, some people mistakenly assume it must be inferior.
But the fish in this family, which includes haddock and scrod, are extraordinary, with large, firm white flakes that have a delicate flavor.
They can be baked, poached, broiled or fried and go with a wide variety of sauces.
Despite overfishing and trawlers that drag the seabed clean, leaving no younger fish to grow, cod is still widely available and is the most important saltwater fish besides herring.
"There are grounds for thinking that the European colonization of North America was prompted to a large extent by the existence of cod on that side of the Atlantic," writes Alan Davidson in "North Atlantic Seafood" (Viking).
"Cape Cod was, of course, named for the cod; and Boston, 'the home of the beans and the cod,' has an effigy of the 'sacred cod' from which the city derived much of its wealth, hanging in the State House." Mr.
Davidson added, "Shed, therefore, any ideas that the cod is an ordinary fish and invest the next piece of cod you buy with the exciting qualities which are its by right."


U.S. Ready to Declare Haiti 'Secure'
The United States and United Nations plan to declare, perhaps as early as Tuesday, that Haiti is now a "stable and secure environment" and begin the process of transferring military control from American to United Nations authority, Administration officials say.
The decision to move forward comes despite the killing of an American soldier on Thursday and the doubts of a number of military officers and diplomats who say Washington is rushing the transfer because of Congressional pressure.


Change


Three U.S. Airlines Add New Routes
Three United States airlines have added routes this winter.
USAir, (800) 428-4322, recently introduced direct service from New York to Montego Bay, Jamaica, via Charlotte and Baltimore.
Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, a Boeing 737 leaves La Guardia Airport at 6:05 A.M., stops in Charlotte, and arrives in Montego Bay at 11:56 P.M.
Return flights leave Jamaica at 1:20 P.M., arriving in New York at 7:37 P.M.
On Wednesdays and on Fridays through Sundays, flights leave La Guardia at 6:50 A.M., stop at Baltimore-Washington International Airport and arrive in Jamaica at 1:13 P.M.
Return flights leave Montego Bay at 2:30 P.M, arriving in New York at 9:11 P.M.
The round-trip peak-season fare through April 14 is $359 midweek, and $389 weekends.
Purchase at least seven days in advance and a three-day minimum stay are required.
USAir is offering introductory land and air packages to Jamaica in January.


Start With One Person, Enlist Many
I play golf regularly and have been aware of the chemicals which are used to maintain the luster of the links  [ "On Long Island Golf Courses, the Trend Is Organic," Nov. 20 ] .
Harold Wade began his battle alone, but there are many concerned individuals who think as he does.
He is keenly aware of Nassau County's problems of urbanization, traffic congestion, air pollution and needed expansion to keep pace with the population growth.
By far the greatest catalyst for civic improvement lies in the voices of concerned citizens who are willing to work with elected officials to create a better environment.
Long Island has overcome many obstacles in spite of its tremendous growth in such a short time.
Beyond the realm of asphalt and power lines one of her most valued resources is the never-empty reservoir of human energy and talents of those who, like Mr.
Wade, really care about our thriving metropolis.
WILMA ASKINAS Great Neck


Houseplants Like to Put Their Feet Up, Too
IS your Clivia resting?
It should be.
Many house plants need a break just as much as people do.
One of the greatest mistakes that plant hobbyists make is overcare.
The plants are pushed and pushed with water, fertilizer and warm rooms.
There is never any time off, never a time to luxuriate in a dormant period.
But a dormant period is often just what house plants, like their outdoor cousins, are in need of.
Not all of them, of course, but most of them, and foremost of all, Clivia.
In fact, if these plants are pushed all year long, they never bloom.


Auto Renters Must Use Caution
To the Editor:
The thrust of your article on car rental companies' practice of checking customers' driving histories ("Car Rentals: Only the Best Need Apply," Viewpoints, Dec. 18) is that the car rental industry is somehow engaged in a scheme to deny motorists access to cars by invading their privacy.
Such a suggestion is not only inaccurate, but silly on its face.


Discover America: Visit Europe
Two galleries with collections focusing on the history and archeology of the Americas recently opened in Europe.
The 2,000-square foot Mexican Gallery at the British Museum in London is devoted to 3,000 years of pre-Hispanic history in Mesoamerica.
The room, which opened last month, is the first completed section of the museum's North American Gallery, a suite of rooms that will display selections from the museum's collection of 20,000 American artifacts.
The North American Gallery is scheduled for completion in 1997.


Correction
Because of a transmission error, the Executive Computer column last Sunday, about translation software for personal computers, misstated part of a sentence rendered by a program called French Assistant for Macintosh.
"We saw your photograph in the Intevac catalog" was correctly translated by the software as "Nous avons vu votre photographie dans l'Intervac catalogue."


A Dissident In the Gulag And Grozny
A month ago, Sergei A. Kovalyov was almost a forgotten man.
When Mr.
Kovalyov, once a Soviet dissident, picketed the American Embassy in November to protest the denial of a visa for a friend, the embassy's consular officers didn't recognize his name.
A biologist who spent years in Soviet labor camps, Mr.
Kovalyov was a close ally of Andrei D. Sakharov in the Soviet era and was elected to the new Russian Parliament as a supporter of President Boris N. Yeltsin following the collapse of the Soviet Union.


Jan. 8-14: A Hellish Picture; Prosecutors Offer Details Of Abuse by Simpson
Nicole Brown was 17 and fresh out of high school when she met O. J. Simpson, then 28.
Almost immediately, and for the next 17 years, prosecutors in the murder case argued last week, he turned her life into pure hell.
The prosecutors' aim, in offering detail upon detail, was to persuade Judge Lance A. Ito to let the jury see evidence of the brutal side of their relationship at Mr.
Simpson's trial on charges of murdering his former wife.
The man portrayed by prosecutors in court papers is a hard-drinking, foul-mouthed bully whose explosive jealous rages left Ms.
Simpson humiliated, bloodied and cowering.
In this picture, Mr.
Simpson's final act of violence, after stalking and harassing his former wife, was to stab and slash her and her friend Ronald L. Goldman to death.


Young Is Running, and Now 49ers Are Following
Steve Young tucks the ball away. There he goes again. Running. Scrambling.
He has covered 6 yards and he is in the end zone now.
Pop!
Chicago Bears safety Shaun Gayle hits Young hard and late and Young flies and sprawls toward the turf.
Young pops up and nastily spikes the ball at Gayle's feet.


The Road to Zanzibar Is Getting Busier
Zanzibar, once a center of the spice trade, has been attracting the tourist trade of late.
Hotels and cultural sites on the island off the east coast of Africa had fallen into disrepair owing to government neglect.
But in the last few years, the Government (Zanzibar and Tanganyika united in 1964 to become Tanzania) has encouraged tourism investment, and improved facilities have begun drawing travelers, many of them adding stops on Zanzibar to longer East Africa tours.
One of the island's chief attractions is the Stone Town section of the city of Zanzibar, with its narrow, winding streets and balconied limestone houses with ornately carved doors.
Visitors also may tour farms where clove, cinnamon, nutmeg and cardamom are grown, or swim at Indian Ocean beaches.
One company that operates East African tours, Wildlife Safari, offers a two-night stay on Zanzibar before any of its trips.
Participants stay in the Dhow Palace, a Stone Town house converted to a 10-room hotel.
The cost of $295 a person, based on two in a room, includes breakfast and sightseeing.
Travel to Zanzibar is usually by a flight from Nairobi to Dar es Salaam on the Tanzanian coast, followed by a 22-mile hydrofoil ride.
Round-trip fare is $300, according to the company.
Wildlife Safari offers a free three-night stay on Zanzibar to anyone about to take its 15-day Wings Over Kenya (land cost from $3,195 a person ) or Kenya Under Canvas (from $3,795) tours.
Call Wildlife Safari, (800) 221-8118; fax (510) 376-5059.


Coleman Paces Rally From 14-Point Deficit
Although he drew his fifth personal foul with close to eight minutes left and fouled out with 2 minutes 24 seconds to go, Derrick Coleman provided sufficient inspiration for the Nets tonight.
Coleman scored 22 points and grabbed 11 rebounds, both tops for his team, in 36 minutes of action to lead the Nets to a 93-84 triumph over the Minnesota Timberwolves at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
New Jersey came back from a 14-point first-half deficit.


The Hair Is Shorter, The Resolve Is Longer
Don't be fooled by the balding pate.
Andre Agassi's 24-year-old hairline may be in recession, but he's in the mood to attack.
The reigning United States Open champ has got himself an action-adventure haircut and a matching action-adventure attitude for 1995.
Who else but Agassi would deduce it's realistic for him to conquer the Australian Open on his very first attempt?


Will Children Go the Way of the Mule Deer?
To the Editor:
A Jan. 8 Week in Review article reports that many parents let children make decisions at the market on "sugared cereals, cookies and salted snacks."


Arms Deals Vulnerable to Abuse
The arrival in Alabama not long ago of a mammoth Russian cargo plane -- not exactly a routine sight at Huntsville International Airport -- gave away some of the secrecy cloaking Pentagon efforts to obtain advanced Russian military hardware in the wake of the cold war.
It is an expensive practice with worthy intentions that must be carefully monitored to insure that deals made largely outside public view are clean and in the national interest, not just the interest of favored friends of the Pentagon.
The plane carried components of a sophisticated Russian air defense system that is considered equal if not superior to the Patriot missile system used by U.S. forces in the Persian Gulf war.
The Russian system was sold to BDM International, an American company acting on behalf of the Pentagon, by Belarus, one of several countries eager to collect hard currency in exchange for advanced military equipment left in their possession when the Soviet Union disintegrated.


The Need to Preserve Indian Sites
Concerning the West New Brighton, S.I., Journal of Dec. 18:
Native Americans came, some from out of state, to speak about two Native American sites, Lot 33 and the Last Green Hill, which are in imminent danger.
This land is next to and part of a Lenape burial ground and dwelling site.


Hot Steakhouse's Unpopular Offering: Smells
"I eat steak three, four times a week, maybe every day," said Raymond Yahr, as he struggled to rise from his neighbor's couch.
"O.K., I eat it every day. Large, copious quantities."
But when the Santa Fe Steakhouse opened next door two months ago, even Mr.
Yahr, the chairman of the tenants association, was annoyed.
The restaurant, which has become a popular draw, specializes in cooking steaks over burning oak.


Lisa M. Gioia, Glen J. Graffeo
Lisa Maria Gioia, a vice president in New York for the Nationsbank Corporation, was married yesterday to Dr.
Glen John Graffeo, a dentist in New York.
The Rev.
John Gerhard performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer.
Mrs.
Graffeo graduated from Tufts University and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
She is the daughter of Angela and Peter Gioia of Congers, N.Y.
The bride's father retired as a jeweler at Lieber &amp; Lerner, a wholesale jewelery concern in New York.


Corrections
A picture last Sunday with a report about the wedding of Rebecca Emily Meyers and Michael David Wiederhorn was published in error.
It showed Kimberly Jane Morris and Paul Jonas Silverstein, who were married on Dec. 29.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 15, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
18
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
35
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
3
8
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young student's mysterious drowning in Victorian England.
4
31
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
5
16
THE VAMPIRE LESTAT, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Eerie carryings-on in a tale ranging from ancient Egypt to the 20th century.
6
7
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $4.99.) The romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
7*
11
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery writer's happy family life -- and the madman determined to take his place.
8
20
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's death.
9
3
NATURAL CAUSES, by Michael Palmer. (Bantam, $5.99.) A physician is accused of being responsible for the deaths of pregnant women.
10
13
THE QUEEN OF THE DAMNED, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Continuing the author's chronicle of 6,000 years of vampirism.
11
1
LORD HARRY, by Catherine Coulter. (Topaz, $5.99.) A 19th-century woman disguises herself as a male to stalk the man who she believes is responsible for her brother's death.
12*
3
THE CHRISTMAS BOX, by Richard Paul Evans. (Steinway, $4.95.) A young family moves in with an elderly widow.
13
28
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
14
7
BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) Tracking a series of violent deaths.
15
1
ELOQUENT SILENCE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $6.50.) A man, a woman and his deaf daughter look for solace in New Mexico.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
17
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
4
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of "Seinfeld."
3
53
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
4
16
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters reflect on their lives.
5
5
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
6
20
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
7
12
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
8
584
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
9
1
CONTRACT WITH AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich, Dick Armey, et al. (Times Books/Random House, $10.) A Republican program for reshaping the Government.
10
51
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
11
35
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
12
10
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.
13
98
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
14
26
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
15*
10
ARMORED CAV, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $15.) A tour of an armored cavalry regiment.
16*
14
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the Great Plains.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
16
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
15
HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
3
2
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1995. (World Almanac/Funk &amp; Wagnalls, $8.95.) The latest edition of the reference
work.
4
7
THE CURSE OF MADAME "C," by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) A collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 31, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Critic's Notebook; Suburban Stages: An Assessment
FOR a night at the theater in November, a playgoer in Croton could have come upon Moliere's "Miser." To see "I Hate Hamlet" was an option for a resident in Scarsdale.
In Port Chester, a couple of musical comedy connoisseurs were singing Sondheim and Porter.
Nonprofessional productions all, such varied fare represents the active life of Westchester's theatrical aspirants with day jobs.
They perform an impressively eclectic array of plays and musicals, classical and contemporary in cities and towns, many of which take pride in arts councils of their own.
Observers of local stages tally up 34 such groups in a consistent theatrical buzz.


Jan. 8-14; A New Way to Think About AIDS
A stunning new discovery about the nature of AIDS virus infections is leading scientists to re-think their strategies for fighting the virus.
They used to think that little was happening during the 10-year period when an infected person is usually free of symptoms, and so, perhaps, treatments were not as important.
But two papers published last week show that during that time the virus and the immune system are fighting to the death, with a billion or more new viruses being released each day into the bloodstream and a billion or more white blood cells dying each day in the battle to keep the infection under control.
The body, in the meantime, churns out replacement forces at the rate of a billion white blood cells each day.
And the virus only wins, in the end, because it has the slightest statistical edge in the fight.
Perhaps the most discouraging news was that the AIDS virus can almost instantaneously become resistant to new drugs.
One of the research teams, headed by Dr.
George M. Shaw of the University of Alabama at Birmingham, gave a drug, nevirapine, to people with AIDS virus infections.
The drug destroyed 99 percent of the virus in their bodies.
But, two days later, mutant viruses that were resistant to the drug had appeared.
And two weeks later, virtually every virus being made was resistant.


Topics of The Times; The City's Schools, Triumphant
Bashing public education in New York City has become a favorite sport.
The accepted wisdom is that the public schools are not working, and that City University is a mere shadow of its former intellectual self.
Two recent events offer a more promising perspective.
New York City students accounted for one-quarter of the semifinalists in the Westinghouse Science Talent Search, the oldest and most prestigious high school science contest in the nation.
The final 10 winners will be announced in March.
Meanwhile, a team from Borough of Manhattan Community College won the Pan American chess championship -- for the second year in a row -- whomping teams from some of the nation's most prestigious universities.


There Are Movies, And Then There Are Movies
LINDA FIORENTINO HAS GOOD reason to be upset.
Virtually unknown after making 14 movies, she finally got noticed last fall.
In "The Last Seduction," Ms.
Fiorentino took the concept of the femme fatale to new levels, playing a New Yorker who leaves town with her husband's hard-earned $700,000 (from a drug deal) and then gets really ruthless.
The critics loved her (Janet Maslin, writing in The New York Times, called her performance "flawlessly hard-boiled"), and last month the New York Film Critics Circle named her best actress.
But on Friday, when the last of the Academy Award ballots were mailed, "The Last Seduction" wasn't even on the list of eligible films.
That's because last July, three months before the film opened in New York and Los Angeles theaters, it was shown on HBO.
Four times.


Culebra Island
To the Editor: I read with great interest your feature on Culebra ("A Wilder Caribbean," Oct. 30).
I visited Culebra this past July and found it to have unspoiled, picture-perfect beaches, but also a serious transportation problem.
The Friday trip to Culebra was to be a day outing, leaving on the early morning ferry and coming back in the afternoon.
Nothing could have prepared me for the predicament of the return trip.


Converting Brownstone Homes Into Office Space
A SOFT real estate market and a spate of vacancies have created opportunities for small companies and bargain-seeking investors to convert private brownstone homes to other uses, real-estate agents say.
Such conversions, from homes to offices or stores, and even back again, have altered the landscape of Center City's narrow streets for more than 300 years, since William Penn began his Colonial real estate development.
But the steady pace of conversions in recent years, real-estate professionals say, has created a buyer's market.


The Hat and The Catwalk
A boyish man whose short, soft, stand-up hair makes him resemble a duckling, Christian Lacroix sets down the large bottle of Evian water he's been swigging, smiles broadly, and shakes my hand.
Then he shuffles over to a table piled with open boxes of brightly colored toys.
No (I see now), it's actually costume jewelry, bags and belts.
Could he tell at a glance that I'd never been to a single fashion show before yesterday?
If so, he's too busy to care.
It's the second day (with seven more to go) of the women's pret-a-porter shows in Paris, the day before his two shows at the Louvre, and he's hard at work in his showrooms on the rue du faubourg St-Honore, making final accessory fittings.


Pittsburgh Still Trying to Run By a Steel Curtain
The Steelers' shadow, four Super Bowl championships, is nearly two decades old.
But it looms as large as ever and engulfs this edition of the Pittsburgh Steelers no matter where they turn.
"I wish I had a dollar for every time someone said, "Let's win one for the thumb," said Steelers quarterback Neil O'Donnell. "Heck, I just want one for one finger."


Corrections
A chart on the Travel Advisory page on Nov. 6 referred incorrectly to the tax on some car rentals in Spain.
A reader's letter received on Dec. 23 pointed out that rentals in the Balearic and Canary Islands are not exempt from tax.
The rate is 16 percent in the Balearics (it was 15 percent until Dec. 31) and 4 percent in the Canaries.
This correction was delayed through an editing oversight.


Jan. 8-14: El Nino's Return; Unrelenting Rains Punish Much of California
California has long endured severe natural hazards -- earthquakes, wildfires, mudslides.
This winter it is flooding, from the redwood country in the north to Malibu near Los Angeles, as a recurring Pacific weather phenomenon known as El Nino pushes the jet stream out of its normal position and steers storm after storm toward the state.
By the weekend, state officials said that the storms had caused $200 million in damage and that at least 11 people had died.
Rock slides had closed the coastal highway in Sonoma County, and state emergency officials said 3,000 people and been forced from their homes.
Some 34 counties were declared disaster areas by the Federal Government.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
TRIBECA  $315,000
100 Reade Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,550-sq.-ft. condo in a loft building; elevator, dining area, washer/dryer, 2 exposures; common charge $263, taxes $4,440, listed at $350,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: J.I. Sopher Co.)


Cold War Leftovers Include Warm Coats
Surplus coats of the former Soviet Army are the latest addition to the army of military coats being worn by civilians.
The precisely cut, blue-gray coats, with their signature wide collar and lapels, are made of heavy wool.
They often come complete with brass buttons and insignia and, occasionally, medals.
Many wearers point to the surplus shops on Brighton Beach Avenue in Brooklyn as their source, with prices under $100 for a private's coat and up to $150 for an officer's coat.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
FLOYD DELL  The Life and Times  of an American Rebel.
By Douglas Clayton.
Ivan R. Dee, $30.


On-Line Property Listings
LUCILLE BOCCHICCHIO, a management consultant who has developed a reputation as a computer whiz, was recently asked by a friend if there was a way to list his East 59th Street co-op apartment on an electronic bulletin board.
The result was the "for sale" announcement (co-op, East 59th Street, 2 beds, 2 baths, asking $215,000) that appeared on CompuServe's residential listings all last week.
Costing just $1 per line per week, it certainly started the phones ringing.


Gleaming Baubles That Could Make A King Envious
NOT SINCE THE BLOCKBUSTER auction of King Farouk's paperweights in Cairo in 1954 has a collection as celebrated come on the market.
Now, the New-York Historical Society is selling 500 glass paperweights from a collection that while slightly smaller in size, is more comprehensive than that of the Egyptian monarch.
The sale will be held on Wednesday at Sotheby's in Manhattan and is expected to bring about $1 million.
Proceeds from the auction will go to the society's endowment for maintaining its vast collection of books, paintings and furnishings.
While approved by the State Attorney General, the society's decision to sell art and objects from its collection has been widely criticized.


Holiday Tomorrow
The Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday, which is today, will be legally observed tomorrow.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office, at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, open.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Alternate-side street-cleaning regulations suspended.
SANITATION Regular pickups and recycling but no street cleanings.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Open.
TRANSPORTATION Subways, buses, the Long Island Rail Road and the Metro-North railroad on regular weekday schedules.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and rail service on regular weekday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on regular weekday schedule.


Weather May Seem Unfrightful, But the Shovel Sales Are Booming
Not like a lion, not like a lamb, more like a slug: winter is arriving inchmeal in the New York City region.
But people seem determined not to be caught off guard this time.
They were out buying fleece-lined boots in August and snow blowers before Halloween.
Towns shipped in road salt early and often.
Sleds, snowshoes and neoprene masks are selling briskly, store owners say.


A More Confident Russia Presses Hard on Rebels
Compared with the devastation of cities like Dresden, Coventry or Stalingrad in World War II, Russia's dismantlement of Grozny may not seem much.
Still, what has happened here is harsh enough.
And it isn't quite finished.
Russia is now putting its best troops and full weight against the Chechen fighters, driving them back into the ruins of the presidential palace of their leader, Dzhokhar M. Dudayev, whose call for peace talks has been ignored by increasingly confident Russian security officials.


Trujillo's Wickedness
To the Editor:
Gonzalez Eche varria, "Ms. Alvarez clutters her novel with far too many misdeeds and misfortunes: rape, harassment, miscarriage, separation, abuse, breast cancer."


The Task of Choosing a Successor
Secret letters will go out to a select group of Roman Catholic leaders in New York in the next few months, seeking their counsel on who should take up the red miter and crosier as Archbishop of the Diocese of New York.
Today, as he turns 75, John Cardinal O'Connor must follow the tenets of canon law and submit his resignation as leader of the 1.8 million parishioners of the Archdiocese of New York, which includes Manhattan, the Bronx, Staten Island and part of the Hudson Valley.
The Pope, of course, does not have to accept.


Cod's Versatility and Delicate Flavor
AMERICANS eat more cod than any other fish.
Because it is less expensive than salmon, tuna or swordfish, some people mistakenly assume it must be inferior.
But the fish in this family, which includes haddock and scrod, are extraordinary, with large, firm white flakes that have a delicate flavor.
They can be baked, poached, broiled or fried and go with a wide variety of sauces.
Despite overfishing and trawlers that drag the seabed clean, leaving no younger fish to grow, cod is still widely available and is the most important saltwater fish besides herring.
"There are grounds for thinking that the European colonization of North America was prompted to a large extent by the existence of cod on that side of the Atlantic," writes Alan Davidson in "North Atlantic Seafood" (Viking).
"Cape Cod was, of course, named for the cod; and Boston, 'the home of the beans and the cod,' has an effigy of the 'sacred cod' from which the city derived much of its wealth, hanging in the State House." Mr.
Davidson added, "Shed, therefore, any ideas that the cod is an ordinary fish and invest the next piece of cod you buy with the exciting qualities which are its by right."


Murdoch, Joined by Lobbyist, Talked of Regulatory Problem at Meeting With Gingrich
The communications executive Rupert Murdoch was accompanied by his Washington lobbyist when he met with Speaker-in-waiting Newt Gingrich in late November, and the three men discussed his fight over Federal regulations that could cost him billions of dollars, Mr.
Murdoch's spokesman said today.
Within a week of the meeting, Mr.
Murdoch's publishing company, HarperCollins, was discussing a $2 million book advance with Mr.
Gingrich.
The advance had ballooned to $4.5 million by the time it was announced in late December, although Mr.
Gingrich subsequently relinquished it and has yet to actually sign a contract with Harper.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
IN EUROPE'S NAME: Germany and the Divided Continent By Timothy Garton Ash.
Vintage, $15.
The author analyzes the foreign policy known as Ost politik, in which the former West Germany adopted an attitude of conciliation and rapprochement toward its Eastern neighbor.
Examining how West German actions, which included paying large sums of money for the exchange of political prisoners, may have hindered the collapse of Communism, he has written a work that "ranks among the most important books on recent international history," V. R. Berghahn said here in 1993.
CROSSING THE RIVER By Caryl Phillips.
Vintage International, $11.
This novel explores the African diaspora from the viewpoints of several characters: an educated freed slave in the 1840's, a beleaguered black American cook during the years of westward expansion, an 18th-century captain of a slave trading ship and a lonely white Englishwoman who falls in love with a black American soldier during World War II.
Last year our reviewer, Janet Burroway, praised its "brilliantly coherent vision of two and a half centuries." The same publisher has also reissued Mr.
Phillips's 1986 novel, A STATE OF INDEPENDENCE ($10), about a black man who returns to the Caribbean island of his birth after 20 years in England.
Once home, he encounters bitterness and change.
The result is "a calypso . . . a moral played out with a lilting absence of moralism," one critic said.


No Headline
"There's no doubt that the Farmer's Almanac forecast heightened the anxiety of winter-weary New Yorkers and Northeasterners. Everyone here bought snow blowers. I don't know what they're using them for.  Maybe they're rototilling their gardens." FRED GADOMSKI, meteorologist, Pennsylvania State University.  [ 1:3. ]


Lawyer Claims Overdose Killed Doris Duke
A lawyer representing three people with claims against the estate of Doris Duke, the tobacco heiress who died in 1993, has charged that Miss Duke was killed through a lethal overdose of drugs in her mansion in Beverly Hills.
The lawyer, Raymond Dowd, made the accusations in court papers filed last week in Surrogate Court in Manhattan, where Miss Duke also lived.
Mr.
Dowd said in the papers that there was an unidentified witness to Miss Duke's killing.


RESULTS PLUS
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  Colorado Triumphs  Shelly Sheetz scored 16 points and Erin Scholz had 13 as No. 6 Colorado beat Missouri by 75-67 yesterday in Columbia, Mo.
Missouri (9-4) was led by Erika Martin with 22 points and Mandy Bryan with 16. (AP)


Long Island Journal
Undersea Wonders
FOR Herman Gross of Great Neck, it's 20,000 frames under the sea.
"Actually I've taken 50,000 pictures underwater," he said.
And all since he qualified for Social Security.
Now almost 78, Mr.
Gross undertook his first scuba dive when he was 62.
"We always go to St. Thomas," he said.
"In 1979, I decided to try diving there. I went underwater and saw how beautiful the sights were."
As his wife, Gertrude, will see sights only from terra firma, Mr.
Gross began to capture the underwater scenes on film to show her and others.
His love of photography started on Staten Island, where he was a boy.
"I took my Brownie box camera everywhere," he said.
"I remember taking pictures at my sister's engagement party in 1931."


Congressional Memo; Fast Out of the Starting Gate, But the Route Ahead Is Long
"Congressional reform" may be the most overused oxymoron since "loyal opposition," but there has been a staggering amount of change on Capitol Hill in the 10 days since the 104th Congress convened.
It is not just the new rules, or a new agenda in which cutting welfare replaces expanding health care.
It is not even that Republicans are in charge of both houses.
After all, it has been only 40 years since that last happened.


NIXON AND HIS ENEMIES
My longtime P.R. client, Tony Randall, has always been so proud of what he considers his greatest honor -- his inclusion in the "enemies list" of Richard Nixon ("The Best of Enemies," by Daniel Schorr, Jan. 1).
How well I remember angry calls from other clients -- like Henry Fonda and Richard Burton, Sylvia Sidney and Myrna Loy: "How come you were able to get Tony Randall on Nixon's 'enemies list' and not me?"


Shaw Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Corrections
An article in the Week in Review yesterday about foreign policy and the Republicans in Congress omitted several words in a statement by the historian Michael Beschloss, altering its meaning.
Mr.
Beschloss said that in 1980, almost every major Republican leader agreed with "the critique of what Jimmy Carter was doing." He did not say that the Republicans agreed with President Carter's foreign policy.


Essay; Baltics Belong in a Big NATO
Should we trust the Russians? That's the central strategic question of our time.
If your answer is yes, then it follows we should send Moscow aid and credits; we should cluck-cluck about the savagery in putting down the Chechen reach for independence but discourage any secession from the vast Russian federation.
And not only should we not expand NATO eastward, we should respond to our allies' abandonment of Bosnia by bringing home 110,000 American troops now defending Europe.


Legions of Berliners Salute Two 1919 Martyrs of the Left
Tens of thousands of people marched through eastern Berlin today to honor the memory of two Communist martyrs who were killed 76 years ago: Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht, co-founders of Germany's Communist Party in 1918.
They were captured and slain on Jan. 15 of the next year.
The anniversary of their death was marked by giant demonstrations staged each year of Communist rule.
Few expected that the demonstrations would continue into the post-Communist era, but today's startlingly large turnout suggested that many Germans still consider the two worthy of honor.
At the cemetery, people stood in line for hours for the chance to file past their graves.
Many left red carnations.
A police spokesman estimated the crowd at 50,000, but officers at the scene said the true figure was considerably higher.


Breathing Room on the Homeless
Some advocates for the homeless are angry at former Gov.
Mario Cuomo for one of his last acts in office: changing the requirement that the city house homeless people immediately.
They accuse Mr.
Cuomo of doing for Mr.
Giuliani what he would not do for fellow Democrat David Dinkins, presumably as a payoff for the Mayor's support during Mr.
Cuomo's campaign.
All that is moot now, however.
The deed is done and it need not be the disaster for the city's homeless that their advocates fear.
For one thing, the old rule -- which stipulated that anyone who applied for shelter by midnight had to be placed by 8 the next morning -- gave housing officials no time to decide whether applicants had a valid case, or whether other solutions could be found.
For another, it created a standard no city administration could meet.
Over the years, various officials and the city itself were regularly found to be in contempt of court, resulting in fines of more than $5 million.


POP
Now This Soul Sister Simply Doesn't Mince Words Millie Jackson, singer Beacon Theater
Before most gangster rappers even learned their first obscenity, Millie Jackson had broken the foul-language barrier in rhythm-and-blues music.
Her new performance, "Young Man, Older Woman," which opened on Tuesday and continues through Sunday at the Beacon (Broadway at 74th Street), proves that Ms.
Jackson still has the strength, prurience, humor and taste for the extreme to hold her position as a big sister to most female rappers and a woman for whom any male gangster rapper would politely step aside.


St. John's Questions And Losses Pile Up
St.
John's Coach Brian Mahoney was hoping to have some answers by now, instead he's finding more questions.
The biggest of which is how to end a three-game losing streak that figures to grow to four when the Red Storm visits Syracuse tomorrow at the Carrier Dome.
Sure, the Red Storm is a young team, counting on 3 freshmen among 10 players who will return next year.
But if this year's goal of reaching the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament is to be a reality, then St.
John's must reverse a downward spiral that has sunk its record to 8-4 and 2-3 in the Big East.


49ers Favored By 17 1/2 Points
The San Francisco 49ers opened as 17 1/2-point favorites over the San Diego Chargers in Super Bowl XXIX, according to the Glantz-Culver Line released last night by World Features Syndicate Inc.
That point spread is the largest between a favorite and underdog in Super Bowl history.
It is half a point wider than the 17-point spread that the Jets overcame on Jan. 12, 1969, when they not only beat the gamblers' margin, but won the game by 16-7 against the Baltimore Colts in Super Bowl III.


A New Chairman Is Selected For Assembly Schools Panel
Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver has named Assemblyman Steven Sanders, a Manhattan Democrat, as chairman of the influential education committee, charging him with protecting New York City's schools in a year when Gov.
George E. Pataki has pledged to cut state spending.
The appointment of Mr.
Sanders on Friday fills a vacancy left by the death last month of Assemblyman Angelo Del Toro of East Harlem, who had led the panel since 1990.


At Party's Helm, a Gritty Politician
William D. Powers lost his patronage job with the New York State Legislature in 1980 for supporting Alfonse M. D'Amato's successful campaign to wrest the Republican nomination from the United States Senator Jacob K. Javits but landed another post anyway: on Senator D'Amato's payroll.
A decade later, rejecting Mr.
D'Amato's advice but winning his blessing, Mr.
Powers captured the state chairmanship of a party that was financially and politically bankrupt.
Both times, Mr. Powers bet against the odds. And he won.


St. Paul Bancorp Inc.(SPBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Colbert Recovers to Beat Albus in Playoff  Jim Colbert made a remarkable recovery on the third hole of a playoff, then made a 3-foot putt to beat Jim Albus yesterday in the Senior Tournament of Champions in Dorado, Puerto Rico.
Colbert, whose tee shot on the third extra hole found a bunker behind a tree, split two palm trees with his approach, then watched as the ball landed 5 feet beyond a green-side bunker and rolled to within 3 feet of the cup.
Colbert made the winning putt after Albus's birdie attempt from 10 feet missed.
Both had finished 54 holes on the 6,740-yard Hyatt Dorado Beach East course with under-par 209 totals.
For Colbert, the victory completed a major reversal.
He finished tied for last place in November's season-ending Senior Tour Championship. (AP)


INSIDE
Schools Make Do With Less
New York's budget problems have brought hardships to its schools: bigger classes, fewer teachers and new demands on parents.
Page B1.
Rift on Simpson's Team
An apparently irreparable breach has developed between two of O. J. Simpson's lawyers: Robert L. Shapiro and F. Lee Bailey.
Page A8.


Clock Never Stops on the Death Watch
There are many ways to solve old murders, and sadly, perhaps one of the best is when the killer tries another one.
Several months ago, as doctors frantically worked to save a woman who had been shot three times in the head, Detective Michael Palladino squeezed in between the doctors and asked, over and over, who it was that shot her.


Pioneer Hi-Bred International (PHYB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Two City Slickers Take to the Court in Winter Break


Chechen Resistance Came As Surprise, Colonel Says
Lieut.
Col.
Yuri V. Klaptsov was told to expect little resistance when his troops advanced on Grozny on Dec. 31.
But Colonel Klaptsov, 39, deputy commander of Russia's 131st Motorized Infantry Brigade, found himself in a three-day firefight without clear orders from his superiors, who failed to answer radio messages.


Switzer Sees Red and the Cowboys Get the Blues
There could be no better example of the Dallas Cowboys' uncharacteristic and almost shocking self-destruction today than the knuckleheaded move that Coach Barry Switzer made in the fourth quarter.
It stood as a symbol of a day gone wrong for the defending Super Bowl champs.
The San Francisco 49ers are going to the Super Bowl to play the San Diego Chargers and perhaps it has to do more with the mistakes Dallas made than with the 49ers' excellence.
And Switzer, the rookie coach out of Oklahoma whose play-calling was severely criticized by the former Cowboys coach, Jimmy Johnson, made one of the biggest errors of the afternoon.
With Dallas trailing, 38-28, midway through the fourth quarter and driving to cut it closer, Troy Aikman's pass to Michael Irvin was incomplete near the 49er goal line.
Replays showed that the man defending him, Deion Sanders, clearly interfered with him.


Millions of People Greet the Pope in the Philippines


Healthy Rangers Proving Time Does Heal All Wounds
Colin Campbell has plenty of things to worry about as the Rangers prepare for their season opener on Friday, but team injuries is not one of them.
It is a welcome development for the rookie coach.
At the conclusion of an injury-plagued training camp last September, Campbell faced the prospect of opening the season without a number of key players.


Gambling Suspect Gives Up As Raids Uncover Assets
As about 500 police officers raided betting parlors and confiscated stashes of money in northern Manhattan, Brooklyn and Queens on Friday night, Raymond Marquez was on his cellular phone, trying to figure out how badly his gambling operation had been damaged, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
Investigators had been monitoring calls by Mr.
Marquez, better known as Spanish Raymond, who was free while facing trial on an earlier gambling arrest, and they closed in fast to arrest him again, officials said.
At one point Friday night, they rushed into a bar he had been in, only to miss him by minutes, the authorities said.
Finally the police called Mr.
Marquez's lawyer, Herman Graber, who found him and advised him to surrender.


Repairman Is on Line While Still On Street
Three policemen walked right into Carlos Sam's computer repair shop Friday morning and shut off the electricity.
"Move on," one said.
"Take a walk."
Mr. Sam smiled and did as he was told. "I really can't complain," he said.


Farrakhan Case Informer: A Man Living on the Edge
Michael Fitzpatrick, the man who the authorities say turned in the daughter of Malcolm X and accused her of trying to hire him to kill Louis Farrakhan, has emerged as the central figure in the case, shadowed by intrigue and a history of enticing others to wrongdoing.
While little has emerged about Qubilah Shabazz, despite the notoriety of her father, in the days since she was indicted on the basis of his testimony, a much clearer portrait of Mr.
Fitzpatrick, the Government's star witness, has come into view.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
JACKSONVILLE JAGUARS -- Named Kevin Gilbride offensive coordinator.


Japan Pushing Information Software
In an attempt to catch up to the United States in multimedia technology, Japan's Government and seven major electronics companies are setting up a consortium to develop software for information networks, officials said this weekend.
The goal of the new effort is still somewhat vague.
It appears to be aimed in part at aiding transmission and retrieval of digital high-definition television images and other information by computers and television sets.


THEATER
Stressing the Pain Behind Chekhov's Comedy 'The Cherry Orchard' Bouwerie Lane Theater
Eve Adamson has given her version of "The Cherry Orchard" an agitated, nervous quality that, in the end, leaves one perplexed.
She has said she spent part of last year soaking up the current unsettled atmosphere in Russia as she prepared to direct the play, and people have long noted the extraordinary premonitions of the Russian Revolution in some of the speeches of the student Trofimov in this 1904 work, Chekhov's last.


Algeria's Most Radical Islamic Group Seeks Pact, With Conditions
The most radical of the militant groups fighting to turn Algeria into an Islamic state said today that it was ready to end its insurgency if the Algerian Government accepts a peace plan proposed by other major opposition parties on Friday.
But the organization, the Armed Islamic Group -- which claimed responsibility for the hijacking of a French airliner last month -- added some conditions.
It demanded punishment for generals leading the battle against Islamic militants, a ban on communist and atheist political parties and the release of two of the Islamic Group's top leaders.


The 49ers Win With Rhetorical Flourish
They picked a fight in warm-ups, wrote incendiary newspaper columns and never issued a gag order on their fullback.
So, in their maiden season as trash talkers, the San Francisco 49ers had a new law to obey: back up the rhetoric.
Obligated to put the scoreboard where their mouth was, the 49ers cooperated today.
It was 7-0 before quarterback Steve Young broke a sweat, 14-0 before Dallas running back Emmitt Smith broke a sweat, and 21-0 before the chain gang broke a sweat -- because the Cowboys, by then, hadn't had a single first down.


First Commonwealth Financial Corp.(FCF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dividend Meetings


Usery and Owners To Meet Thursday
Resumption of talks in baseball's labor dispute is not visible on the horizon, but a meeting in Washington on Thursday may lead to a return to the bargaining table.
Bill Usery Jr., the mediator asked by the Clinton Administration to try to lead owners and players to a settlement, has asked the owners' 12-person negotiating committee to meet with him.
After that session, he will decide if there is reason to summon both sides to a meeting.


Chechens Keep Fighting Under a Hail Of Shelling
In vicious street battles under a ferocious Russian artillery bombardment today, Chechens fighting for their self-declared independence kept up their resistance against seemingly impossible odds and retained control of essential buildings in central Grozny, the capital.
Fighting was said to be continuing in the area around the presidential palace, especially around the Interior Ministry and Security Ministry.
There was also heavy fighting near the railway station.


POP
A Blues Performer With Genuine Acting Skills Jimmy Johnson, singer Chicago Blues
A set of blues music moves around, celebrating Saturday night in one song, then bankrupt love in the next, all with the extroversion of somebody swinging for the bleachers.
It demands acting on the performer's part, and the technical competence to suggest emotion when it's not there.


The Founders Took Time Out for Prayer
To the Editor:
Prof.
Robert S. Alley, a respected Madison scholar, is factually correct in criticizing House Speaker Newt Gingrich's quotation of Benjamin Franklin's call for prayer at the Constitutional Convention (letter, Jan. 9): The delegates did not act on Franklin's suggestion that "prayers imploring the assistance of Heaven, and its blessing on our deliberations, be held . . . every morning before we proceed."


At UConn, the Women Take On High Court
In 1985, when Geno Auriemma became the women's basketball coach at the University of Connecticut, he did not fall into luxury.
He had to share an office with the soccer coach.
His team played in an old field house with poor lighting.
On a good night, there might have been 100 spectators, and it wasn't because of high ticket prices.
The tickets were free.


How Anti-Abortion Rhetoric Hurts the Patient; What Roe Says
To the Editor:
In Roe v.
Wade, the Supreme Court refused "to acknowledge the developing fetus as either human or alive," claims Prof.
Mary Ann Glendon (Op-Ed, Jan. 10).
This is false.


Heady Days for Young Conservatives
Life around here is sweet these days for young Republicans.
Forget the aimlessness and pessimism that is emblematic of so many in Generation X. Since the Nov. 8 elections, conservative young Republicans have been euphoric and filled with a sense of purpose.
For the under-30 crowd in Washington, at least, grunge is out and buttoned-down is in.


Wachovia Corp.(WB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Washington Federal S &amp; L Assn.-Seattle (WFSL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


At Home Abroad; Truth And Healing
In a bleak cemetery at the edge of town there is a gravestone marked Bantu Steven Biko: Born Dec. 18, 1946, died Sept. 9, 1977.
Steve Biko was a brilliant intellectual leader of the Black Consciousness movement, the most respected young anti-apartheid figure of his time; his friends, black and white, thought that someday he would lead a new South Africa.
He died of massive brain injuries while in the hands of the security police.
When I left that graveyard, I thought to myself that I could not forgive the murderers of Steve Biko.
It is true that South Africa needs reconciliation -- that the terrible past cannot be raked over forever.
But how can one overlook such a crime?


Woman Held in the Death of Her Newborn Baby
A Bronx woman who was allegedly working as a prostitute in her ninth month of pregnancy was arrested yesterday after her newborn baby was found dead, the police said.
The woman was identified as Kisha Davis, 22, said Sgt. Edward Caro, a police spokesman.


Japan Is Likely to Meet Goal on U.S. Auto Parts
Japan's automobile industry is almost certain to achieve a target set three years ago to purchase $19 billion in American-made automobile parts this fiscal year, Government and industry officials said.
The likelihood of reaching the goal became clear on Friday when the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association announced that for the first half of the fiscal year, purchases of American parts and materials spurted 32 percent to $9.53 billion, half the required total.


KLA Instruments Corp.(KLAC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Johnson And Jones: Best of Enemies
For two seasons, they were the fractious yet successful pair who combined to lead the Dallas Cowboys to consecutive Super Bowl titles.
But since last spring's divorce between Jerry Jones, the owner, and Jimmy Johnson, the well-haired coach, there's been little but animosity, backbiting and criticism.
Yesterday it was revealed by NBC's Will McDonough that Jones had made a special request to the National Football League on Saturday.
And what was his request?
To restrain Johnson, a member of Fox Sports' pre-game show, from walking on the field before the N.F.C. championship game, lest he provide unnecessary distractions for his former players.


JAZZ
Murray the Composer, Eloquent Across the Genres David Murray, saxophonist Knitting Factory
The saxophonist and composer David Murray and his octet performed his "Picasso Suite" -- a tight, long-form piece that uses farmyard braying and swing and Mr.
Murray's completely distinct melodic sensibility -- on Wednesday night.
For their first show in New York in three years, Mr.
Murray and his band invoked the early and middle 1980's with music that was rife with imagination and drama and short on musical precision.


Christopher Chides Yeltsin
Under fire for strongly backing President Boris N. Yeltsin during the Chechnya crisis, Secretary of State Warren Christopher announced a modest change today in policy, warning Mr.
Yeltsin that he could lose Washington's support if he forsakes democracy or free markets.
Mr.
Christopher seemed to put new conditions on American support for the Russian leader.
Appearing on the NBC News program, "Meet the Press," he said, "Our concern is for reform in Russia. We'll continue to support President Yeltsin as long as he is moving in the right direction."


Custom-Made Newcasts For Minnesota Viewers
Hoping to win the elusive loyalty of channel surfers and compulsive zappers while maintaining its position at the top of the local television news ratings, a broadcast station in Minneapolis-St.
Paul is making a most unusual leap into the Interactive Age.
The biggest surprise is just how low tech and inexpensive this leap is.


Ministers Raise Voices in Face of the Death Penalty
In the cavernous sanctuary of the Concord Baptist Church in Bedford-Stuyvesant, the Rev.
Gary V. Simpson grasped the pulpit yesterday acknowledging that the return of the death penalty to New York seemed virtually assured.
But he then went on to offer parishioners a passionate attack on capital punishment.
"Now that the death penalty is coming back to New York," he said, lifting his head in prayer, "we must recognize that life is Yours to call for and take out. We would not release that power to governors and legislators to say who is fit to live and die."


Confusion Marks Polish Plan To Commemorate Auschwitz
Elie Wiesel, the Nobel laureate, expressing unease at the confusion surrounding ceremonies planned by the Polish Government to mark the 50th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, said today that he was not sure whether he would attend.
The office of President Lech Walesa has announced that Mr.
Wiesel, who as a teen-ager spent 11 months in the Nazi camp in southern Poland, will be a main speaker at the commemoration next week.
But Mr.
Wiesel said that he had not yet received an invitation nor had he seen the program.


Market Place; In the volatile airline industry, it's Delta's time to shine.
IN the absence of steady profits in recent years, large airlines have served up a stream of neck-wrenching strategy shifts, flirtations with bankruptcy and ground-breaking labor-management deals.
Given the turmoil, it is hardly surprising that most carriers have taken a turn at being considered the industry leader.
The current rising star?
Delta Air Lines, which spent the holidays celebrating a Federal judge's decision two days before Christmas that Delta was not liable for the demise of Pan American World Airways in 1991.


Rock-Tenn Co.(RKTN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Industrial Production . . . .
Dec.
Capacity Utilization . . .
Dec.
Wednesday  Business Inventories . . .
Nov.
Thursday  Balance of Trade . . .
Nov.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Housing Starts . . .
Dec.


Barber's 'Vanessa,' Long Neglected, Is Revived
Like many American operas, Samuel Barber's "Vanessa" started strong and then faded.
Its initial reception at the Metropolitan Opera in 1958 was wildly enthusiastic; Dimitri Mitropoulos, who conducted the first performance, exclaimed, "At last, an American grand opera!" But the Met lost interest in the work a few years later, and Cecil Beaton's sumptuous sets were destroyed in a 1973 fire.
The Washington Opera's visually splendid new staging, a co-production with the Dallas Opera that opened on Saturday at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, is one of very few attempts at this score in recent decades.
The principal reason for the opera's neglect is probably Gian Carlo Menotti's soggy libretto, which aims for the Gothic passions of Isak Dinesen and the subtle epiphanies of Chekhov but instead achieves a kind of uneventful, unpoetic melodrama.
Vanessa, the melancholy aristocrat, falls for the young, caddish Anatol, the son of her former lover.
Erika, her no less melancholy niece, also sleeps with Anatol, becomes pregnant and aborts her child to avoid compromising her aunt.
Vanessa goes off with Anatol, unaware of his worthlessness, while Erika stays home and withdraws from the world.


Rising Newsprint Costs Testing U.S. Newspapers
Just as newspapers are recovering from years of sluggish advertising, many papers across the country are beginning new cost-cutting measures to offset a sharp rise in the cost of newsprint.
Analysts say the newspaper industry is healthier than it has been in years, with spending on newspaper advertising rising a respectable 7.5 percent in 1994 from the year before, according to the Newspaper Association of America.
This year's advertising growth is also expected to be strong, and newspaper companies are reporting improved earnings.


Albany Begins to Open Up
Congress has been doing it for years.
So have various states.
Now, after years of neglect, the two top leaders of New York's Legislature have pledged to provide an itemized accounting of the portly, padded legislative budget.
That would help ventilate the cocoon that has long surrounded lawmakers' spending, especially in the Republican Senate.
It is also one of several promising new moves toward a more open and accountable legislature.
Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver and the new Senate majority leader, Joseph Bruno, say they will issue detailed member-by-member reports on their chambers' spending and itemize the many mysterious lump sums that crop up every year in the legislative budget so that everyone can see where the money is going before the budget vote.


POP
Now This Soul Sister Simply Doesn't Mince Words Millie Jackson, singer Beacon Theater
Before most gangster rappers even learned their first obscenity, Millie Jackson had broken the foul-language barrier in rhythm-and-blues music.
Her new performance, "Young Man, Older Woman," which opened on Tuesday and continues through Sunday at the Beacon (Broadway at 74th Street), proves that Ms.
Jackson still has the strength, prurience, humor and taste for the extreme to hold her position as a big sister to most female rappers and a woman for whom any male gangster rapper would politely step aside.


Dr. King's Memorial
With the year 2000 now in sight, it is clear that the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was the most important public figure to emerge from the Deep South in the 20th century.
He was not simply a regional figure, of course.
By destroying segregation in his home territory, he redefined America's approach to human rights and released political energies that have touched citizens as far away as China and South Africa.
But great leaders leave personal as well as global histories.
They belong to the family of humanity, but their individual families can be battered cruelly in the conflicts that swirl around such leaders.
This was the case with the family of Dr.
King's role model, Gandhi, and also with the King family.


Synagogue Says Misleading Advice by a Brokerage Firm Resulted in a $650,000 Loss
In a miniature version of the investment disaster that plunged Orange County, Calif., into bankruptcy, a Westchester synagogue says it lost $650,000 from its capital campaign last year through investments in highly speculative securities.
But unlike Orange County, whose treasurer knew the risks he was taking, the synagogue, the Westchester Jewish Center in Mamaroneck, contends that its treasurer was misled by a Wall Street brokerage into thinking the securities were virtually risk free.
The synagogue also says it did not know it would be charged more than $100,000 in commissions for the investments.


Schulman (A.) Inc.(SHLM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about the cartoonist George Price referred incorrectly to one of his fellow cartoonists at The New Yorker.
William Steig is alive and still working.


Westcorp Inc.(WES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
VARTAN GREGORIAN had no idea when he went to lunch at the presidential palace in Lisbon last week that he was about to receive one of Portugal's highest honors: President Mario Soares awarded him a medal of the Grand Official Order of Prince Henry the Navigator, named for the 15th century patron of exploration.
Dr.
Gregorian is president of Brown University, which, along with the University of California at Santa Barbara, is one of the two schools in the United States to have departments of Portuguese and Brazilian studies.
He was in Portugal to meet with officials of foundations and to promote cooperative projects between the United States and Portugal.


Bruckner Works and a Look at How They Came to Be
Probably no one who has spent much of his career immersed in the music of Mahler and Bruckner qualifies as a cockeyed optimist.
But when Deryck Cooke published his blithely titled, influential little essay "The Bruckner Problem Simplified," in 1969, he reckoned without a new era of problematization, as academics like to call it.
And he surely reckoned without the gleeful musical problematizer Leon Botstein.
"The spurious Schalk score," Mr.
Cooke wrote with reference to the first published edition of Bruckner's Fifth Symphony, "has been abandoned by everybody." But here was Mr.
Botstein, on Friday evening, conducting the American Symphony Orchestra in the Franz Schalk edition of the Fifth at Avery Fisher Hall.


How Anti-Abortion Rhetoric Hurts the Patient; The Nazi Comparison
To the Editor:
Prof.
Mary Ann Glendon says Planned Parenthood unreasonably opposes the rhetoric of the anti-abortion movement (Op-Ed, Jan. 10).
She says it is the pro-choice movement whose rhetoric cheapens life.


U.S. IS CONSIDERING A LARGE OVERHAUL OF ECONOMIC DATA
Federal statisticians have begun the most ambitious effort since the late 1950's to remedy mounting deficiencies in measuring the nation's economic performance.
Government and private analysts worry that the statistical system increasingly fails to capture the numbing array of new technologies and structural changes in today's $7 trillion economy.


How Anti-Abortion Rhetoric Hurts the Patient; Vulnerable Clinics
To the Editor:
Abortion is not "superior to other rights infringed on by violent crime" (letter, Jan 11).
But there are other reasons for giving special police protection to family-planning clinics.


In Japan, It's Chic to Eat American Apples
To the Editor:
Re "Japan Tastes Once-Forbidden Fruit: U.S. Apples" (news article, Jan. 11): There are two main reasons American apples are popular in Japan.
The obvious one is that they are inexpensive.
Less obvious, the Japanese are fascinated by how Americans live and are eager to try American ways, which partly explains why teen-agers can be seen in punk style, and there is a voracious appetite for used Levi jeans and jewelry from Tiffany's.


The Terrible Towel Works for Tears, Too
Suddenly, the Pittsburgh Steelers today turned into what they insisted they were not -- an American Football Conference team.
Most of the season, until faced with a dominating, run-stopping San Diego team in the A.F.C. championship game, the Steelers had played like a throwback from the days of steel mills -- when it was down-and-dirty football and uniforms were bloodied.
Of all the A.F.C. teams with a chance to take back the Super Bowl, the Steelers seemed to be the last, best shot.


Issel Quits as Coach of Nuggets
DAN ISSEL quit as coach of the Denver Nuggets yesterday, saying the job is "making me something I don't want to be."
General Manager BERNIE BICKERSTAFF said an assistant, GENE LITTLES, will succeed Issel as head coach.


Citizens Banking Corp.(CBCF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; In a Bid for Hits, Networks Buy Pieces of Rivals' Shows
When Jeffrey Katzenberg and Steven Spielberg turned up at an ABC news conference here this week to describe their plans for the partnership between the network and their new studio, Dreamworks SKG, they had only one announcement to make: The first show to be developed by the previously announced joint venture would be produced by Gary David Goldberg, the creator of "Family Ties," and it would be made for CBS.
CBS?
Aren't those the wrong initials?
Why did ABC put up $100 million so that Mr.
Katzenberg and Mr.
Spielberg (the third Dreamworks partner, David Geffen, was off putting up sandbags to protect his house in Malibu against the latest California monsoon) could turn out a show for CBS?


Team of the 80's (49ers) Topples Team of the 90's (Cowboys)
Look who just got caught.
America's Team.
Grabbed by the loftiest point in its star.
Shook silly until the shine turned dull.


Flowers Industries Inc.(FLO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 17


Most Markets Open Today
The Government securities market is expected to be closed today in observance of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday and the Treasury's weekly auction of bills will be postponed until tomorrow.
But other financial markets and the commodities markets will be open.
Most banks and government offices will be closed.


Romance, Romance
To the Editor:
Re your Jan. 10 Chronicle: Amanda Quick does not also write under the name Jayne Ann Krentz.
Jayne Ann Krentz uses the pseudonym Amanda Quick to write her best-selling historical romances.


Remedy Sought for 22,000 Heart Patients With Risky Pacemakers
A panel of heart experts met this weekend to consider what steps to take about potentially defective wiring in heart pacemakers implanted in more than 22,000 Americans.
The manufacturer of the pacemakers, Telectronics Pacing Systems Inc., of Englewood, Colo., issued a voluntary recall of the wire leads used on some pacemakers last October after it was found that a support wire could break, penetrate surrounding plastic insulation and pierce the heart.


THEATER
Stressing the Pain Behind Chekhov's Comedy 'The Cherry Orchard' Bouwerie Lane Theater
Eve Adamson has given her version of "The Cherry Orchard" an agitated, nervous quality that, in the end, leaves one perplexed.
She has said she spent part of last year soaking up the current unsettled atmosphere in Russia as she prepared to direct the play, and people have long noted the extraordinary premonitions of the Russian Revolution in some of the speeches of the student Trofimov in this 1904 work, Chekhov's last.


Seau Very Good With One Good Arm
As he stepped onto a podium for a post-game interview session, Chargers linebacker Junior Seau rolled his left shoulder slightly and then winced.
The grimace was quickly replaced by a smile when someone asked how he felt about his first Super Bowl trip.
"I can't tell you, to tell you the truth," Seau said.
"It's a time where you go through hills and valleys in the course of 60 minutes. At the end of the game, it comes down to that last play. You don't know whether to cry or yell or smile. All I know is we're going to the Super Bowl."


El Paso Natural Gas (EPG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Neediest Cases; After a Shooting, Help For a Recovering Victim
When the solitude seems stifling, Frederick B. leaves his house for the more comfortable hush of a library.
He reads the newspapers, but often the buzzing in his ears is so bad that he has to stop.
And when he sees articles about robberies and murders, the memories creep in and overwhelm.
Mr.
B., a Jamaican immigrant, spent 30 years repairing vending machines in Brooklyn.
One morning in 1992, as he loaded his car with tools, a stranger approached and forced his way into Mr.
B.'s house in the Canarsie section.


Peace Talks Resume in Mexico Even as Disputes in South Deepen
Peasant rebel leaders met today with representatives of President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon for the first formal negotiations in almost a year to end the uprising in the southern state of Chiapas.
There was a dramatic air to the encounter, held at a rebel strongholdin the Lacandon rain forest and announced in this outlying city only as it got under way.
But hopes for peace were tempered by conflicts over politics and land that have deepened even as the threat of new fighting has waned.


How Anti-Abortion Rhetoric Hurts the Patient; First, Define Fetus
To the Editor:
The theme that runs through your Jan. 4 editorial "Curbing Violence at Abortion Clinics" and the Jan. 5 Planned Parenthood advertisement is a determination to treat as nonexistent the core issue: whether the child/fetus/embryo in the womb is a human being, and whether abortions are, by definition, the elimination of unwanted human beings.


In Newark, Immigration Without Fear; A Neighborhood Remade By Unexpected Hands
Jack Santos, the owner of a restaurant in the Ironbound section of Newark, remembered how easy it was 30 years ago picking out the Portuguese illegal immigrants who had begun settling in what was then a gritty neighborhood of factories and small shops.
They were the ones running down Ferry Street whenever an immigration van appeared.
The raids took place just about every week, he said, leaving scores of workers hiding in their apartments and rows of driverless delivery trucks along the main thoroughfare of Ferry Street.


The Big East's Undefeated
The second half of today's Connecticut doubleheader -- the men's half -- pits the Huskies and the Hoyas in Hartford in a battle of teams that have yet to lose in the Big East.
The Huskies, ranked No. 2 in the nation, are 12-0 and are the only unbeaten team in Division I-A.
The Hoyas are 11-1 and like Connecticut, are 5-0 in conference play.
The third unbeaten team in the Big East is Syracuse, which is also 5-0 in the conference and 12-1 over all.


Trustmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


True North Get Campbell Media Job
The Campbell Soup Company in Camden, N.J., is joining a long list of large advertisers that are consolidating the media portions of their accounts at free-standing agency units specializing in media services.
Campbell said on Friday that it had named True North Communications to handle the domestic media planning, buying and research duties on its account, which is estimated at $120 million, through a special media-only unit in New York to be called the Campbell Media Alliance.


CHRONICLE
JUDITH RODIN, president of the University of Pennsylvania, didn't have to travel as far to cast her eyes on an honor made in her name.
JEFFREY H. LORIA, an art dealer and collector, has donated "King Solomon," a work by Alexander Archipenko, the Ukranian-born sculptor, to the university in Philadelphia in honor of Dr.
Rodin.
The 14-foot-tall work has been on view outdoors there since 1984 on loan from Mr.
Loria.
Archipenko, died shortly after casting the maquette for "King Solomon."


Cocaine in Luggage Leads to an Arrest
A 38-year-old man carrying 37 pounds of cocaine in his luggage was arrested yesterday morning moments after he stepped off a plane at La Guardia Airport from Los Angeles, officials said.
The man, Jose Adrian Rivera Majia, was arrested at 8:40 A.M. as he was about to claim two suitcases loaded with cocaine wrapped in 13 plastic bundles, clothing and other items, said Terry Benczik, a spokeswoman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
The value of the shipment was estimated at $250,000 wholesale and four times that price on the street.


Chargers Strike and the Hype Crumbles
It wasn't enough that Steelers defensive end Ray Seals had assured a shutout against San Diego in this afternoon's American Football Conference championship game at Three Rivers Stadium.
Some Pittsburgh players had actually arranged to shoot a music video this week in anticipation of a trip to Super Bowl XXIX in Miami.
Too bad the Steelers didn't consult the San Diego Chargers before they decided to shoot from the lip and have themselves immortalized in celluloid.
The Chargers absorbed what they deemed insults all week and waited until the game to inflict injury.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; From an earthquake, a cross-country move and an image makeover for Redken hair care products.
AN upheaval that begins this week in the competitive realm of hair care product advertising can trace its roots to, of all things, an earthquake.
Redken Laboratories Inc., which since its founding in 1960 was based in the Los Angeles suburbs of Van Nuys and Canoga Park, has relocated to Manhattan, after its executive office and research and development operations were destroyed by the earthquake that struck the Los Angeles area a year ago tomorrow.


Roe and UMass, No. 1 and Trying Harder
Lou Roe had not been feeling good.
He had the flu, and his game had developed a touch of anemia.
Nothing so depleting, however, that Saturday's 93-60 victory by top-ranked Massachusetts over 21st-ranked Pennsylvania couldn't cure.
"That's as well as we can play," UMass Coach John Calipari said after the game.
It was not a night for false modesty, and none was offered.


A Flooded Town Asks, 'Why Us?'
Fire and pestilence would scarcely come as a surprise after what this Pacific Coast town has been through.
Almost three years ago one of the strongest earthquakes ever recorded in California struck Ferndale, tossing dozens of gaily painted 19th century craftsman-style houses off their foundations, destroying businesses and leaving millions in damages.
Then came the flood last week.
On the west side of Ferndale near where the Eel River empties into the Pacific, its miles of low-lying delta filled with water in a matter of hours on Monday, drowning hundreds of cattle and sheep, and filling barns and farm homes with mud.
South of town, the road to Honeydew and Petrolia was blocked by an avalanche of rock and soil, stranding families.
And smack in the center of Ferndale, a town of 1,300 residents, the normally quiet St.
Francis Creek burst out of its banks, turning Main Street into a foot-deep river of muck that business and homeowners have just begun to clean up.


A 5-Part Eulogy to the War on Poverty
"America's War on Poverty," a five-hour series produced by Henry Hampton that begins tonight on PBS, is a eulogy to the nation's effort in the 1960's to raise up the down-and-out, particularly by giving poor people a voice in the way money from Washington was used.
As seen in the glow of the memories of Government planners and community organizers, it is a story of idealistic innovators running up against the tough realities of politics in America.
The scene-setting opening hour, "In This Affluent Society," focuses on areas like Appalachia that remained untouched by America's postwar prosperity.
Demand for coal, the area's main resource, was down, and automation was eliminating jobs in the mines.
Miners tell of finding themselves suddenly without work or usable skills.


When the Knicks Play the Nets, It Becomes a Battle of Opposites
Pat Riley's motivational seminar is back on schedule.
Butch Beard's remedial basketball class is, uh, coping.
Where Patrick Ewing can dominate, Benoit Benjamin has been known to procrastinate.
Where the Knicks sometimes shine, the Nets often whine.
But place them on the same court recently and one has the makings of a fine playground run.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  MEXICAN OPPONENTS MEET  Mexican peasant rebel leaders met with representatives of President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon for the first formal negotiations between the Government and the insurgents in almost a year.
A1  HOLOCAUST REMEMBRANCE DISPUTE  Elie Wiesel, the Nobel laureate, said he was not sure whether he would attend ceremonies planned by Poland to mark the 50th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz.
A2


Essentials Become Luxuries as Schools Cope With Budget Cuts
At Public School 6 on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, the fourth graders in an honors class, meeting in the school cafeteria, get their literature lessons not from teachers but from volunteers.
There is no school librarian; parents staff the library.
At P.S. 172 in Sunset Park in Brooklyn, there is not even a library anymore; it was removed a couple years ago to make room for two kindergarten classes with a total of 56 students.
The school is one of Brooklyn's most crowded, with 731 students in a building meant for just over 400.
Music and art classes were eliminated this year because of budget cuts.


Comfortable Germans, Slow to Change (Especially if It Means More Work)
Life for the 16 million people in the former East Germany has been transformed since reunification in 1990, but change has come slower among the 64 million people here in the prosperous west despite warnings that their comfortable and costly welfare state must be cut back in a new era of global economic competition.
Pleas to work longer or harder are not easy to sell in a country where the 35-hour week is common, average hourly wages are higher than those in the United States and even first-year employees get four weeks' paid vacation.


Holiday Today
The Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday, which was yesterday, is being legally observed today.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office, at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, open.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Alternate-side street-cleaning regulations suspended.
SANITATION: Regular pickups and recycling but no street cleanings.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Open.
TRANSPORTATION: Subways, buses, the Long Island Rail Road and the Metro-North railroad on regular weekday schedules.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and rail service on regular weekday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on regular weekday schedule.


Shovel vs. Bulldozer In West Bank Battle
Palestinian residents of several West Bank towns planted trees yesterday in places where they say their land is in danger of being confiscated to expand Jewish settlements.
It was the latest skirmish in a conflict that is becoming more aggressive as negotiations for Palestinian autonomy in the West Bank head toward a new, uncertain phase.


Reducing Debt in 1700's
To the Editor:
Newt Gingrich, Speaker of the House and a historian himself, should be more sensitive to historical ambiguity and nuance.


Los Angeles's Steel-Frame Buildings: Quake-Proof or Not?
In the year since the deadly Northridge earthquake, this disaster-hardened city has become aware of a frightening new danger: the fragility of the steel-frame buildings that at first seemed to have survived the shaking unscathed.
And despite months of urgent laboratory testing as the extent of their mostly hidden cracks and fissures became clear, no one yet knows how to make the weakened buildings safer.


Overhaul Is Planned for New Orleans Police
The city's new Superintendent of Police has announced a plan to restore public confidence by rebuilding the police department, which has been rocked by scandal.
"Today we begin a battle for the soul of our city, and it starts with the implementation of Police Department reform and reorganization," Superintendent Richard Pennington said on Thursday at a special meeting of the City Council.
Mr.
Pennington took over the department in September after leaving the police department of the District of Columbia.


Bridge
One of the world's fastest analysts recently became an American resident.
Martin Hoffman, a Holocaust survivor who went to England and acquired the skills of a bridge expert, now lives in Lauderhill, Fla.
At the 1993 Fall Nationals, he held the South cards in a Senior Pairs event and was the declarer in four hearts after West overcalled in clubs.
West cashed two club winners and shifted to the singleton diamond.
Dummy's jack was taken by the queen, and East returned a low diamond.
South ruffed with the heart ten, and realized that the obvious plan would fail.
He could cash dummy's spades, return to his hand with a club ruff, and ruff his spade loser.
But he would then be unable to draw trumps without permitting the defense to score a trump trick.


Up to 4 Million Turn Out for Pope's Mass in Manila
In Denver 17 months ago, in a World Youth Day gathering that many people compared to Woodstock, Pope John Paul II enthralled young Americans packed into a park in a scene that had all the backpack and blue-jean bonhomie of a 1960's rock concert.
This time, it was the Pope's turn to be impressed.


No Headline
"The heritage of the civil rights movement is too important to be controlled by a Government agency that has only superficial familiarity with the internal dynamics of our freedom struggle." DEXTER KING.  [ A10:3. ] "People closest to a legacy are not the most reliable stewards of that legacy. They are emotionally invested in an experience and feel proprietary about it." DAVID LEVERING LEWIS, historian.  [ A10:3. ]


Treasury To Sell Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to Tuesday's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.53 percent, and a six-month bill was 6.06 percent.


West Bank Battle for Land Is Waged With Trees
Under a milky winter sun, Diab Abdel-Moti Nasser put the remaining strength of his 75 years into the pick he swung today, digging holes in the rocky hillside for almond saplings he was about to plant.
Actually, he said, he was not planting trees so much as making his claim to that patch of land, which lies a mile from this ramshackle village in a southwestern niche of the West Bank.
Here, land is politics, and Mr.
Nasser was voting with his muscles.


Oren Root, 83, Banking Official And a Rockefeller Adviser, Dies
Oren Root, a former New York Superintendent of Banks and an aide and adviser to Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller, died on Saturday at his home in Bedford, N.Y.
He was 83.
The cause was cancer, said his son Oren Root Jr.


METRO DIGEST
THE STRAIN ON DISPLACED WORKERS  They gathered at 3:45 A.M. in a commuter parking lot in Meriden, Conn., shrinking into the seats of the Ford Club Wagon with their lunch boxes and their makeshift pillows and their gruff greetings.
They drove the 87 miles to the General Motors assembly plant in Tarrytown, N.Y., by 6.
They worked nine hours on the assembly line and then drove home.
Detroit calls these people "G.M. gypsies," and automotive industry experts say that across the country, as the nation's largest car manufacturer has closed and consolidated plants, tens of thousands of such workers are in similar situations.
A1.


JAZZ
Murray the Composer, Eloquent Across the Genres David Murray, saxophonist Knitting Factory
The saxophonist and composer David Murray and his octet performed his "Picasso Suite" -- a tight, long-form piece that uses farmyard braying and swing and Mr.
Murray's completely distinct melodic sensibility -- on Wednesday night.
For their first show in New York in three years, Mr.
Murray and his band invoked the early and middle 1980's with music that was rife with imagination and drama and short on musical precision.


Angst With Purpose From Pearl Jam
To headline a benefit concert for Voters for Choice, Pearl Jam performed on Saturday night for the first time since the spring of 1994, topping a bill at Constitution Hall with Neil Young and Crazy Horse, L7 and Lisa Germano.
The concert could have been called Grunge for Choice; all four bands used guitars to both drive and smudge their songs.
Pearl Jam pumped out equal portions of fire and angst, and the audience couldn't wait to sing along with every long-suffering word.
It was the first of two concerts that served more than one purpose.
The shows raised $100,000 for Voters for Choice, a nonpartisan organization founded by Gloria Steinem to raise money for candidates who support abortion rights.
During Pearl Jam's set, Eddie Vedder added new words when he sang "Daughter," a song narrated by a woman: "My body is nobody's body but mine."


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B6-7.


Turner And NBC Halt Deal
A merger of Turner Broadcasting System Inc. and NBC that was being negotiated this weekend instead collapsed over the issue of control of the merged entity, after a meeting between John F. Welch Jr., the chairman of the General Electric Company, which owns NBC, and Ted Turner, the chairman of Turner Broadcasting.
Both sides issued statements yesterday, declaring that the proposed merger had been halted, and attributing its failure to a disagreement about which side would have retained management control.


Touring Paris Opera Ballet Stars Show How Times Have Changed
Eager balletomanes helped fill the Tilles Center at the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University on Saturday night for a performance by the Paris Opera Ballet Ensemble, a touring company headed by French stars who included Charles Jude, Elisabeth Platel, Isabelle Guerin and Florence Clerc.
The air had an extra tingle of excitement.
How times have changed, though.
Instead of the endless procession of "diverts," or great classical star turns, that would have been served like canapes even a decade ago, the group offered strong dancing, a tantalizing new face and interesting choreography from the international ballet repertory.
One highlight of the evening was "Pierrot Lunaire," a slight but potent solo choreographed by Ella Jarowzevitch to Beethoven's "Moonlight" Sonata.
Mr.
Jude was the usual disconsolate, hopeful Pierrot, but one who was also homesick for the moon.
This Pierrot's arm kept reaching up toward the glowing disk as if to climb back up to it, in a portrait that might have been painted by the poet Paul Verlaine.
And the dance captured all Mr.
Jude's inherent nobility and the resonance of his performing.


World Economies


Ralph Merrifield, Expert on London In the Roman Era
Ralph Merrifield, a British archeologist and an authority on London when it was under the Roman Empire, died last Monday in King's College Hospital in London.
He was 81 and lived in London.
The cause was cardiac arrest after a brief illness, said his wife, Lysbeth.


Rising Newsprint Costs Testing U.S. Newspapers
Just as newspapers are recovering from years of sluggish advertising, many papers across the country are beginning new cost-cutting measures to offset a sharp rise in the cost of newsprint.
Analysts say the newspaper industry is healthier than it has been in years, with spending on newspaper advertising rising a respectable 7.5 percent in 1994 from the year before, according to the Newspaper Association of America.
This year's advertising growth is also expected to be strong, and newspaper companies are reporting improved earnings.


Scouts Drown in Swollen Creek


Rams Poised to Move the Team
The Los Angeles' Rams president, JOHN SHAW, arrived in St.
Louis yesterday to complete a deal to move the franchise.
A Rams source in St.
Louis said the team's owner, GEORGIA FRONTIERE, was to follow later in the evening.


Fehr on a Mission in Venezuela
DONALD FEHR, the union chief, is due to arrive in Caracas, Venezuela, today to ask local players not to break ranks with fellow major leaguers.
Fehr will meet with Venezuelans and others playing winter ball for a briefing on efforts against the owner-imposed salary cap and the use of replacements, DIONISIO ACOSTA, president of the Venezuelan Baseball Players Association, said yesterday.


A Painful Recovery
Severely injured after being shot by a robber, Frederick B. had to quit his job and faced a painful, lonely recovery.
He received a small amount of worker's compensation and public assistance, but it was not enough to pay his bills.
"I had never felt so helpless," he said.
Then Catholic Charities stepped in.
Article, page B3.


Bates Will Handle Tobacco Marketing
The Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Company and its sibling, the British-American Tobacco Company, have further expanded their relationship with Bates Worldwide on their Lucky Strike cigarettes account, by naming Bates to handle the brand's worldwide strategic marketing communications.
The account, with billings estimated at $100 million, was previously handled by various local agencies.


Not Only in New York, the Mentally Ill Fall Through the Cracks
To the Editor:
"Amateur Hour at Mental Health" (editorial, Jan. 7) places considerable blame on the New York State mental health system, yet you omit the obstacles the mentally ill confront in the public and private mental health system (see also "Violent Mental Patients Must Have Treatment," letter, Jan. 12).


Market Closed in Japan
The stock market was closed here today in observance of the Japanese holiday of Adult Day.
On Friday, the Nikkei index of 225 issues fell 78.84 points, or four-tenths of 1 percent, to 19,331.17.


Fifth Third Bancorp (FITB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Manhattan Office Space


Patents
INVENTORS with patents pending or those considering filing an application should circle June 8 on their calendar.
On that day new laws governing patent terms go into effect, and right now the Patent and Trademark Office is striving mightily to let inventors know that the ground rules are about to change radically.
The shift is part of the legislation concerning the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, or GATT, that Congress passed in December.
Buried in the 22,000-page agreement was a 23-word sentence decreeing that patents would be valid for 20 years from the date an application is first filed.
The decree replaces an 1861 law that made patents valid for 17 years from date of issue.
The new rules, effective June 8, are intended to make patent terms in the United States consistent with those in Europe and Japan.


Libby E. Sachar; Judge, 90
Libby E. Sachar, who in 1946 was the first woman appointed a Superior Court judge in New Jersey, died on Dec. 28 at her home in Plainfield, N.J.
She was 90.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said her son, Judge Leonard Sachar of Scotch Plains, N.J.


49ers and Chargers Going to Super Bowl
The San Francisco 49ers yesterday fulfilled the promise first hinted at last summer.
But the Pittsburgh Steelers ended their day stunned.
In San Francisco, the 49ers soundly defeated the Dallas Cowboys, 38-28, in the National Football Conference championship game to advance to Super Bowl XXIX in two weeks in Miami.
In Pittsburgh, the San Diego Chargers upset the Steelers by 17-13 in the American Football Conference championship in a game decided by a last-minute goal-line stand.
The Chargers will face the 49ers in the Super Bowl.
Above, San Francisco quarterback Steve Young lunged into the end zone for a 3-yard touchdown in the third quarter.
At right, the Chargers' Dennis Gibson (57) knocked the ball away from Pittsburgh's Barry Foster to deny the Steelers a last-minute game-winning touchdown.
SportsMonday, page C1.


CHAMPIONSHIPS: Sports of The Times; Alas, the Fall of an Empire That Never Was
STAN HUMPHRIES? Alfred Pupunu? The San Diego Chargers?
Who are these people?
Who are these guys who stormed into Pittsburgh -- excuse me, Blitzburgh -- behind enemy lines and short-circuited some mighty grand plans?


Issue Behind King Memorial: Who Owns History?
As a battle over real estate, the conflict between the family of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. and the National Park Service over a parcel they both want for a monument to the civil rights leader is clear-cut, prosaic and likely to be resolved through negotiations.
But less clear-cut and less susceptible to a negotiated resolution are the questions of whose history the monument would display and what the correct mix would be of dispassionate outsider and passionate insider in interpreting that history.
Spencer Crew, the director of the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of American History, said disputes of this kind were fought on the "battlefield of history" and could be particularly bloody because "it is where we define ourselves."


A Feud Begins Among Simpson's Lawyers
As O. J. Simpson heads for trial this week on murder charges, an extraordinary and apparently irreparable breach has developed between two of his lawyers: Robert L. Shapiro and Mr.
Shapiro's former mentor, F. Lee Bailey.
The feud, which will be left to a third member of the defense team, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., to referee or resolve, is an embarrassing distraction, becoming public only four days before opening statements, which are set for Thursday.
It stems from the results of an internal investigation by Mr.
Simpson's main investigator, William Pavelic of Los Angeles, into disclosures to the press.


Corporate Express Inc.(CEXP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Poets' Poetry and Reflections, In Their Voices for All Time
The voice is tired but not old, worn like the map that has unfolded for too many journeys.
Anne Sexton would have strolled on stage at the 92d Street Y with a drink in one hand and a cigarette in the other, wearing her famous red dress, that screaming red a message in itself.
Then she starts to recite her signature poem, "Her Kind."


Now, the Real Skinny From New Zealand
It's a classic sight in America's Cup racing -- bright skies, rolling seas and sailors sitting like ducks in a row on the high side of a sailboat.
But if New Zealand's TAG Heuer Challenge sets the pace here, those stylized days could be over.
The team's new shark-gray boat sailed here for the first time today in the Louis Vuitton Cup challengers trials.
The syndicate, led by Chris Dickson, has taken a more radical slant on design than any other team.
And the direction appears to have paid off.
The Dickson yacht, which has not yet been named, beat Japan's Nippon 94 by 57 seconds.


POP
A Blues Performer With Genuine Acting Skills Jimmy Johnson, singer Chicago Blues
A set of blues music moves around, celebrating Saturday night in one song, then bankrupt love in the next, all with the extroversion of somebody swinging for the bleachers.
It demands acting on the performer's part, and the technical competence to suggest emotion when it's not there.


Curbing the Costs of Job Injuries
Many employers are taking tighter control over the rising cost of treatment for on-the-job injuries.
They are turning to remedies that they have long used to rein in all other employee health costs.
The cost of treating workplace injuries had risen to $28.39 billion in 1993.
Medical spending in workers' compensation cases rose more than tenfold from 1970 to 1990, almost twice the rate of general medical inflation.


Xilinx Inc.(XLNX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
Some people may find it hard to envision MARYLOU WHITNEY, the socialite and grand dame of the Saratoga racing scene, mushing through the wilds of Alaska, but that is exactly what she has been doing lately.
Now she wants other people to bid at auction on the chance to ride in a dog sled for the first seven miles of the 1995 Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race.
The 1,049 race from Anchorage to Nome starts March 4.
Mrs.
Whitney spent her honeymoon dog sledding in northern Manitoba in January 1958, and after her husband, Cornelius Vanderbilt Whitney, died two years ago, she said, "I was sentimental and lonely and wanted to go back to that wonderful time of my honeymoon."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Federal statisticians have begun the most ambitious effort since the late 1950's to remedy deficiencies in measuring the nation's economic performance.
Government and private analysts worry that the statistical system increasingly fails to capture the numbing array of new technologies and structural changes in the economy, and it is widely believed that Government policies along with monetary regulation by the Federal Reserve have, to some extent, been thrown off by misleading data.  [ Page A1. ]


How Anti-Abortion Rhetoric Hurts the Patient
To the Editor:
Prof.
Mary Ann Glendon, in "When Words Cheapen Life" (Op-Ed, Jan. 10), assumes soothing language fools women into thinking abortion does not involve a potential child.
But women have abortions precisely because they are aware of the overwhelming responsibility of motherhood.


A Bad Week In the Asian Markets, Too
Traders in the stock and currency markets of East Asia braced for another hard week as the aftershocks of Mexico's financial crisis continued to pound emerging markets in the region.
Despite economists' assurances that major Asian currencies were unlikely to be devalued and that markets in this part of the world bore little resemblance to their counterparts in Mexico and elsewhere in Latin America, investors pulled money out of Asian currency and stocks.


Age 32 Beats Age 43: It's an Old Story
The class of the division sat at ringside in suit and tie, smiling pensively.
Roy Jones conceded he was rooting for old man Roberto Duran, if only because the prospect of fighting weathered and worn Vinny Pazienza bored him.
"Does anyone in boxing really want to see that fight?" Jones, the International Boxing Federation supermiddleweight champion, wondered aloud.
"I mean, he could get seriously hurt. I don't know if I want that on my conscience. I don't know if people want to see that fight."


A Sermon in New Hampshire


Mr. Aspin: Pick Up the Pace
Les Aspin, the former Secretary of Defense, has an opportunity to draw the blueprint for an overhaul of American intelligence agencies, but he must move quickly or lose the chance.
More than two months have passed since Congress, impatient with the Clinton Administration's lethargic efforts to review the operations and budgets of the intelligence services, created an outside commission to do the job.
President Clinton quickly selected Mr.
Aspin to run it.
Not enough has happened since.
Republican and Democratic leaders in Congress have appointed the eight members of the panel the legislature was authorized to select.
Mr.
Aspin and President Clinton have yet to name eight others the White House gets to appoint.
There is no staff director and no staff, and little sign preparations are being made so the commission can get to work swiftly once the membership is set.


Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline Partners L.P.(SFL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prudential Insurance Narrows Its Review
The Prudential Insurance Company of America has narrowed the review on its estimated $50 million account to three agencies from seven, advertising executives said on Friday.
Among those eliminated were Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York, which has handled the account for the last five years.
The executives, who spoke on condition of anonymity, identified the three finalists as BBDO New York, Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis and Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners in New York.
The four New York agencies eliminated were Altschiller &amp; Company, Bates U.S.A., Deutsch Inc. and Lowe.


Swift Transport reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


World News Briefs; U.S. Warns Airlines Of Threat in East Asia
The Federal Aviation Administration has ordered United States airlines flying to and from East Asia to increase security measures as a result of bomb threats, a State Department official said tonight.
In the wake of the directive, a United Airlines jet, Flight 826 en route to Hawaii, returned to Tokyo today after F.A.A. investigators warned airline officials in Chicago that a bomb might have been planted on the plane.
No bomb was found.
The flight was scheduled to proceed to Honolulu this afternoon, the airline said.


Thorn Apple Valley Inc.(TAVI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 9


No Doubt About It: Heat Is Up for Sampras And Sanchez Vicario
It's hot and it's humid and it's the Grand Slam tournament where, appropriately enough, players learn just how it feels to be a shrimp on the barbie.
According to Pete Sampras, you can't survive two weeks at the Australian Open without experiencing the sensation of being broiled alive.
"It's the hottest one of them all," he said.


Evans Group Wins Ford Dealers Job
The Northwest Ford Car Dealers Association has selected the Evans Group in Seattle to handle its account, which had been at Cole &amp; Weber in Seattle for the last 17 years.
The billings were estimated at $10 million to $12 million.
Evans was awarded the acccount last week after a two-month review that was narrowed to Evans and four other finalists after Cole &amp; Weber dropped out: Borders Perrin &amp; Norrander in Seattle and Portland; W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Southfield, Mich.; Elgin Syferd/DDB Needham in Seattle, and J. Walter Thompson Detroit.
A campaign is expected to begin on March 1.


G.O.P. Governor Candidate Won't Appeal Maryland Race
Two days after a state court rejected her effort to overturn the Maryland governor's election won by Parris N. Glendening in November, Ellen R. Sauerbrey, the Republican challenger, said today that she had withdrawn her appeal of the court's decision.
But whether her retreat clears the way for Mr.
Glendening to be sworn in on Wednesday, as scheduled, remains unclear.
In a brief statement, Mrs.
Sauerbrey said she would disclose her "future course of action" at a news conference on Monday in Annapolis, leaving open the possibility that she might mount another challenge through a Federal court or the Maryland House of Delegates.


Lost by U.S.: The Sense of a Right to Triumph
THE END OF VICTORY CULTURE Cold War America and the Disillusioning of a Generation  By Tom Engelhardt  351 pages.
Basic Books/HarperCollins. $25.
In broadest outline, what Tom Engelhardt argues in "The End of Victory Culture" is neither startling nor particularly original.
He writes that in the two decades between the end of World War II and America's entry into Vietnam in force, this country lost its culture of victory, which he defines as the sense of a right to triumph over American Indians, Japanese, Indochinese or any other supposedly lesser people.


CHAMPIONSHIPS: Sports of The Times; In the Final Analysis, Jones and Cowboys Die With Their Boots
OUTSIDE, after he accepted the National Conference trophy, Eddie DeBartolo's voice thundered through Candlestick Park's public-address system.
"We are going to Miami," the 49ers' owner said, alluding to Super Bowl XXIX, "and we are going to bring back another championship."


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Big Smith Brands Inc., Deerfield, Fla., an initial public offering of 750,000 units (each representing two shares and two warrants).
Barington Capital Group.


Making Trenton Pay the Costs Of What It Requires of Towns
For too long, local officials say, state government has been acting like the man who walks into a bar, orders drinks for the house and then ducks out, leaving the patrons to pick up the tab.
After decades of being stuck with the bill, New Jersey's 567 municipalities are closer than ever to making the state pay up for things it wants the towns to do.
Three proposed constitutional amendments, including one sponsored by the Republican Assembly Speaker, Chuck Haytaian, would ease some existing mandates and force the state to pay for new ones; all have been passed by the Assembly and are awaiting action in the Senate.


KU Energy Corp.(KU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sani Top Journal; Lesotho, Where the Scenery Soars, and Life's Flat
For the men of this vertiginous border outpost that overlooks South Africa from mountains nearly two miles high, the two main seasonal activities are beer drinking and sheep shearing.
Often simultaneously, judging by the many bleeding wounds on the white-stubbled flanks of the shorn flocks penned outside the tin shed of the village wool cooperative.


ATI Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Aging Auto Workers Travel Long Roads to Stay in Place
They gathered in the blackness of 3:45 A.M. in a commuter parking lot here, pulling their coats around them, shrinking into the seats of the Ford Club Wagon with their lunch boxes and their makeshift pillows and their gruff greetings.
They drove the 87 miles to the General Motors assembly plant in Tarrytown, N.Y., by 6, still in darkness.
They worked nine hours on the assembly line.
As they drove home, the morbid banter rolled on: old age, aching muscles, spouses who have become complete strangers, and especially this winter's closing of the G.M. plant in Bristol that took away their old jobs.
Then, somewhere around Waterbury, there was a subtle change, immediately perceptible to people who know one another's rhythms: Ricardo Torres stopped joking.


U.S. Business Magazines Thriving on Foreign Ads
A significant increase in advertising from international sources like foreign governments, tourist agencies, banks and a range of industries helped make 1994 the best year for advertising pages in United States magazines in at least five years.
The principal benefactors were domestic editions of business magazines.
Forbes reported a 46 percent increase in foreign ad pages last year in the magazine and its two supplements, Forbes FYI and ASAP, compared with 1993.
Fortune saw ads from Asia increase 60 percent and ads from Europe rise 12 percent.


New Era for Orange County Jeremiah
If anyone in Orange County has a right to say, "I told you so," it is John M. W. Moorlach.
And while he may not use exactly those words, it is clear that he is thriving as the most obvious choice to be appointed county treasurer -- the man who foresaw the Southern California county's investment problems.
Mr.
Moorlach, a Republican in a predominantly Republican county, lost his bid for the treasurer's job by a 2-to-1 margin in November to Robert L. Citron, the incumbent for two decades.
Now, more than $2 billion in losses later, Mr.
Citron has resigned, Orange County has filed for bankruptcy protection and Mr.
Moorlach is negotiating with a new county Board of Supervisors, hoping to be appointed as his replacement.


FIRST INTERSTATE BANCORP (I,N)
First Interstate Bancorp reported a nearly 45 percent increase in fourth-quarter earnings yesterday, an advance that reflected an improved California economy and strong loan growth.
First Interstate, which is based in Los Angeles, made $211.3 million, or $2.65 a share, in the quarter compared with $146.1 million, or $1.78 a share, a year earlier.


A Drama About Hearts, Healthy and Otherwise
Have a stack of tissues handy if you are settling down to watch "A Heart For Olivia," a two-hour account of a couple's efforts to save the life of their newborn daughter.
The program lives up to the promise of the title of the CBS series "Before Your Eyes," as the camera goes into the operating rooms and the report digs into the feelings of Sherrie and Lonnie Maize, Olivia's parents.
When the Maizes discover in Sherrie's fifth month of pregnancy that their baby has a severe heart defect, they seek help at the Loma Linda University Medical Center in California, celebrated for its infant heart transplants.
The program begins slowly, taking its time to catch the flavor of Murphy, N.C., the town in the Great Smoky Mountains where the Maizes live, and the spirit of the friends and neighbors who pitch in to raise the money to send the couple across the country.


DNA Sleuths Follow Disease's Tracks to 2 Very Different Genes
WHENEVER a lot of very good scientists spend years searching single-mindedly for a high-profile disease gene, they invariably begin fishing out all sorts of candidate genes that look, smell and wiggle like the real thing, but then prove to be frustrating red herrings.
In the course of seeking the genes that contribute to hereditary colon cancer and breast cancer, for example, researchers published reports of discoveries that in short order were shown to be the wrong genes.
Usually the source of the confusion is not hard to sort out: in the case of the mistaken breast cancer gene, biologists determined that what appeared to be a guilty mutation in the candidate gene was in fact a so-called polymorphism, a harmless variation in the chemical makeup of some people's DNA that had nothing to do with why one woman had familial breast cancer and another did not.


Pytka Is Honored In Awards Program
Pytka, the commercial production company in Venice, Calif., headed by the director Joe Pytka, took top honors last week at the 37th annual International Television Advertising Awards sponsored by the New York Festivals.
Pytka won seven gold World Medals and one Grand Award for work for advertisers like Apple Computer, Doritos and Nike Inc.
Other top winners were Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York, with four awards, and DDB Needham Los Angeles and Giraldi Suarez, a New York-based production company, with three gold awards each.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Boys and Girls Excels at King Relays  Boys and Girls of Brooklyn won three events yesterday at the Public Schools Athletic League Martin Luther King Relays at the West 168th Street Armory.
Coach Jim Jackson's squad also posted the fastest time, 3 minutes 26.67 seconds, in a qualifying 1,600-meter heat for the Millrose Games P.S.A.L. final, which will be held on Feb. 3 at Madison Square Garden.
The victories yesterday for the Kangaroos were in the 4 x 200 (1 minute 33.47 seconds), the sprint medley (3:35.96) and the 4 x 400 (3:31.89) relays.
Dwight Joseph of Edison High in Jamiaca, Queens, did 43 feet 8 1/2 inches in the triple jump relay as he and teammate Roland Navia combined for a winning performance of 83 feet 3 inches.
Curtis of Staten Island won two events, the high jump (11-6) and the pole vault (12.0).


Bob: Your New Best Friend's Personality Quirks
MAKING computers easier to use is easier said than done.
For years the Microsoft Corporation has been designing convoluted user interfaces and declaring them "easy." The simple command for saving one's work in early Microsoft programs was the Escape key followed by the letters T and S for Transfer, Save.
In "The Underground Guide to Word for Windows," the author, Woody Leonhard, writes, "If you think it's easy, you haven't been trying." Even Microsoft now grants that using Windows itself is not nearly as simple as its ads once proclaimed.
Now that Microsoft has announced Bob, the resulting barrage of publicity leads me to break my habit of waiting for the final version before testing the product and to proceed with a close look at what works and what doesn't. (Note well: Bob will not be on the shelves before the end of March.)


Office Max Chooses Lintas Campbell
Office Max Inc., an office-products retailer in Shaker Heights, Ohio, said yesterday that it had selected Lintas Campbell-Ewald in Warren, Mich., to handle its account, which had been at Meldrum &amp; Fewsmith Communications in Cleveland since February 1993.
Billings were estimated at $40 million to $42 million.


Synopsys Inc.(SNPS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
Because of a transcription error, the Personal Computers column in Science Times last Tuesday, about on-line sources of information about government, misstated the Internet address for the Internet Multicasting Service of Washington.
It is http://town.hall.org.


Minority Leader Becomes an Intraparty Annoyance for Clinton
President Clinton took a couple of hundred aides, advance men and bodyguards to a community college in western Illinois last week to press his proposals for educational tax breaks for the middle class.
But he had to compete for headlines and television time with the House minority leader, Richard A. Gephardt, who simply answered a question on Capitol Hill.
As Mr.
Clinton was busy arguing that his ideas were crucial to the security of working Americans, and by implication the Democratic Party, the Democratic leader in Congress surprised the White House with his own attention-getting alternative at a hearing of the Ways and Means Committee: flattening and simplifying the income tax rates.


Merrill Lynch Is Facing Challenge to Credibility
Ever since Orange County, Calif., declared bankruptcy last month, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company has trumpeted its claim that it had retained about $2 billion worth of securities as collateral for loans made to the county while other Wall Street lenders quickly cashed out.
But now, as the county mounts a legal onslaught against the securities firm, what Merrill has tried to portray as a gesture of support for its longtime client has turned into a major challenge to its credibility.


Let's Not Take Risk of Putting School Meals in Private Hands
To the Editor:
While we are often in agreement with City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone, we strongly disagree with his recommendation that school meals be removed from New York Board of Education jurisdiction (editorial, Jan. 11).


Questions on Coach
The Nevada-Las Vegas interim president, KENNY GUINN, hopes to meet with Coach TIM GRGURICH today or tomorrow and discuss his medical problems and his immediate future with the team.


Russian Guns Pound Deeper in Chechen Capital
Russian bombers and helicopters swung low over the capital of the secessionist region of Chechnya today, and artillery pounded deeper south toward Chechen-held territory.
The besieged Chechen rebels, who say they have forced the Russians to retreat from some buildings in the city, appeared tired and dangerously edgy.
As artillery and rocket fire continued to hit the capital, Grozny, the Russian Prime Minister, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, appeared on television in Moscow.
He called for immediate peace talks and a cease-fire in Chechnya, where the Russian military campaign to seize control from the secessionist government entered its sixth week today.


SOCCER
Italy
While Juventus was taking a stronger grip on first place with a 3-0 triumph over Roma, Franco Sensi, the president of the Roma team, was protesting the officiating.


Glencullen Journal; In Irish Pubs, Sober Talk of a New Road Hazard
The Irish are engaged in a countrywide debate over the pleasure of drink versus the pain of driving home and being pulled over by police officers enforcing the tough new drunken driving law.
The emotional dialogue is filling newspapers, television screens, living rooms and, of course, most of the country's 10,200 pubs.


Small but Joyful Flock Greets Pope in Papua New Guinea
After a Mass attended by four million people in the Philippines on Sunday, Pope John Paul II arrived here tonight and sat among 300 worshipers in a small and hot concrete church and prayed with them.
The crowds may not have been the same, said a local priest, but it was "namba wan samting tru -- that's pidgin English for a good thing."


Is the Future of China in Deng's Iron Hand?; Going Back
To the Editor:
William Safire (column, Jan. 9) argues that "Russia is in better political shape than China" because its new openness insures a long-run stability that China's "totalitarian state" can only simulate.
Perhaps, but listen to my Chinese friend.


Clinton Says Budget Cutters Should Spare Service Plan
President Clinton today mounted a defense of his $500 million program that encourages young people to take part in national service, an idea that Congressional Republicans have in their budget-cutting sights.
The program, known as Americorps, now includes 20,000 young people who work full or part time at minimum wage in one of 300 programs in communities around the country, in return for Government help in repaying their college loans.
In an address here today, the President proclaimed that its establishment had been perhaps his proudest achievement.


UConn Women Stake Claim to No. 1 by Beating the No. 1
No. 1 learned something today. No. 1 is no longer No. 1.
In a gritty, physical, often frenzied game this afternoon before a national television audience, unbeaten Connecticut soundly beat previously unbeaten Tennessee, 77-66.


Applied Extrusion Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Old Kent Financial Corp.(OKEN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Xilinx Inc.(XLNX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mrs. Clinton Shouldn't Start Weakening
To the Editor:
Re "Hillary Clinton Asks Help in Finding a Softer Image" (front page, Jan. 10):


One-on-One Is No Way for Nets to Win
The double team never came, Derrick Coleman was guarding someone else and Benoit Benjamin was home with the flu.
That left Patrick Ewing room to operate and the Nets with no one to stop him.
Ewing put together his most impressive offensive output of the season, scoring 32 points on 13-of-22 shooting and leading the Knicks past the Nets, 107-90, yesterday afternoon at Madison Square Garden.


Graves Pledges Not to Let Back Surgery Soften His Style
The scar on the small of Adam Graves's back is not even an inch long.
But the surgical procedure last October that put it there could have forced the Rangers gritty left wing to miss two months of the regular season, maybe more.
Could have, had their not been a lockout that lasted 103 days.


Japan's Second-Largest Port Is Site of Heaviest Earthquake Damage
The earthquake that struck Japan early this morning caused major damage to one of Japan's most distinctive big cities and the country's second largest port.
Thus the disaster could have a major impact on Japan's economy, at least in the short term.
Kobe, with a population of 1.47 million people and an area of 208 square miles, is a thriving port city, the sixth busiest in the world.
It has been a lifeline to the outside world for more than a thousand years.
The city, once known as Hyogo, was an important outlet for Japan's trade with China and other Asian nations since the Nara period, in the 8th century, and still plays a major role in the nation's economic life.
It is now the capital of Hyogo Prefecture and serves a region of more than 18 million people.


Lincoln Telecommunications Co.(LTEC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mr. Grasso's Death Wish
Delivering on a campaign pledge, Gov.
George Pataki has shipped the confessed multiple murderer Thomas Grasso from New York to Oklahoma, where the prisoner has waived all defenses to a quick execution.
The pledge, which was cheap politically, and its fulfillment, billed as a cost savings for New York's prisons, are meant to look "tough" on criminals.
Actually they amount to a rare state capitulation to a killer's desire to choose his own punishment.
Already a fugitive from a 1990 murder in Tulsa, Mr.
Grasso fled to New York, where he committed a second murder at a Staten Island boarding house.
He pleaded guilty to the second murder and began serving New York's maximum term of 20 years to life.
Oklahoma asked to borrow the prisoner back, in accord with an interstate compact, to conduct its own trial.
After the trial the compact provides that the prisoner "shall be returned to the sending state," in this case New York.


An American Tourist Is Killed By Gunmen in North Cambodia
Gunmen in northwestern Cambodia killed an American tourist and her Cambodian guide in an attack Sunday on near a remote stone temple outside the ancient Khmer capital of Angkor, American and Cambodian officials said today.
The woman's husband was seriously wounded in the attack, which Cambodian officials said was carried out by Khmer Rouge guerrillas, who kidnapped and killed at least six tourists last year.
But foreign diplomats said the attack was just as likely to have been the work of bandits.


National City Corp.(NCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No One Flies for the Obstetric Services
To the Editor:
Re Stuart Elliott's Jan. 11 Advertising column on the South African Airways commercial re-enacting a baby's in-flight birth: When I first saw the ad, I assumed the airline was drawing a subtle analogy between the birth of a baby and the birth of democracy in South Africa.


What to Expect in Washington Today
HOUSE: The Ways and Means Committee will hold a hearing on family programs.
SENATE: The Judiciary Committee will hold two hearings involving Federal spending and the Constitution.
In the morning, the full committee is scheduled to act on a proposed constitutional amendment to require a balanced budget.
In the afternoon, the panel's subcommittee on the Constitution will hold a hearing on a constitutional approach to the line-item veto.


Carl Monder, 66, Expert on Steroids
Dr.
Carl Monder, a biochemist who specialized in contraceptive safety and steroid chemistry, died on Jan. 5 in Englewood Hospital in New Jersey.
Dr.
Monder, who lived in Teaneck, N.J., was 66.
He had a brief illness, said Dr.
David Phillips, a colleague at the Population Council in Manhattan, where Dr.
Monder worked.


Japan's Cedar Forests Are Man-Made Disaster
IT was a crisp, golden day in the vast forests here, near the base of Mount Fuji, but for Shigejiro Sugiyama a stroll in the country was an encounter with an impending disaster.
He plucked a sprig of cedar and pointed out how the trees were heavy with dense rows of tiny amber buds, the product of a particularly hot, dry summer.
They meant that come spring, he and millions of other Japanese are likely to suffer in what experts are saying will be the worst year ever for a malady known in no other country to such a degree: allergic reactions to cedar pollen.


Protesters Denounce Police Over Choking Death


Standex Intl.(SXI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Memo to Chargers: Watch Game 14 Film, Then Burn It
They bolted to a 21-0 lead.
It was all clicking for the San Francisco 49ers.
Steve Young was doing his thing, darting and scrambling here and there, tossing 304 yards worth of beautiful spirals to Jerry Rice and John Taylor and Brent Jones and Ricky Watters.
Watters did his thing, rushing for 53 yards and scoring on a 4-yard run.
And the defense won it early.
Only 3 points allowed in the first half.
All around, the 49ers were quicker, faster, smarter more physical.


Hmm-m-m, Well, the Beach Should Be Here Some Place


CHRONICLE
JOHN HERSEY, the novelist, who wrote "Hiroshima" and "A Bell for Adano," might not have appreciated the ceremony on Sunday designating his Key West, Fla., home a literary landmark.
"Of all the artists I've known, John was the most sincerely adverse to publicity," said RICHARD WILBUR, the poet and Mr.
Hersey's neighbor for 20 years, The Associated Press reported.
"He'd have been very alarmed to see us all flocked here in front of his house."


New Class of Lightning Found High Above Clouds
SCIENTISTS have been studying lightning ever since Benjamin Franklin demonstrated its electrical nature some two centuries ago, and have generally felt that its nuances were understood.
The bolts were white hot, hitting temperatures of 50,000 degrees Fahrenheit and strengths of several hundred million volts.
Though dazzling to the eye, lightning as a scientific topic had become rather passe.
But it turns out that science missed the most bizarre and interesting bolts of all, which materialize above thunderheads and shoot upward, not downward, flickering across great distances.
Such wonders were hidden from view until recently, when ground observers, aircraft and spacecraft managed to glimpse their ephemeral dance.


American Virtuosi Cancel Rest of Season
The American Virtuosi, a chamber orchestra, have canceled the remainder of their engagements this season at Gould Hall.
The ensemble plans to give a performance of Handel's "Acis and Galatea" in the spring, at a place and time to be announced, its director, Kenneth Hamrick, said.


Eddie Bauer Chain Plans Expansion Into Dress Clothes
Eddie Bauer, the specialty retailer known for its outdoor-oriented casual wear, will soon sell dress clothes as well.
The chain hopes to cash in on what it sees as a consumer trend toward the wearing of clothes for the corporate workplace that feature a more casual accent..


Mrs. Clinton Shouldn't Start Weakening; Offensive to Women
To the Editor:
House Speaker Newt Gingrich's disparaging reference to Hillary Rodham Clinton and his appointment of Christina Jeffrey as House historian show a disparity in public outrage and in his own reaction.


Budget Measure Likely but Which One?
The odds are good that amid much hue and cry, the necessary two-thirds of the House of Representatives will vote late this month for a Constitutional amendment ordering the Federal Government to get its budget in balance.
A bit surprisingly, little else about the amendment is even close to a sure bet.


No Headline
"What's neat is that we didn't expect it. It's probably been there since the earth began. But our eyes have just been opened." -- DR.
GERALD J. FISHMAN, an astrophysicist, discussing lightning that shoots up, not down.  [ C9:1. ]


Vargas Llosa Wins The Jerusalem Prize
Mario Vargas Llosa, the Peruvian novelist, was named the winner of the Jerusalem Prize yesterday.
The $5,000 prize, sponsored by the Jerusalem International Book Fair, is awarded every other year to a writer whose work expresses the idea of the freedom of the individual in society.
In awarding the prize to Mr.
Vargas Llosa, whose works include "The Green House" and "The War of the End of the World," the judges praised his "uncompromising stance on the writer's role in fighting human injustice" and added, "His oft-quoted statement that 'Literature is fire' expressed his belief in the revolutionary potential of writing."


Sampras Starts Strong and Sticks to Basics
Preferring comfort to novelty, Pete Sampras, the Australian Open's defending champion, wore old sneakers and used an old racquet today to produce a familiar result: a first-round victory without a hitch.
"Hopefully things will work out for me here," Sampras said after his 73- minute demolition of Gianluca Pozzi of Italy by 6-3, 6-2, 6-0.


Acxiom Corp.(ACSM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO. (ADM,N)
The Archer-Daniels-Midland Company said yesterday that earnings jumped 50.7 percent in its fiscal second quarter as a combination of falling American farm prices and rising overseas demand for food products pushed up profit margins.
The company, a food processor based in Decatur, Ill., said its net income rose to $220.1 million, or 43 cents a share, from $146.1 million, or 28 cents, in the period a year earlier.
Per-share figures reflect a 5 percent stock dividend in September and a 3-for-2 split in December.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; To keep potential customers from nodding off, a paint company strives to be warm and fuzzy.
IF there's anything more dull than watching paint dry, it may well be watching paint advertising.
Desiccated discussions of paint's durability and longevity are virtually guaranteed to cover consumers with at least a couple of coats of miasma and boredom.
That's the challenge facing ICI North America, a unit of giant Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C., and its new agency, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide in New York, as they introduce a higher-priced paint brand called Dulux to this country.
Dulux, which Imperial Chemical's ICI Paints calls the world's best-selling paint brand, will be introduced in the United States in the spring through its Glidden Company subsidiary.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Piecing Together A Difficult Work by Strauss  New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall
When Debussy first heard "Ein Heldenleben," he made an astonishingly prescient comment.
Even though the medium of film had just been invented, he said that Strauss was practicing a sort of musical cinematography.
The description may have been intended as an insult, but it neatly captured Strauss's style, which is a matter of images juxtaposed rather than structures sustained.
"Ein Heldenleben," one of Strauss's trickiest big pieces, proceeds by a series of stunning contrasts: the grandly heroic opening leads into the inane chattering of the "Hero's Adversaries"; the passion of "The Hero's Courtship" is broken by the ferocity of the battle scene.


Change at Montclair
NICK DELTUFO is stepping aside as Montclair State's basketball coach for the rest of the season because of chronic fatigue, the school announced yesterday.
DelTufo, 35, has missed the Red Hawks' last eight games because of health problems.
He led Montclair State to an 18-8 record last season and an N.C.A.A.
Division III tournament berth, the first for the Red Hawks since 1983.


Is the Future of China in Deng's Iron Hand?; The Copyright Idea
To the Editor:
Re Thomas L. Friedman's Jan. 8 column on Chinese violations of international copyright protections:


Johnson Controls Inc.(JCI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


People
*
Nick Baum was named to the new position of chief executive for Europe, excluding France, at Euro RSCG, Paris.
He was previously international president at Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York. *
Joseph Cupani was named executive vice president and chief creative officer at Chapman Direct Advertising, New York, assuming responsibilities from Barry Kessel, who left.
Mr.
Cupani was previously senior vice president and executive creative director at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct, New York.


Patterns
A Fashion Biennale
Beneath Michelangelo's naked David at the Galleria dell' Accademia, one of the more ambitious projects concerning dress was announced last Thursday.


Q&amp;A
Elliptical Orbits
Q.  Why are the planets in elliptical orbits around the Sun?


Accounts
*
National Westminster Bank, London, to Bartle Bogle Hegarty, London, to consolidate the media portion of its account, previously divided between Bartle Bogle, which handles the creative portion, and CIA Medianetwork, London.
Billings were estimated at $38 million. *
Worthington Foods Inc., Columbus, Ohio, to Fahlgren, Dublin, Ohio, to handle its account, previously at Bates U.S.A., Columbus.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.


Sports of The Times; Coleman Attends a Shootaround
DERRICK COLEMAN finally showed up for a shootaround, which is all yesterday's 107-90 victory by the Knicks over the Nets really was.
For those who don't speak N.B.A., shootaround is what game-day practice is known as in the National Basketball Association.
Teams gather for an hour in the morning to jog through the plays, theirs and their opponent's, and toss a few uncontested shots at the rim.


Privatization Is Crucial for Italy's ENI
For Franco Bernabe, who spent much of the last two years cleansing Ente Nazionale Idrocarburi S.p.A., the big Italian oil and petrochemicals group, of an aura of political corruption, the biggest challenge now is to sell off the state-owned company to the public without more political interference.
The outcome is crucial for ENI, the world's fifth-largest oil company by sales, as the international chemical industry awakes from recession and major oil companies stake out claims in the former Soviet Union and China.


Credit Markets Mostly Inactive
There was no trading yesterday in either the cash or futures markets for Treasury securities.
The markets were closed in observance of the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
The corporate and municipal markets were open, but there was little activity since they generally set prices from government security trading.
Most securities firms had only a few people on trading desks.


The Joys of Upgrading An Everyday System
IT was past time.
I had avoided upgrading the workaday Macintosh, a Quadra 660AV, to System 7.5 from 7.1, because of a strong disinclination to make a major change during a big project.
Now the project is finished.
The installation, from a CD-ROM, went smoothly.
The machine seems faster, and Wordperfect 3.0 has definitely speeded up.
The most noticeable addition is that the Apple menu is now hierarchical; when you pull it down from under the Apple logo at the upper left corner, rightward-pointing triangles next to some of the entries lead to submenus.
Selecting Control Panels, for example, offers access to all the control panels in the system folder -- ways of adjusting color, keyboard, mouse and more -- without leaving a running program.
That also means that the Apple menu is huge.
With the eight items I have added to it because they represent programs I like to be able to get at easily, there are now 18 choices, so many that the list scrolls off the screen.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK DEFICIT DEFIES CUT AFTER CUT
Although he has already slashed $2 billion from city programs, Mayor Giuliani still faces another budget gap in the next 18 months that will be as large, if not larger.
And those grim figures do not take into account the real possibility of large cuts in aid from Washington and from Albany, where Governor Pataki is looking for ways to solve the state's own budget gaps and make good on his campaign promise of major cuts in taxes and spending.
A1.


Extra Goal for Holman and O'Sullivan
Steve Holman of the United States sees American honor at stake.
Marcus O'Sullivan of Ireland has an all-Irish score to settle.
As the two top milers entered in the 88th Wanamaker Mile, both hope to accomplish their goals on Feb. 3 at the Chemical Bank Millrose Games at Madison Square Garden.
"I'd love to win for a sixth time," said O'Sullivan, the 33-year-old three-time world indoor champion, whose five Wanamaker victories, following the record seven by Eammon Coghlan, have contributed to a virtual Irish hegemony over the venerable race.


Heather Watts, An Unlikely Swan, In Her Final Song
The choreography's the thing at the New York City Ballet.
George Balanchine assiduously pursued a no-star policy in the company he founded with Lincoln Kirstein in 1948.
Yet that did not mean he was uninterested in dancers of star quality.
Heather Watts was not his muse, but he made her a soloist in 1978 and a principal in 1979.
Like a good number of other dancers who supposedly did not fit the Balanchine mold (in this case, spiky, broad-shouldered and inconsistent in his classical style), she has actually been the kind of dancer to which Balanchine was especially attracted.
He knew she could subordinate stage personality to his choreography and yet retain a powerful individuality.


More's in It for the Male Molly Than Thought, Study Finds
IT had looked to all the world like a sterile affair, one built on mutual convenience and exploitation.
She, an Amazon molly fish, had sought copulation with a male, not to obtain his genes and mix them with her own to spawn the next generation, but simply for a quick chemical jump start.
She needed his sperm to prod her eggs to split in twain and create clonal progeny, the fry all female and identical to the mother.
For his part, the male, a closely related species of molly fish that propagates through more normal channels of sexual reproduction, also appeared to benefit from the odd affair.
As scientists showed last year, the male molly fish that copulates with an Amazon becomes immediately irresistible to the females of his own kind, who then hungrily mate with him and give his seed a chance to sire piscine multitudes.
In this way, scientists proposed, a so-called gynogenetic species like the Amazon can persist, gaining the chemical prod of a male's sperm without giving him offspring in return.
She merely made him sexy to other females, and that seemed motivation enough.


Preachers and Plain Folk Honor King
Politicians made speeches, preachers delivered sermons and ordinary people in and around New York used a day off yesterday to march, rally and celebrate the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Some used the opportunity to inveigh against budget cuts.
Others chose to reflect on how Dr.
King might have responded to efforts to reinstate the death penalty, increase the military budget and cut aid to the poor.


Chess
Moscow crime spoiled the recent World Chess Olympiad for many players and teams.
Joel Benjamin of Manhattan, Board 3 of the United States squad, said, "It was so rampant that we quickly learned never to go out of the Hotel Cosmos."
One team representative was robbed of $7,000 after he had exchanged currency.
Moreover, two members of the American team, Alexey Yermolinsky and Alexander Shabalov, both originally from the Soviet Union, were also robbed of considerable amounts of money.
There was no tally of how many players were victims, but there were new stories of robberies almost every day.


In Hartford, Labor's 'True Believer' Is Ready to Battle Rowland
At the Governor's black-tie inaugural ball earlier this month, Jerome P. Brown, the president of the New England Healthcare Employees, District 1199, stuck out like a sore thumb.
Dressed in a hand-me-down gray suit from his brother, Mr.
Brown, the leader of 9,000 state employees, wished good luck to the new Republican Governor, John G. Rowland, whom Mr.
Brown had opposed in the campaign.
As the union leader walked away, Governor Rowland is said to have called out, "Hey, Jerry, you need a tux."


G.O.P. Plan For Welfare Is Criticized
The Clinton Administration today denounced a major element of the House Republicans' welfare bill, which would replace most Federal food and nutrition programs with cash grants to be administered by the states.
The Administration said the Republican proposal would cut at least $5.2 billion -- almost 13 percent --from the $40.8 billion that would otherwise be spent on food assistance next year.


San Diego Journal; An 'Underdog Town' Welcomes Home Its Underdog Chargers
When earthquakes strike Southern California, overloaded telephone systems routinely fall dead as tens of thousands of people try to make urgent calls.
It happened again on Sunday but for a different reason: This city's euphoria overwhelmed its telephones, and the lines went down for 20 minutes when the San Diego Chargers beat the Pittsburgh Steelers.


C. J. Dauphinot Jr., 81, Leader In Latin American Securities
Clarence J. Dauphinot Jr., an asset manager who helped develop Latin America's financial markets after World War II, died on Friday at his Manhattan apartment.
He was 81.
His principal residence was in Nassau, the Bahamas.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Uneasy Quiet After Turmoil On the Team For Simpson
O.
J.
Simpson's defense team was largely tranquil today, even though fundamental tensions between Robert L. Shapiro and F. Lee Bailey, erstwhile friends and colleagues who are now incommunicado, still bubbled beneath the surface.
At the behest of Mr.
Simpson, Alan Dershowitz of Harvard Law School, a man more known for advocacy than conciliation, set out to bring peace to Mr.
Simpson's warring defense lawyers, who must join forces by Friday for opening statements in the case.
His actions suggested that whatever Mr.
Shapiro wished, Mr.
Simpson wanted Mr.
Bailey in the case for keeps.


On My Mind; The Broken People
When I was living and reporting in India, I saw things that hurt my eyes.
I saw them every day for years -- twisted bodies, rotting bodies, mutilated bodies dragging through the streets.
Faces were attached to the bodies but usually you did not look at them peering up from the sidewalk or the gutter.
That way, it was possible to keep walking past the broken people and their hands.


At an Atlanta Celebration: Hope, Resolve And Memories
In what is likely to be her last annual "State of the Dream" speech, Coretta Scott King, the widow of the slain civil rights leader, scanned the international horizon today and said she saw reasons for hope as well as reasons to redouble the efforts to build the "beloved community of Martin Luther King Jr.'s dream."
Late last year, Mrs.
King, the 67-year-old founder of the Martin Luther King Jr.
Center for Nonviolent Social Change here, announced that she was stepping down as chairwoman and chief executive of the nonprofit, educational organization.
Dexter Scott King, 33, the youngest son among the four King children, has succeeded succeed her.
Speaking to nearly 400 people gathered at Ebenezer Baptist Church on the 10th annual observance of the King holiday to mark what would have been Dr.
King's 66th birthday, Mrs.
King said she saw reasons for hope as crises abated in places like Rwanda, Haiti and parts of the Middle East, even though civil strife continued in places like Nigeria, Bosnia and Russia.
"The most positive development for the state of the dream worldwide since we last met has been the establishment of a great new democracy in South Africa," she said.
Domestically, she said, political leaders seemed focused on budget deficits when the nation had a serious "compassion deficit." Nevertheless, Mrs.
King said she was optimistic about the future as she left the leadership of the King center to write about her life after her husband's assassination and to pursue some "long overdue" musical projects that would put her conservatory training as a singer to use.
"I am leaving this ship of hope in good hands," she said of her son.
Since taking over last month, Mr.
King has been involved in a public dispute with the National Park Service over control of a main site in the King Historic District here and the right to construct a major memorial to his father.
Only oblique mention was made of that dispute today as some who have been critical of the King center in the dispute, like Representative John Lewis of Georgia and Mayor Bill Campbell of Atlanta, sat on the dais alongside King family members for the official observance of the holiday.
But a reminder of the dispute was just outside the door of the church and across the street.
There stood the half-demolished hulk of the city's Martin Luther King Jr.
Community Center, which city officials have deeded to the National Park Service over the objections of the King family for the construction of an $11 million visitors' center.
If completed, the center is likely to become the gateway to the historic district, setting the tone for an estimated three million visitors a year, and possibly eclipsing the King family's plans for a high-tech, interactive museum.
In a voice strikingly reminiscent of the cadence and phrasing of his father, Dexter King said that Dr.
King was part of American history and "belonged to everyone spiritually" but that his family was the guardian of his legacy until his dream was fulfilled.
"My father delivered political freedom and I would like to deliver economic freedom," Mr.
King said, sketching a goal that he said the King center was likely to pursue under his leadership.
"Had his life not been cut short, I believe economic empowerment would have been the next step and the King center should be the catalyst in that goal," he said.
"I'm calling home all those freedom fighters who marched with my father. Dexter Scott King is going to be there with you this time, and we will make it to the promise land."


Bringing Cops to Public Housing
Nearly 1 in 12 New Yorkers -- close to 700,000 in all -- live in housing that is owned and operated by The New York City Housing Authority.
New York's public housing is orderly and well maintained compared with the violent eyesores that blight cities like Chicago.
Still, as poverty has deepened, New York's public housing projects have grown poorer and more vulnerable to crime and social disintegration.
The Housing Authority chairman, Ruben Franco, now proposes to get police officers to move into public housing apartments in exchange for various inducements.
The basic idea is sound.
The city should move promptly to make it a reality.


Bosnia Truce Frayed by Fighting and Disputes
Intense fighting in the Bihac area of northwestern Bosnia and disagreements over easing the Serbian encirclement of Sarajevo suggested today that the logic of war would again prevail over a tenuous Bosnian cease-fire.
The fraying of the four-month cease-fire that took effect on Jan. 1 came as the United Nations and NATO sought to paper over yet another bitter row, this one over the plans of the United Nations commander in Bosnia to reveal NATO's flight plans to the Serbs.


It's a Rout As Ewing Makes It Look Easy
The Knicks played hard.
The Nets hardly offered a response.
So what was expected to be an intense game between old rivals on a holiday afternoon quickly became a rout yesterday.
The Nets trailed by 21 points at halftime and by 29 points with four minutes to play.
By that time, many of the people who attended the Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Day game at Madison Square Garden had seen enough.
So had Butch Beard, the Nets' coach.


North of the Border, Peso's Drop Is Hurting Stores
When Bernard L. Levin filled the racks with winter jackets at his Tienda Amigo store a block from the border he had no idea that he was a currency speculator.
But more than two-thirds of his customers come across the border bridge carrying pesos whose value has shriveled.
His jackets still hang undisturbed.
His saleswomen straighten and tidy counters untouched since their last sweep.
His markdown signs seldom stop, or even slow, anyone passing by outside.


Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc.(PIOS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Everybody Loses In Cuts to the Arts
To the Editor:  Representative John A. Boehner argues that it is irresponsible for our Government to finance the arts when the country suffers from crime and poverty (front page, Jan. 9).
The National Endowment for the Arts budget is $167.4 million; appropriating it wouldn't make a dent in the $30 billion crime bill.


Two Lost Battles
To the Editor
Anyone with the price of a plane ticket can come to the United States as a tourist and stay illegally, and anyone who wants to buy drugs can buy them, even though our Government spends billions on enforcement.
Why keep trying to win the unwinnable?
JESSE BRYANT New York, Jan. 10, 1995


A Year's Experience With Lemaire an Edge for Devils
Instead of the coaching vacancy that was too often the norm during previous off seasons, the Devils spent this off season knowing they would have last year's top coach in the league back at the helm as they embark on the most ambitious campaign in their history.
It would be an understatement to say that the continuity provided by Jacques Lemaire's return as coach is an advantage for the Devils, who fell an overtime goal short of reaching the Stanley Cup finals last season.


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


Democrats Seek to Curb Effect Of Bill on Federal Mandates
Facing the almost certain passage of a bill that would make it harder for Congress to impose new Federal requirements on state and local governments without paying the costs, Senate Democrats this week intend to offer amendments to limit the bill's reach.
Many Democrats say they agree with the goal of reducing the burdens of what are known as "unfunded mandates." But they also sympathize with environmental, labor and education groups that say the proposed legislation would go too far in tying the hands of Congress.
Republicans strongly support the bill as a way of curbing Federal power.


New York City's Undying Deficit: Slash It, and It Just Grows Back
Although he has already slashed $2 billion from city programs, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani still faces another budget gap in the next 18 months that will be as large, if not larger.
And those grim figures do not take into account the real possibility of large cuts in aid from Washington and from Albany, where Gov.
George E. Pataki is looking for ways to solve the state's own budget gaps and make good on his campaign promise of major cuts in taxes and spending.


Fears Raised On Possibility Of Fare Rise
The uncertainty of government subsidies for mass transit in New York could force a fare increase in the near future and is jeopardizing a plan to offer discounts to riders, transit officials said yesterday.
But they added that it was too soon to predict the timing and size of a fare increase.
"Until the state's executive budget comes out on Feb. 1, we won't have a clear idea of exactly how much trouble we're in," said Jay Walder, executive director and chief financial officer of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.


Studies Point to Flaws In Lineups of Suspects
IT was just turning dark one October night when a young woman hitchhiker was picked up on Pacific Highway South 10 miles outside of Seattle by a man with a beard and a three-piece suit.
Instead of driving her to Tacoma, the man turned into an isolated dirt road, raped her and left her by the side of the road.
Just 24 hours later, the rape victim, shown an array of photographs by detectives, identified Steven Titus as her rapist.
Largely on the basis of her testimony, Mr.
Titus was found guilty.


Southern Co.(SO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Slain Doctor's Elder Son: A Troubled Relationship
For two decades, a large Tudor-style house at 84 Greenway South in Forest Hills was home to Dr.
Teresita Valera Costello, an obstetrician, but many neighbors knew little of her.
They knew only a quiet hard-working widow who saw patients in an office in her basement, and often drove to her other office, in Manhattan.
Her sons, James and Craig Costello, were another matter.


Building A New Life, Step by Step
He works in a health-food shop now, doling out vitamins, herbal remedies and thoughtful advice.
But his own self-improvement interests Paul O. the most, and he marvels at the distance he has traveled.
Mr.
O. dropped out of college after two years, and shortly afterward had a nervous breakdown.
Other breakdowns followed, and he could not keep a job or create any permanence in his life.
By age 45, Mr.
O. had survived several suicide attempts and been hospitalized three times.


For Hospital by the Sea, Courtship and Alliance
LONG BEACH MEMORIAL HOSPITAL is not particularly well known beyond the borders of this oceanfront city.
Founded in 1922 as a first-aid station under a tent on a municipal beach, it has grown over the years but never outgrown the community it serves.
It is a big institution as institutions go in a city of 34,000 people, a 200-bed hospital with a 200-bed nursing home that is the largest employer in town.
Even its emphasis on the treatment of geriatric diseases is a reflection of the community around it, for the city has one of the highest concentrations of elderly people on Long Island.


Justice Dept. Knew of Case On Farrakhan
After initially playing down their role in the investigation of a daughter of Malcolm X, officials at the Justice Department's headquarters here said today that Federal prosecutors in Minneapolis repeatedly advised them of their progress in the case.
The extent of coordination between prosecutors in Minneapolis and officials at the Justice Department has emerged as an issue in the wake of criticism that the Government may have entrapped the daughter, Qubilah Bahiyah Shabazz, into a crime by relying on a witness with a record as an informer.


Elaine Greene, 74, Literary Agent, Dies
Elaine Greene, a leading literary agent in Britain, died on Jan. 10 at a hospice in London.
She was 74 and lived in London.
The cause was lung and brain cancer, said Jed Mattes, her affiliate in New York.


McCormick &amp; Co.  (MCCRK,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Nov 30


Go After Corporate Welfare
Republicans will have to cut over $1 trillion out of the Federal budget over seven years in order to pay for their promise to cut taxes and balance the budget.
If Social Security and defense are exempted, as many Republican leaders insist, that means the remaining programs must be cut by 30 to 40 percent.
This benighted pledge, if fulfilled, will wreck Government programs, good and bad.
The damage could be mitigated by requiring defense to absorb its fair share of the cuts, as this page has urged -- and by eliminating the huge, unjustified Federal subsidies and tax breaks doled out every year to wealthy companies and other special interests.


Woman Held In Drowning Of Two Sons Is Arraigned
Covering her eyes with her hands at the mention of her dead sons, Susan V. Smith appeared in court today, where she declined to enter a plea as a prosecutor announced that he would seek to have her executed for murder.
Mrs. Smith, 23, is charged with drowning her sons, Michael, 3, and Alex, 14 months.


In Performance; DANCE
Work on a Grand Scale In a Tiny Space  Colloquium Contemporary Dance Exchange Here
The lively South Village arts center known as Here has several spaces for performances and exhibitions.
The one in which a concert of dance and music was presented on Thursday night by the Colloquium Contemporary Dance Exchange proved inappropriate for the kinds of events the participants favored.


AT LEAST 597 ARE KILLED IN JAPANESE QUAKE; KOBE DEVASTATED AS 2,000 BUILDINGS BUCKLE
A powerful earthquake shook major cities in western Japan today, killing at least 597 people, starting dozens of fires and trapping hundreds of residents in the wreckage of collapsed buildings.
The national police and other authorities said 2,198 people were injured and 531 missing, and the casualty figures were expected to rise as the authorities combed the rubble.
In the initial confusion, the official toll of injured was given as 13,000 but that number was later retracted.


The Mark: Refuge in Risky Days
With political and economic troubles shaking markets not only in Latin America, but also in European countries like Spain, Italy and Sweden, investors in search of safety and stability have been fleeing to the German mark.
So intense has been the demand for the mark that an index calculated by Germany's central bank, pitting the mark against 18 other major currencies, soared last week to 198.6, its highest postwar level.
This bolstered the mark's reputation as rock-solid and underlined the confidence investors have in German monetary policies.


Despite the Long Odds, Chargers Are Hardly Ready to Be Counted Out
Now that San Diego is in the Super Bowl, the popular sentiment is that the Chargers are California dreaming if they think they have any shot at beating the 49ers on Jan. 29 at Joe Robbie Stadium.
So, for the next two weeks San Diego is going to have to convince most people that it is not just Buffalo with better weather.
That will be a tough sale because the Chargers will be facing a 49ers team that was built to win a Super Bowl this year.


Dallas's Once Steady Compass Is Aflutter
Where do the Dallas Cowboys go from here?
It is a question that was on the mind of every Cowboys player.
Some, like guard Nate Newton, aren't ready to say that it is the end of a dynasty.
"Don't say that; I should slap you," he joked.
"We're just beginning."


Quake Hit Japanese Area That Was Not Thought Highly Vulnerable
In this earthquake-prone nation, the area around Kobe in western Japan has not been known as a danger zone.
Indeed, some people are said to prefer to live in western Japan in part to escape earthquakes, which have occurred much more frequently recently in Tokyo, to the east, and in northern Japan.
"It was difficult to imagine that an earthquake of that scale would happen in that place," said Minoru Kasahara, associate professor in the Research Center for Earthquake Prediction at Hokkaido University.


St. Louis Symphony Names Hans Vonk as Next Director
The St.
Louis Symphony, which came to be regarded as one of the best American orchestras during the 25-year directorship of Leonard Slatkin, has appointed the Dutch conductor Hans Vonk as its next music director, the orchestra announced yesterday.
Mr.
Vonk is to succeed Mr.
Slatkin starting with the 1996-97 season, when Mr.
Slatkin is to take over the National Symphony Orchestra in Washington.
Mr.
Vonk's three-year contract requires him to conduct for 12 to 16 of the orchestra's 24 annual subscription weeks.
Mr.
Slatkin will be conductor emeritus through Mr.
Vonk's first term.


Women's Five at Connecticut Make a Perfect Season Better
The players' joyful faces and the noise from all around transformed a basketball game into a milepost.
And nobody wanted to leave.
The women from the University of Connecticut reached uncharted territory today by defeating the top-ranked Lady Vols of Tennessee.
Their victory came before a roaring full house of 8,241 fans in Gampel Pavilion, before a national television audience and at the expense of the team whose three national championships make it the standard for challengers in women's college basketball.


Some Haitians No Longer View G.I.'s as Saviors
When American troops first arrived here in September, the local population greeted them as liberators.
But for many in this isolated town of 25,000 at the tip of Haiti's southern peninsula, the Americans have turned out to be not saviors of the Haitian people, but rather allies of the paramilitary groups that oppressed Haitians for a generation.
Human rights groups say that while reports of collaboration between the United States military and such groups have been rare in Port-au-Prince, where most of the 6,000 American troops still in Haiti are deployed, such accusations are often heard from provincial centers and the countryside.


In Mexico's Peace Talks, a Slow if Hopeful Beginnin
Despite what mediators described as a productive first meeting between Mexico's new Government and peasant rebels, people familiar with the talks cautioned today that the two sides did not even begin to discuss the issues involved in a peace settlement.
In what were the first negotiations between the Government and the insurgents in more than 10 months, representatives of the Mexican Interior Ministry and the Zapatista National Liberation Army focused instead on steps to restore a formal truce.


Central &amp; South West Corp.(CSR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Will Lieberson, 79, Director, Is Dead
William H. Lieberson, a director and playwright, died on Sunday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 79 and lived in Manhattan.
He had had a heart ailment, said his son Dennis.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Celebrating Bartok With Words and Notes  Jerome Lowenthal, pianist Third Street Music School Settlement
This 50th-anniversary year of Bartok's death will see many commemorations, but it is doubtful that any event will give as clear and edifying a picture of the composer's world as Jerome Lowenthal's lecture and recital on Friday night.
In principle, one should be wary of the talking pianist, but Mr.
Lowenthal is worth hearing on two counts: what he says is strikingly intelligent, and his intelligence is reflected in his playing.


John Nuveen Co.(JNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Frontier Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  DETROIT TIGERS -- Named Skeeter Barnes player-coach at Toledo of the International League; Rick Adair pitching coach; and Lou Pinhey trainer.
National League


Is the Future of China in Deng's Iron Hand?
To the Editor:
Re "Deng's Daughter Opens a Long-Shut Door" (front page, Jan. 13): In anticipating the passing of the ailing Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping, some Beijing leaders summoned to see him recently were startled by the harshness of his final bits of advice.


Gander Mountain Inc.(GNDR,NNM) reports earnings for 13wks to Dec 31


It's a State of Delirium: UConn Men Go to 13-0
Kirk King's picturesque slam dunk to finish the first half did not win the game for Connecticut tonight, not with 20 more minutes of basketball to play.
But it certainly changed it.
King's recovery and slam of Rudy Johnson's blocked layup attempt helped Connecticut retain the lead and the momentum against a Georgetown team the Huskies had outplayed in the first half.
The significance of King's two-handed jam with three ticks left before intermission became immediately apparent in the second half.


Teco Energy Inc.(TE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.50
2.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.53
5.53
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.06
6.06
3.14
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.66
7.66
5.71
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.78
7.78
6.29
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.63
8.63
7.26
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.80
6.80
5.54
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CHRONICLE
Fifty years ago today, Raoul Wallenberg, the Swedish diplomat who rescued tens of thousands of Jews in Hungary from the Nazis, disappeared into the Soviet Union.
His fate is still unknown, but his name is burnished with reverence.
Tonight, when the Raoul Wallenberg Committee of the United States commemorates the anniversary at a dinner in the Pierre Hotel, ELIZABETH HANFORD DOLE will receive the Raoul Wallenberg Award.
The connection: She is the president of the American Red Cross and he was sent to Budapest in 1944 to rescue Jews under the auspices of the International Red Cross.


CHRONICLE
About six months ago, JOHN CARDINAL O'CONNOR said to BARRY TUCKER, a son of the tenor RICHARD TUCKER, " 'If I give you St. Patrick's, would you do a concert in the cathedral?' ", Mr.
Tucker recalled yesterday.
He is the president of the Richard Tucker Music Foundation, which awards prizes and study grants to young singers.
The cardinal, who sits on the board of the foundation, gave Mr.
Tucker a list of available dates and he picked Jan. 15, little suspecting that it was more than an ordinary Sunday.


Insurers Offer Advice to Consumers
Stung by flat sales and a declining public image, the life insurance industry is trying to repair the damage with a new booklet that it hopes will make buying life insurance a less daunting task.
The new booklet explains why insurance should be bought, describes the main features of various types of policies and tells customers what to expect from a sales agent.
It also suggests questions consumers might ask and concludes with a few tips for buyers.


Russian Artists Flocking To Berlin
For the second time this century, Russian artists are descending on Berlin.
In the years after the 1917 revolution, some 50,000 fleeing Russians came here, establishing Russian newspapers, galleries, cafes and theater companies.
Among them were creative artists ranging from Vladimir Horowitz to Wassily Kandinsky to Vladimir Nabokov.


San Francisco's Seifert Is All Coach and All Fan
If he had a 49er pompom, George Seifert would have waved it today.
He is home-grown, straight out of the Mission District and a former Kezar Stadium usher.
Forty years later, he is showing his city to a Super Bowl, and he can explain his emotions only in San Francisco terms.
Candlestick Park almost tipped over with glee on Sunday, and Seifert's provincial reaction was, "It was like the days of the Haight."


Market Place; A Problem Long Foreseen Suddenly Trips Cyrk's Stock
The law can make companies disclose impending problems.
But it can't make investors pay attention.
The story of Cyrk Inc., which bills itself as a designer and producer of custom-designed sports apparel and accessories, shows the dangers of ignoring heavy insider sales and of assuming that warnings in prospectuses are just boilerplate.
The company had disclosed that its major customer would be cutting back, but investors kept buying the stock.
The shares rose 80 percent last year only to give up the entire gain in just 10 trading days this year.


Partial Disclosure by the Speaker
True to his promise of a more open House of Representatives, Speaker Newt Gingrich has taken steps to expand television access to House proceedings.
He is less open about his finances.
Mr.
Gingrich recently pledged that his political action committee, Gopac, would disclose future donors.
But past Gopac donors who aided the Speaker on his climb to power remain anonymous.
A second fund-raising arm of Mr.
Gingrich's political apparatus, the Progress and Freedom Foundation, has also decided against full disclosure.
The two-year-old think tank, which underwrites Mr.
Gingrich's weekly call-in program on National Empowerment Television, has released data showing that it has collected nearly $1.7 million from 95 major donors.
The list includes companies whose interest in Mr.
Gingrich is not limited to his ideas.
According to Roll Call, the Capitol Hill newspaper, Direct Access Diagnostics, a subsidiary of Johnson &amp; Johnson, became a foundation supporter after Mr.
Gingrich sent a strongly worded letter to the Food and Drug Administration supporting the company's application for approval of its home AIDS test.


By Design; Time to Shine
Shine and transparency are two big trends for spring, and there's one material that combines both qualities: clear vinyl.
It showed up on runways on both sides of the Atlantic and is now coming into stores.
Bergdorf Goodman has clear vinyl tote bags with handles of white or black patent leather by Miu Miu ($280), narrow belts in red or blue clear vinyl by Herve Masson ($65), and ultra-skinny belts in red, yellow or clear vinyl ($45).


The 49ers Post Second Victory
Fox's broadcast of the Dallas-San Francisco game generated a 34.2 preliminary Nielsen overnight rating, up 9.2 percent from last year's 31.3 rating, when CBS aired the game.
NBC's telecast of the San Diego-Pittsburgh game drew a 27.9 rating, down 5 percent from the 29.3 for last year's Kansas City-Buffalo game.


Mexican Stocks Rise on Eve of Bond Sale
The Mexican stock market staged another modest rally today but most investors were more preoccupied with Tuesday's scheduled auction of $300 million in Government bonds, which will be widely interpreted as a gauge of confidence in Mexico's ability to recover from the country's economic crisis.
The Mexican market's price index rose 1.19 percent today, closing at 2,243.
Mexican stocks traded in New York did not fare as well.
Telefonos de Mexico, the leading Mexican depository receipt traded in the United States, was down 87.5 cents, closing at $33.75.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  Alan Greenspan is stepping into the limelight with greater frequency, pushing Congressional leaders to support the rescue plan for Mexico and volunteering solutions to the budget deficit.
While previous Federal Reserve chairmen have preferred to keep their policy roles behind the scenes, Mr.
Greenspan has been willing to take public stands on issues beyond the Fed's usual direct concerns.
That exposure carries risk for a central bank known for its status apart from the executive branch.  [ Page D1. ] The life insurance industry is trying to improve its image with a new booklet that explains the purchase of life insurance.  [ D2. ]


INSIDE
Budget Measure Unknowns
It is a good bet that an amendment calling for a balanced budget will pass the House of Representatives, but few can say what form the measure will take.
Page A16.
Spotlight on Greenspan
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, is taking a more visible role in issues normally beyond his purview.
Page D1.
Red Sprites and Blue Jets
Researchers have spotted bizarre lightning bolts, some red and others blue, that shoot upward from thunderheads.
Science Times, page C1.
Bishop Is Found Dead
Bishop David E. Johnson, who was retiring as leader of the largest Episcopal diocese in the nation, apparently committed suicide.
Page B7.


Bishop David E. Johnson, 61, Dies From Gunshot
Bishop David E. Johnson, the retiring leader of the largest Episcopal diocese in the country, was found dead in his apartment on Sunday of a single gunshot wound to the chest.
He "died by his own hand," said his elected successor, Bishop M. Thomas Shaw.


Tredegar Industries(TG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  QUAKE HITS CENTRAL JAPAN  A powerful predawn earthquake devastated central Japan, killing about 600 people and injuring thousands as it crumbled buildings and collapsed elevated freeways.
A1


From Chinese Traditions, Up-to-the-Minute Clothes
Fashion, like every other aspect of American culture, is constantly absorbing the flavors of ethnic groups.
In the 1970's, black designers like Stephen Burrows, Jon Haggins and Willi Smith made a splash with their use of bright colors and innovative cuts.
In recent years, Asian, Latino and Indian designers have added their particular esthetics to the fashion blend.
One of the most successful at translating Chinese traditions into Western clothes is Vivienne Tam, who was born in Canton and educated in Hong Kong.
She takes a classic Chinese multicolored peony pattern and prints it in black and white on pre-pleated polyester georgette.
She puts typically Chinese embroidered butterflies and flowers on netting or nylon.
And she decorates T-shirts with sequined Pop Art images of Mao Zedong wearing pigtails or a clerical collar, or being stung on the nose by a bee.


A Tale of 2 Brothers and 2 Divergent Paths
William M. Bulger began his 17th year as President of the Massachusetts State Senate this month, a position he has held longer than anyone in the history of the Commonwealth.
Meanwhile, his big brother, James (Whitey) Bulger, a convicted bank robber and reputed mobster, went on the lam.
A Federal grand jury indicted Whitey Bulger, 65, last week on charges of racketeering and extortion.
Senator Bulger (pronounced BULGE-are), who is five years younger than Whitey and is widely known as Billy, was maintaining public silence, even as television reporters chased after him at the Statehouse, demanding to know whether he would urge his brother to turn himself in.


Observer; Those Vital Paupers
There is probably no solution to the welfare problem.
It is the inescapable product of an economic system with which the powers that be are quite content.
This is why politicians and social planners are limited to tinkering with the going welfare system.
Attacking the problem at its root would mean admitting it is rooted in the structure of American capitalism.


Bomb Threats To a Church By a Protester Are Charged
A longtime abortion-rights advocate in Rockland County was arrested over the weekend and charged with threatening to blow up a Roman Catholic church and school in Suffern, N.Y., local authorities said yesterday.
Alice Hand, 54, of Suffern, was charged with aggravated harassment, a misdemeanor, after the police said she made at least three threatening telephone calls to the Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church in Suffern.


Edward Gargan, 72, Professor of History
Edward T. Gargan, a scholar of modern French intellectual and social history and emeritus professor of French history at the University of Wisconsin, died on Tuesday at his home in Madison.
He was 72.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Qualcomm Inc.(QCOM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Police Investigating Slain Doctor's Son
Since Dr.
Teresita Valera Costello's body was found, the police have said they do not have a suspect in the killing.
But they add that they are looking into the background of her older son, James Costello, 25.
He and his mother had disputes over money, one law-enforcement official said, and she had recently threatened to throw him out of the house.
"She was completely scared of him," the officials said.
"She was going to kick him out."
Article, page B3.


Couple Are Struck and Killed by L.I. Train
A Long Island Rail Road train struck and killed a 26-year-old man and a 20-year-old woman early this morning as they crossed the railroad tracks at an intersection just east of the Farmingdale station, the police said.
Investigators said that the couple, who had just left a nearby 7-Eleven convenience store, ignored flashing signals, walked around a crossing-guard rail and stepped onto the tracks just after an a eastbound train passed through the intersection at 2:30 A.M.
The couple apparently did not see an oncoming westbound train that struck and killed them, said Detective Robert Goetchlius of the Nassau County Police Department.


The Cold War In Brighton Beach; Police and Russian Emigres Share an Uneasy Relationship
Of numerous murders in recent years linked to Russian organized crime in Brighton Beach, not one has been solved.
That, police investigators say, is because no one has come forward with any information, despite the fact that dozens of people were present at the scenes of some of the killings.
The unsolved murders -- the police say as many as 15 in the last 10 years -- are perhaps the most flagrant consequence of the uneasy relationship between the police and Russian immigrants in Brighton Beach.
It is a wariness bound up in competing stereotypes and conflicting interests, and it represents yet the latest twist on a tension intrinsic to the dynamic between the police and many new immigrant groups in New York City.


What's New About a Spider's Web? It Takes a Computer to Know.
USING a computer model to study the behavior of spider webs, researchers say they have discovered the solution to what one of them described as a crucial problem for the spider -- how to stop a relatively massive insect moving at a fast speed.
If the web were too stiff, said Lorraine H. Lin, a structural engineer and an author of a new study on spider web dynamics, "the insect would bounce back out like hitting a trampoline," adding, "If there was too much give, the threads would break."


Managers and Coaches May Feel Cost of Strike
On a day when the baseball players union took what the clubs view as a fantasy step in their ongoing labor dispute by filing 123 players for salary arbitration, a union official also raised a possibility yesterday that would provide all-too-real consequences for major league managers, coaches and trainers.
Gene Orza, the Players Association's associate general counsel, said union officials will soon talk to managers, coaches and trainers about their intentions of working with the replacement teams major league clubs are forming.


Sterling Electronics (SEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Count-Down With Rudy Giuliani
To the strains of "New York, New York," Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani walked onto the set of David Letterman's "Late Show" last night and read the "Top 10 Announcements That Will Make New Yorkers Go Nuts."
The Mayor gave a spirited reading, pumping his fist into the air by the time he got to No. 1.


A Manager Returns
PHIL NIEKRO, the former knuckleball pitcher who won more than 300 games in the major leagues, enjoyed managing the Colorado Silver Bullets, the women's professional baseball team, so much in their debut season that he's going to do it again.
"It was a magical year for me," Niekro said yesterday after signing for a second year.
"Give them the time all the men have had in this country to play, and you're going to find a lot of good baseball players."


Soldiers on Both Sides Talk of an Anarchic War
As Russian troops pound their way toward Chechnya's presidential palace, the charred symbol of the region's secession, Chechen militants in this village some eight miles southwest of the capital are organizing against Russian occupation.
They intend to harass Moscow's troops and block their columns.
With electricity cut weeks ago when the fighting began, the deep black night is broken only by the steady, reverberating crump-whump-whump of heavy artillery explosions from the capital, Grozny.
About 100 young men, ages 14 to 20, patrol the streets of this village of about 10,000 people in six, two-hour shifts from 6 P.M. to 6 A.M.


UBS Unit Buys More Saatchi Shares
Shares of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company P.L.C. surged yesterday in trading in London and New York after a unit of UBS U.K.
Holdings significantly increased its holdings and became the agency company's largest single shareholder.
A unit of UBS's Union Bank of Switzerland Asset Management operation called PDFM Ltd. raised its stake in Saatchi &amp; Saatchi to 13.6 percent, or almost 30 million shares, from an undisclosed level last week that analysts estimated at less than 5 percent.
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi stock, battered last week by the defections of clients and top executives, rose 9 percent in trading on the London Stock Exchange.
In New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday, the stock's American depository receipts, which equal three shares, closed up 10.3 percent, or 50 cents, to $5.375.
The stock price had fallen after Saatchi &amp; Saatchi's board voted Dec. 16 to oust Maurice Saatchi as chairman and clients like Mirror Group Newspapers left.


Most Markets Stayed Open
The Government securities market and most banks were closed yesterday in observance of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday.
But other financial markets and the commodities markets were open.
The Treasury's regular weekly auction of bills was postponed until today.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Early Florentine Music To Illuminate a Lecture  Waverly Consort Metropolitan Museum of Art
No one should have felt shortchanged by the Waverly Consort's hourlong program "Music in Florence, Circa 1350-1450," on Saturday evening.
Though few and brief, the musical selections, squeezed into a slide lecture by John Nadas of the University of North Carolina, were of high quality, and the performances were mostly worthy of them.


Disney Video Deal Held Near
The Walt Disney Company and its three partners -- Ameritech, SBC Communications and BellSouth -- are close to investing a total of $500 million into a program to help provide video programming to their telephone customers, according to a person familiar with the negotiations.
The $500 million investment will be made over the next five years.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MARTIN MARIETTA MATERIALS INC., Raleigh, N.C., a unit of Martin Marietta Corp., said it would sell its concrete and gravel operations as part of a plan to reorganize the businesses it recently acquired from Dravo Corp., Pittsburgh.
SIEMENS A.G., Munich, Germany, said it had won a contract to build a $194 million thermal waste recycling plant for Neubrandenburg in eastern Germany.


CHRONICLE
About six months ago, JOHN CARDINAL O'CONNOR said to BARRY TUCKER, a son of the tenor RICHARD TUCKER, " 'If I give you St. Patrick's, would you do a concert in the cathedral?' ", Mr.
Tucker recalled yesterday.
He is the president of the Richard Tucker Music Foundation, which awards prizes and study grants to young singers.
The cardinal, who sits on the board of the foundation, gave Mr.
Tucker a list of available dates and he picked Jan. 15, little suspecting that it was more than an ordinary Sunday.


Making a Unified Whole With Music and Design
Complexions began life last year as a company that seemed dedicated to the idea of unifying dance, music and design into an inseparable whole whose parts, ideally, were created by dancers.
The dance component, created by Dwight Rhoden, had an appealing, nubbly roughness and brash enthusiasm.
The performers were first-rate, headed by Desmond Richardson, one of the most gifted dancers of his generation and, like Mr.
Rhoden, then a member of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.
Complexions returned to the New York stage on Friday night in excerpts from new dances to be performed in July.
The program, presented at the Clark Studio Theater in the Rose Building at Lincoln Center, was a dispiriting affair.
Mr.
Rhoden knows what he is after, which is not an evening of concert dance as it is currently known but a sort of fashion parade of hot and gorgeous bodies, apparently refugees from the club scene.
Dressed in bikinis and gauze veils for the most part, they seem to move not to musical scores but through air filled with music and sensual poetry past odd, evocative bits of sculpture and props.
He knows how to pull it all off.


Frito-Lay Simplifies Media Planning
Frito-Lay Inc. said yesterday that it would consolidate media planning for all brands at a special media-only unit of DDB Needham Worldwide in Dallas called Team Frito-Lay.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade publications estimated them at $70 million to $80 million.
Lynn Markley, a spokeswoman for Frito-Lay in Plano, Tex., said that DDB Needham was awarded the assignment after a two-month review that also included BBDO New York.
The media planning duties were previously divided between DDB Needham's Chicago office, which handles brands like Rold Gold pretzels and Frito corn chips, and BBDO New York, which handles brands like Doritos tortilla chips and Lay's potato chips.
The national media buying duties remain at True North Media in New York.


The Dreams That Literary Works Are Made Of
MY EDUCATION A Book of Dreams  By William S. Burroughs  193 pages. Viking. $21.95.
A WORLD OF MY OWN A Dream Diary  By Graham Greene  116 pages. Viking. $21.95.
"I read in a newspaper that I had been appointed Archbishop of Westminster," Graham Greene writes in his dream diary.
It was a laughable idea, he goes on, but each member of his family had been given two tickets for the ceremony and he felt he ought to go through with it, though secrets from his past -- a mistress and possible tax evasion -- threatened to get in the way.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
'Figaro' With Newcomers And a Countess's Homecoming  'Nozze di Figaro' Metropolitan Opera
The Metropolitan Opera's revival of Mozart's "Nozze di Figaro" in the fall was remarkable not only for the New York debut of the Welsh bass-baritone Bryn Terfel but also for the quality and unity of most of the cast around him.
So some anticlimax was inevitable when the cast was overhauled on Thursday evening.


Hutchinson Technology Inc.(HTCH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Corrections
An article on Friday about the filming of the movie "City Hall" in New York City misstated the position of Kenneth Lipper.
He is a co-producer of the film, not the writer of the screenplay.
It was written by Bo Goldman.


Corrections
An article yesterday about an informant who implicated Qubilah Shabazz, a daughter of Malcolm X, in a plot against Louis Farrakhan, rendered his surname incorrectly at one point.
He is Michael Fitzpatrick, not Fitzgerald.


Panthers Are Patient
Defenseman ED JOVANOVSKI, whom the Florida Panthers selected as the No. 1 overall pick in the National Hockey League draft last June, will be left in juniors the entire season.
"It'll be better for him with the tight schedule, the lack of practice time and the limited playing time he would have," Panthers General Manager BRYAN MURRAY said.


Dow Up 23.88 Points, to 3,932.34, in Heavy Trading
The stock market rose for a second day in heavy trading yesterday, hitting its highest level in more than two months.
Stock traders persisted in their hope that the Federal Reserve would moderate or even forgo an expected increase in interest rates, which would mean a boon to stocks.
Indeed, a respected market strategist, Michael Metz of Oppenheimer &amp; Company, doubled his model stock allocation to 40 percent from 20 percent yesterday, halving his cash allocation to 20 percent.


Rider, Laettner Lift Minnesota Over Houston
Timberwolves 94, Rockets 75
Isaiah Rider scored 24 points and host Minnesota held Houston to 28 second-half points as it scored a surprising 94-75 victory last night.


Rebuffed by Alvarez, Miami Talks to Lubick
Wisconsin Coach BARRY ALVAREZ turned down a chance to be interviewed by the University of Miami for its coaching post, and Colorado State's SONNY LUBICK remained a front-runner for the job yesterday.
The Hurricanes' athletic director, PAUL DEE, received permission from the Wisconsin athletic director, PAT RICHTER, to talk with Alvarez, who ended the courtship before it began.


Flu Casts Fevered Misery Across New York Region
Although her cubicle at the emergency room at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center was uncomfortably warm, Martha Rivera of Manhattan wrapped herself in a sweater, scarf and thick winter coat, huddling fruitlessly against a chill that came from deep within.
"Oh, my God," she said. "I have never felt so terrible,"


Making E Pluribus Unum Personal
Musicians use little lies to tell the truth.
Robert Shaw's choral rehearsals last week, ending with Sunday's concert of Brahms and Hindemith at Carnegie Hall, was full of them.
It is the fifth year that Mr.
Shaw has taken some 200 relative strangers, used teaching methods developed over a lifetime, and created splendid performances with the Orchestra of St.
Luke's.
All in just five days.
His method is calculated distortion: note values shorter than the ones composers wrote, syllables that are not in the score added to consonants, singing with numbers, not words, or words without pitches, asking singers to face one another as they rehearse or march in time rather than massing themselves as soprano, alto, tenor and bass.
Mr.
Shaw has been conducting choruses all his life and most of his singers here have, or aspire to, similar jobs.
At Carnegie Hall's workshop series, leaders of church choirs and glee clubs from Sumter, S.C., to Dublin, Ohio, shop for new and better techniques to take home with them.


Lately, a Much More Visible Fed Chief
When the Clinton Administration announced its latest package of assistance to Mexico on Thursday, two men emerged from the back rooms where the deal was being shaped to explain the plan to the White House press corps.
One was the new Treasury Secretary, Robert E. Rubin.
The other, however, has no formal connection to the Administration: Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve.
Officials at the notoriously reticent Federal Reserve say they have seldom seen anything like it.
Not only did Mr.
Greenspan join President Clinton at the White House to persuade Congressional leaders to accept the plan, he also went on to plead to a large gathering of senators and representatives to pass the necessary legislation quickly.


Lubick Is Staying Put
Colorado State Coach SONNY LUBICK withdrew his name from consideration yesterday for the University of Miami job.
Lubick called a news conference in Fort Collins, Colo., to announce his decision.
The 57-year-old coach has three years remaining on his current contract and is expected to sign a four-year extension.


The First Sign of What's to Come
An hour or so after the major league executive council approved a plan for use of replacement players last Friday, Bud Selig was asked why the owners were keeping details of the plan secret.
Selig, who is council chairman and acting commissioner, said: "I don't know that there is a secret. All the details have to be worked out."


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The Japanese earthquake failed to realize Wall Street's worst fears.
A decade ago, some analysts had speculated that a devastating earthquake would cause Japanese insurers and institutional investors to pull their money home to finance rebuilding.
While the markets were calm yesterday, it is possible that the quake will roil some world markets in the weeks ahead.  [ Page D1. ]


Internet Users Consider Spamming a Hostile Act
To the Editor:
Most of us who read and administer the newsgroups at Internet sites do not equate "spamming" with "excessive crossposting," as your Jan. 11 article on E-mail does.
A crossposted article is a single electronic file that can be viewed from any of the several newsgroups (discussion areas) to which it has been sent.


PRO FOOTBALL: Look Who's Talking; 49ers' Taylor, Mostly Silent, Reveals His Inner Soul
It has taken John Taylor nine seasons in the National Football League to talk.
Nine seasons of building something special as a San Francisco 49ers receiver on the field.
Nine seasons of building something unique within.
Nine seasons of building rock-solid maturity.


Max Schnapp, 90, Labor Activist And an Animal Rights Advocate
Max Schnapp, a labor activist turned advocate of pets and their owners, died on Jan. 10 at Interfaith Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 90 and lived in Brighton Beach.
He had a lengthy illness, his family said.


WNYC Shouldn't Go to a Commercial Buyer
To the Editor:
I served as director (1982-88) and chairman (1984-88) of the WNYC Foundation.
Before I became chairman, New York City was suffering a severe financial crisis.
Some of Mayor Edward I. Koch's advisers urged him to sell the television station, saying the city could not support it.


Nationsbank Corp.(NB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Messier Says He's Ready for Anything
Three more years!
Three more years!
That's what Mark Messier wants, for about $6 million annually, from a reluctant Rangers management, whose inclination has been to retain the team captain for two years.
"A three-year deal is not too unfair," said Messier, who turns 34 years old Wednesday.
"Hopefully, I can celebrate my birthday with a new contract."


Where the Professionals Shop
WHEN professional chefs shop for kitchen equipment, they go about the task with the single-mindedness of a baseball slugger choosing his bat.
"These guys are very well versed and have been around kitchenware for a long time," said Chip Fisher, president of Lamalle Kitchenware, a store in Manhattan that caters to food professionals.


Leader Financial Corp.(LFCT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Comfort in Winter: A Hearty Ragout
WITH the holidays past and weeks of frigid weather presumably ahead, I need comforting food, like aromatic soups and stews.
This menu begins with an economical cream of carrot soup.
A little potato is added so that when this version of the old classic is emulsified in a food processor or with a hand blender, it achieves an especially creamy texture.
The vegetables are not sauteed first in butter or oil, as they often are, so it's easy to justify adding a little butter at the end to enhance the flavor.


INSIDE
Credit Warning for New York
Mayor Giuliani's move to borrow to close a budget gap prompted a bond-rating agency to put the city's credit rating under watch.
Page B1.
Cease-Fire Possible
Russia and a secessionist region agreed on the timing for a cease-fire, but as the fighting continued, few people expect it to happen.
Page A10.
Merrill Lynch Blamed
The former treasurer of Orange County, Calif., blamed Merrill Lynch for an investment strategy that led to a $2 billion loss.
Page D1.
U.S.
Industry's Strong Pace
High production levels, and their inflationary impact, revived forecasts of an interest-rate rise.
Page D1.


Tong Leader In Chinatown Is Convicted
In what Federal prosecutors called a major blow against Chinese organized crime in the United States, the powerful former president of a Chinatown fraternal and business organization was convicted yesterday of murder, extortion and racketeering.
Prosecutors in Brooklyn said that the guilty verdict against Clifford Wong, a businessman who long headed the Tung On association, was the first time that the leader of such an organization -- or tong -- had been convicted of such crimes in the United States.


Mexican Parties Sign Accord On Shift to Full Democracy
The Mexican Government and the ruling political party agreed today with the main opposition parties to negotiate changes to fully democratize the country's political system and defuse bitter conflicts over recent elections in two southern states.
In a pact signed here this evening, President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon and leaders of the country's four largest parties pledged to conclude "definitive" reforms of federal and state election laws and to respect the outcome of voting conducted under fair conditions.


Banc One Corp.(ONE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Daniel Robbins, 62; Was Art Historian And a Modernist
Daniel Robbins, an art historian who specialized in 20th-century art and helped encourage the study of it while director of the Museum of Art at the Rhode Island School of Design and briefly of the Fogg Art Museum at Harvard University, died on Saturday at the Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center in Lebanon, N.H.
He was 62 and lived in Troy, N.Y., and Braintree, Vt..
The cause was Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia, a cancer of the lymphatic system, said wife, Eugenia Scandrett Robbins.


Charles B. McCoy, 85, Executive And Ex-Chairman of Du Pont
Charles B. McCoy, who as chairman and president of E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company helped turn a family-run company into a modern corporation, died on Monday at Stonegates, a retirement home in Greenville, Del.
He was 85.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, from which he had suffered since 1989, said his son Robert, of Wilmington, Del.


Corrections
A television review on Monday about the new series "Star Trek: Voyager" referred incorrectly to the show's history since the death of its creator, Gene Roddenberry, in 1991.
The latest version is the second "Star Trek" series since then.
"Star Trek: Deep Space 9," in 1993, was the first.


A Grand Party as Gov. Bush Is Sworn In
George Walker Bush was sworn in as Texas's 46th Governor today, vowing to "use every resource at my disposal to make the Federal Government in Washington heed this simple truth: Texans can run Texas."
The 48-year-old Mr.
Bush, only the state's second Republican Governor since Reconstruction, strode to the podium under raised swords and the six flags of Texas with his wife, Laura, followed by his twin teen-age daughters, Jenna and Barbara.
Later they celebrated with a parade, three inaugural balls, a barbecue and a Mexican-style luncheon on the State Capitol grounds for roughly 9,000 of his closest friends.


The 'Contract' Gets New Ally On the Right
Muffling for the time being the Christian Coalition's rallying cries on school prayer, abortion and homosexuality, the group's leader said today that the coalition would mount its most ambitious lobbying drive ever for passage of the House Republicans' legislative agenda.
In an address at the Detroit Economic Club, Ralph Reed, the group's executive director, said religious conservatives deserved credit for the Republican successes at the polls last November.
And he made it clear that his group expected to be a central player in pressing for the Republicans' "Contract With America."


A New Chapter in a 31-Year-Old Case
James L. Harris, who escaped from a chain gang in Alabama 31 years ago, fled to Long Island and built a new life for himself after Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller allowed him to stay, is in trouble with the law again.
On Dec. 24, Mr.
Harris learned that New York State's highest court had cleared the way for his extradition to Alabama.
On Dec. 31, his legal troubles compounded when he was charged with possession of crack, a $10 drug sale and resisting arrest.


After 130 Years, A. &amp; S. Name Will Fade Into Retailing History
In 130 years, it grew from a 25-by-90-foot dry-goods shop in downtown Brooklyn to a chain of 18 department stores across the New York metropolitan region.
But on April 30, the name Abraham &amp; Straus will pass into shopping history.
The parent company, Federated Department Stores Inc., will convert most of the stores into one of its better known national chains, Macy's, Stern's or Bloomingdale's.
The end of the A. &amp; S. nameplate will leave the most heartbreak on Fulton Street in downtown Brooklyn, where the store flourished from the opening of the Brooklyn Bridge in 1883, becoming the borough's best-known emporium.


Accounts
*
BMW A.G., Munich, Germany, to W/USA Advertising, Chicago, to handle its account in 11 Central American and South American countries, including Argentina, Chile and Peru, previously handled by various local agencies on a project basis.
W/USA will work with its sibling shop, W/ Brazil, Sao Paulo, which already handles BMW's account in that country.
Billings have not been determined.


In Michigan, Uncertainty and Unhappiness Over New Method to Finance the Schools
For two years, the symbol of the need to change the state's method of financing public education was the rural northern Michigan school district of Kalkaska, which ran out of money in March 1993 and closed until the fall term.
Voters in the district had repeatedly refused to raise their property taxes, which financed education.
So it might seem that Doyle Disbrow, the Kalkaska superintendent of schools, would be an enthusiastic backer of Michigan's new education financing plan, which guarantees the state's 570 school districts at least $4,200 a year for each pupil.


Some Banks Show Slump In Earnings
Several of the nation's biggest banks, dragged down by trading losses and lower income from interest, reported fourth-quarter earnings yesterday that were below expectations.
"It was not a pretty quarter," said Thomas K. Brown, a bank stock analyst with Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
"Revenues were weak and expenses ballooned up."


Transit Officials Try to Prevent Withholding of Police Funds
Transit officials are seeking a court ruling and outside arbitration to stop Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani from forcing a merger of the transit police and the city police by withholding city financing for the transit force.
The Mayor has threatened to withhold about $320 million a year from the force starting on Tuesday.
But transit officials said yesterday that the city actually stopped its payments six weeks ago, an assertion the city's budget director denied.


Pentagon and Budget Office Duel Over Unexpected Expenses
In a dispute that President Clinton may have to settle personally, the Pentagon and the White House budget office are clashing over how to pay for unanticipated military operations in places like Rwanda, Haiti and Kuwait.
Defense Secretary William J. Perry and Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, are preparing a memorandum to Mr.
Clinton seeking his support in a disagreement with Alice M. Rivlin, the White House budget director.


Public Service Enterprise Group Inc.(PEG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Debris Hinders Firefighters in Chelsea Blaze


Developments in Congress
HOUSE: With overwhelming bipartisan cooperation, lawmakers cleared the first legislation of the Republican-controlled 104th Congress -- a bill that would end Congress's exemptions from discrimination and workplace laws and from employees' lawsuits.
The 390-to-0 vote in the House to make Congress more accountable gave the Republican majority its first, and probably its easiest, down payment on its "Contract With America." Speaker Newt Gingrich said the legislation had passed Congress and reached the President faster than any measure since 1933.
President Clinton is expected to sign the bill into law.


Travelers Group (TRV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Whatever the Repair Bill, Insurance Companies Spread the Cost Around
Japanese insurance companies have learned to protect themselves against massive losses from earthquakes and will bear very little of the burden of rebuilding the area devastated by the earthquake near Kobe.
Instead, Japanese homeowners and companies have been left to bear the brunt of property damages from the earthquake themselves, or to rely on help from the Government.


Tharp Introduces an All-American Workshop
Twyla Tharp's new program, "Red, White and Blues New Works," looks like Show-and-Tell.
It is definitely not Let's Pretend.
The real Tharp, brainy and entertaining, is all there in the lecture-demonstration format with which she and seven excellent dancers opened a two-week run on Monday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music (30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene).
The evening is studded with, but not dominated by, Ms.
Tharp's didactic patter about her choreographic methods, and the new works, some polished and some still raw studies, feature performers in practice clothes on a bare stage with bright lighting.


Intel Earnings Decline 37% On Charge for Pentium Flaw
The Intel Corporation said today that it was taking a one-time pretax charge of $475 million to cover the cost of replacing defective Pentium computer chips, a move that resulted in a 37 percent drop in the company's fourth-quarter earnings.
Intel reported its earnings after the stock market closed today.
Earlier, shares of Intel fell $1.125, to $67, in Nasdaq trading.


13 Years After Slaying of Surgeon, His Widow Heals
THE murderous confrontation could not have taken more than a minute or two.
Dr.
John Wood, an energetic and much admired surgeon, was on his dinner break at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center when three men tried to rob him on 168th Street.
A single shot was fired.
The doctor fell wounded, and 90 minutes later he died in the emergency room of the hospital where he was completing his residency.
More than 13 years have elapsed since that early November day in 1981, but still the consequences and emotions loosed by the stupid fury have not yet fully played themselves out.
A suspect arrested for the crime just six months ago sits in jail awaiting trial and judgment while Diana Wood, the surgeon's widow, searches for closure and grieves differently from before.


Through Kobe's Rubble, An Economic Rainbow
The earthquake that ripped through western Japan today has paralyzed one of the nation's commercial hubs, leaving rubble and smoke and panic.
It caused colossal damage to Japan's roads, railways and communications and knocked out of commission a port that accounts for 12 percent of the nation's exports.
The quake was the worst in an urban area of Japan in 70 years, ever since the great Tokyo earthquake of 1923, and it struck in a crucial economic zone that includes the business center of Osaka, Japan's third largest city, as well as Kobe, the sixth largest.


When Mashed Potatoe Share Top Billing
GARLIC mashed potatoes, when mixed with yogurt and light sour cream, are low in fat, and delicious by any standards.
While the potatoes are not supposed to be the centerpiece of this meal, they are on equal footing with a simple dish of scallops, zucchini and red peppers.
Scallops With Pepper and Zucchini
10 ounces scallops  1/2 cup dry vermouth  8 ounces red pepper or 7 ounces chopped, ready-cut pepper (1 2/3 cups)  1 teaspoon olive oil  16 ounces whole zucchini or 14 ounces chopped, ready-cut zucchini (2 2/3 to 3 cups)  Fresh or frozen ginger to yield 1 1/2 tablespoons coarsely grated
1/2 bunch fresh chives to yield 2 tablespoons chopped  1/8 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper.
1. Wash scallops and cook in vermouth for 1 minute. Set aside.
2. Wash, trim, seed and chop whole red pepper.
3.
Heat a nonstick pan until it is very hot, then reduce heat to medium high and add oil.
Saute red pepper until it begins to soften.
4.
Wash, dry and coarsely chop whole zucchini.
Add to red pepper and continue cooking until vegetables are soft.
5. Grate ginger and add while vegetables cook.
6. Wash, dry and chop chives.
7.
When vegetables are cooked, add the chives and drained scallops.
Season with salt and pepper.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 195 calories, 4 grams fat, 45 milligrams cholesterol, 370 milligrams sodium, 25 grams protein, 15 grams carbohydrate.
Garlic Mashed Potatoes
1 pound tiny new potatoes  3 cloves garlic  4 tablespoons nonfat yogurt  3 tablespoons light sour cream  1/8 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper to taste.
1.
Scrub potatoes but do not peel.
Peel garlic.
Place potatoes and garlic in pot with enough water to cover, then cook in a covered pot until potatoes are tender.
2.
Drain and mash potatoes and garlic.
Stir in yogurt, sour cream, salt and pepper, and serve.
Yield : 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 270 calories, 2 grams fat, 8 milligrams cholesterol, 185 milligrams sodium, 7 grams protein, 60 grams carbohydrate.
Game Plan
Prepare potatoes through Step 1.  Prepare scallops through Step 6.
Finish potatoes.  Finish scallops.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Compositional Tour Of Bach, Liszt and Scriabin  Lilya Silberstein, pianist 92d Street Y
Lilya Silberstein won the Ferrucio Busoni International Piano Competition in 1987 and has been making records for Deutsche Grammophon since 1988, but she is not as well known in the United States as she deserves to be.
Her recital on Saturday evening showed her to be an insightful interpreter with a powerful technique and a sense of what makes an interesting program.


Koss Wins Owens Trophy
JOHANN OLAV KOSS of Norway, who won three gold medals and set three world records in speed skating at the 1994 Winter Olympics, has been selected as the winner of the Jesse Owens International Trophy Award yesterday.
In balloting by a worldwide panel of electors, Koss received 141 points.
The speed skater BONNIE BLAIR of the United States finished second with 86 points and the distance runner NOUREDDINE MORCELI of Algeria was third with 71.


Reissues Of 2 Novels By O'Hara
APPOINTMENT IN SAMARRA By John O'Hara 269 pages. Modern Library. $13.50
We readers are an untrustworthy lot: writers do everything they can to enthrall us, but as soon as their backs are turned there we are, slipping in and out of their books, "without being singed, pinched, bumped or tickled by any line or chapter." Those rueful, accusatory words are John O'Hara's, and in four decades of writing fiction (his first book was published in 1934, his last in 1974 four years after he died), he shocked, courted and overwhelmed his readers by any and every means at hand.
He is the omniscient narrator and the dispassionate chronicler; he will unleash a volley of newspaper headlines or brute facts about coal mining in Pennsylvania or shopping in New York; he will disappear into a long, intimate soliloquy, or into pages of dialogue, fine-tuned to each character's temper and needs.


What's the Rush on Mandates?
Environmentalists and others whose interests are served by Federal regulation have a name for the three main elements of what promises to be a sustained Republican effort to deregulate American society: the "Unholy Trinity." The term connotes both respect and fear.
There is merit in all three ideas.
Yet critics fear that, taken together, they will cripple a quarter-century of Federal efforts to protect everything from the environment to worker safety.
The ideas grew out of Newt Gingrich's "Contract With America." One would require compensation when property values are diminished by Federal regulation.
A second would subject regulations to independent cost-benefit analysis, otherwise known as "risk assessment," that could make it more difficult for Federal agencies to carry out rules.
The third would make it harder for Congress to approve costly new "unfunded mandates" -- obligations imposed on state and local governments without the Federal dollars to pay for them.


Noe Wants to Save New York Racing From Itself
The most feared man in horse racing sat behind a huge wooden desk at Aqueduct race track wearing a sweater vest, drinking water from a bottle and frequently casting an admiring glance at the framed picture of his grandson, Justin, and said: "There is no hit list."
He is Kenny Noe Jr., who was summoned from Florida in October to rescue New York racing from financial chaos, the loss of fans and betting money and general corporate flabbiness.


A Big Bet by Frito-Lay On the Low-Fat Future
The fat-loving world of snack foods has been growing impressively in recent years, while remaining indifferent to the healthfulness of its products.
But now Frito-Lay, the 800-pound gorilla of snack foods, is making a big bet that America's low-fat obsession will become a third of its multibillion-dollar business.
Frito-Lay said yesterday that it would invest $225 million in revving up the introductions of reduced-fat products and the operations to manufacture them, including new factories in California, Georgia and Utah, and 15 new production lines in existing plants.


UConn Women Voted No. 1
A day after the University of Connecticut's second-ranked women's basketball team beat top-ranked Tennessee, the undefeated UConn women got further evidence that their 77-66 dream victory had really been for real.
The writers and broadcasters who participate in the Associated Press poll yesterday joined the coaches surveyed Monday night by CNN and USA Today in placing UConn atop the college rankings.
As in the coaches poll, the two teams swapped positions in the A.P. poll, with UConn drawing all 31 first-place votes.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Hilton Hotels Corp.(HLT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Merrill Tied to Orange County Loss
The man who managed a $20 billion portfolio for Orange County, Calif., before his risky investment strategy drove the county into bankruptcy, defended himself today as a financial innocent.
He blamed his broker, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, for leading him astray.
"I was an inexperienced investor," declared Robert L. Citron, who served more than two decades as treasurer of Orange County and the man in charge of its investments.
It was Mr.
Citron's first public appearance since he resigned that post last month.


MORE ON THE QUAKE
Crisis of Confidence
Japan has long believed that it had developed technology to prevent disaster from earthquakes, but the widespread destruction from the earthquake in Kobe has undermined that confidence.
Page A14.
Economic Impact
The earthquake has knocked out a major commercial hub.
But the blow to the economy could be balanced by the need to rebuild.
Page A13.
Surprise Location
The earthquake in Japan was caused by an age-old process, with plates grinding against each other, but geologists were surprised that it happened where it did.
Page A15.
Markets Are Calm
The earthquake would once have been Wall Street's "doomsday scenario," but the markets remained calm, reflecting an increasing diversity of investment.
Page D1.


Farrakhan Sees 'Set Up' in Case Of Murder Plot
Louis Farrakhan, the Nation of Islam leader who the authorities say was the target of an assassination plot involving the daughter of Malcolm X, spoke out in her defense tonight and expressed anger and sadness that she had been made what he called the victim of "a trained set-up artist."
In a speech billed as a news conference but directed mostly to the converted, who packed the bleached-white interior of the organization's mosque on Chicago's South Side, Mr.
Farrakhan said he did not want any harm to come to her and that justice would not be served if she went to prison.





More Litigation In Saatchi Battle
The Saatchi &amp; Saatchi battle took another litigious turn yesterday as Maurice Saatchi filed suit in the High Court in London, accusing the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company of breaking his contract when its board voted Dec. 16 to oust him as chairman.
"The writ was served this morning by Maurice on Saatchi &amp; Saatchi alleging breach of contract," Mr.
Saatchi's spokesman, Sir Tim Bell, told Reuters.
The agency company declined comment until it had studied the legal papers.
The suit came five days after Saatchi &amp; Saatchi sued Mr.
Saatchi and three executives who left out of loyalty to him, seeking to prevent them from opening their own agency.


Squaw Valley Journal; Above California Flood, Days of Alpine Ecstasy
You've got to love California.
North of Sacramento, in flooded Roseville, homeowners were dragging soggy couches out of their houses, and President Clinton was in town to review the disaster.
But here in Squaw Valley, 90 miles to the east and 6,200 feet above sea level in the Sierra Nevada, James Dykema was exulting over a wondrous day of skiing.


Corrections
An article on Friday about a New Jersey legislative hearing on royalties for songwriters credited the authorship of "Lullaby of Birdland" incompletely.
George David Weiss, who testified at the hearing, wrote the lyrics; George Shearing, the pianist, wrote the melody.


Gingrich on Tightrope Over Congress's Pensions
When Newt Gingrich was first elected to Congress in 1978, he spurned the members' pension system as too lavish and announced that he would not participate in it.
But a decade later he joined the system, his office confirmed today.
He has been participating since August 1989, an aide said.


DEATH COUNT IN JAPAN QUAKE EXCEEDS 2,000; HUNDREDS STILL TRAPPED IN KOBE WRECKAGE
Rescue teams dug frantically through the rubble in western Japan today and contained huge fires that had raged out of control and darkened the skies with smoke, the aftermath of a catastrophic earthquake on Tuesday in which thousands of people were killed or injured.
The earthquake lasted just 20 seconds but heaved trains on their sides, toppled elevated highways and knocked over buildings, some as cleanly as if they had been severed with a knife.


Corrections
A brief sports report on Monday about a high school track meet, the Archbishop Molloy Games, reversed the names of the winner of the boys' 55-meter hurdles.
He was Deworski Odom of Overbrook High in Philadelphia.
The report also misidentified the event won by Brandit Copper of William Penn High in Philadelphia.
It was the girls' triple jump, not the long jump.


A Steamy Pasolini Rarity From 1962
Hell hath no fury like Mamma Roma, the virago played so stormily by Anna Magnani in Pier Paolo Pasolini's astonishing 1962 film.
Along with its obvious echoes of Italian postwar neo-realism, including explicit references to works by Roberto Rossellini and Vittorio De Sica, the previously obscure "Mamma Roma" also seethes with the sensuality and dark iconoclasm that would mark Pasolini's subsequent career.
Indeed, beyond this film's stark visual beauty and its madly inappropriate Biblical references, there lies a murky, overheated sexual melodrama suggestive of Tennessee Williams, himself a great admirer of La Magnani's raw histrionic style.
Here she plays a former prostitute who brings a feverish, unexamined intensity to the job of bringing up her sexually ripe adolescent son.
The boy's destiny is thus shaped in fearsome ways by his mother's eroticism.
Mamma Jocasta would have been more like it.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Magic Halts Hornets  Shaquille O'Neal scored 35 points and grabbed 15 rebounds to outduel Alonzo Mourning (33 points, 12 rebounds) and help host Orlando stop Charlotte's eight-game winning streak with a 109-98 victory over the visiting Hornets last night. (AP)


No Headline
"All I can see in my future is darkness." TAMIO ARIMA, a victim of the earthquake in Japan.  [ A1:3. ]


Police Check Suspect In Plot to Kill Pope For Link to Bombing
Federal agents have flown to Manila to investigate the possibility that a man being held by local police in a suspected plot against the Pope is the same man who has been accused of masterminding the bombing of the World Trade Center, Federal law-enforcement officials said.
It was not clear last night whether the man being detained by Philippine authorities was Ramzi Yousef, the lean 27-year-old Kuwaiti whom the Federal Bureau of Investigation has been seeking since he fled the country a few hours after the bombing in February 1993.


Ausanio Figures the Count Is Running Out
Joe Ausanio is not desperate because of baseball's dispute between players and owners.
He is just exasperated.
He is not perturbed at someone specific.
He is just irritated by an unpredictable situation.
He is not considering leaving the Yankees temporarily to play in Italy because he wants to make them squirm.
He is just reviewing his options.
In a peaceful baseball world, Ausanio would be less than one month away from reporting for spring training in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
It would be the start of his first full season with the Yankees, a team that might have figured in post-season play last October if there had been a post-season.
It would be a placid time.


First Tennessee National Corp.(FTEN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Northern Trust Corp.(NTRS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Food Notes
N.F.L. Charity Chefs
The Taste of the N.F.L., an annual buffet to benefit hunger-relief programs, will be held on Jan. 28 in Miami, for the fourth year in conjunction with the Super Bowl.
Chefs from the 30 cities with N.F.L. teams will be paired with players to create the dishes for the benefit.
The New York chefs will be Bobby Flay of Bolo and Mesa Grill, and Don Pintabona of TriBeCa Grill.
About 1,800 people are expected to attend.
Tickets are priced at $250.
The benefit is expected to raise at least $200,000 for charity.
Last year's contribution was $180,000.


Abbott Laboratories (ABT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Neediest Cases; Finding Help Until Job Search Pays Off
The leather satchel is faded, creased and bulging with testaments to a grueling job search: resumes, references and rejection letters.
Leafing through its contents, Aida D.'s hands start to shake.
She worked at a savings bank for 14 years, starting as a clerk and eventually becoming the head teller.
But in 1987, she lost her job to the recession.
She found a new position as a bookkeeper, but it lasted only three years, again because of the poor economy.
Since then, Miss D. has juggled temporary jobs and searched doggedly for full-time work.


What F.D.R. Really Said
To the Editor:
My Jan. 13 letter about Newt Gingrich's error in quoting "nothing to fear but fear itself" from Franklin D. Roosevelt's 1933 Inaugural Address was also in error.
I took Mr.
Gingrich to task for not looking it up.
I looked it up but copied it incorrectly.
Roosevelt said, "the only thing we have to fear is fear itself." I fear that I misinformed the readers of my "correction."  HAROLD REISS Buffalo, Jan. 13, 1995


Repeat After Pat Riley: This Is Just Another Game
Revenge? Redemption? Rematch?
Better rethink that, because the Knicks say they are refusing to look at Thursday night's game at Houston -- the first meeting between the teams since June 22, the night the Rockets defeated the Knicks to capture the National Basketball Association championship -- as anything more than a tough road game.


Alcan Aluminium Ltd.(AL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wall St., So Far, Is Weathering Japan's Disaster
In the 1980's, it was Wall Street's worst nightmare: A powerful earthquake hits Japan, damaging high-priced real estate.
Japanese insurers and other institutional investors pull their money home to finance the rebuilding.
And that, in turn, creates a selling panic in the United States securities markets, which had come to rely heavily on Japanese capital.
Yesterday, Wall Street awakened to what seemed to be exactly this financial "doomsday scenario." A devastating earthquake had hit the industrial region around Kobe and Osaka, causing a tragic loss of life and extensive commercial damage.


Chemical Banking Corp.(CHL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Metropolitan Diary
THE other evening, as the No. 10 bus bumped its way down Seventh Avenue on its way to Battery Park City, it was apparent that something had been added to the journey: a chorus of coughs, sniffles and assorted other signs and sounds of winter head colds.
"Boy, do I feel lousy," one woman said.


Foreign Affairs; Good Morning, Vietnam
In 1966, at the height of the Vietnam War, Senator George Aiken became famous for suggesting that we simply declare victory and bring American troops home.
That victory was phony, but 29 years later we truly have one in Vietnam, if winning is measured by a Vietnam that is economically, politically and strategically pro-Western.
Yet despite that victory, Washington is reluctant to open full diplomatic relations with Hanoi and consolidate its tentative move into America's orbit.
It's time.
It's time we started relating to Vietnam as a country, not a conflict.
It's time that we declare victory and go back to Vietnam to reap it.
President Bush should have been the one to open relations.
He knew it was the right thing to do, and he had the credibility with veterans' groups to do it.
But he didn't. (Wouldn't be prudent.) President Clinton, despite his problems with Vietnam vets, has inched closer to Hanoi, by lifting economic sanctions last year and agreeing to a low-level liaison office this year.
For months the State Department has been quietly recommending full normalization, but after the midterm Republican rout the White House said "Forget it." (Wouldn't be prudent.) That is America's loss.


Islanders Lose Beers to Injury
The Islanders suffered their first major injury of training camp Monday night when defenseman Bob Beers was hit in the face with a puck.
Beers, 27, suffered multiple facial fractures and hyphema (blood in his right eye).
He was taken to North Shore University Hospital, where he will stay three to seven days to allow the swelling to go down before undergoing surgery.


Checkfree Sues a Rival Over Use of Technology
The Checkfree Corporation, the leading provider of services that allow customers to pay their bills electronically, said yesterday that it had sued a rival, contending that the company was illegally using its technology.
Checkfree said it had received a patent on the technology, a process that allows it to pay any bill for any customer, yesterday.
It then filed a lawsuit against National Payment Clearinghouse in Federal District Court in Columbus, Ohio, where Checkfree is based.
Checkfree is seeking an injunction against National Payment, as well as damages.


Bank of New York Co.(BK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Treasury Securities Fall in Price
With the exception of the long bond, prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday, dragged down by a strong industrial production report.
The Federal Reserve reported yesterday that industrial production rose a strong 1 percent in December, the biggest gain in two years.
The data showed an industrial sector robust enough to withstand a series of increases in short-term interest rates, suggesting that the Fed will be forced to keep raising rates, traders said.


U.S. Industry Pace Spurts, Reviving Talk of a Rate Rise
American industry ran at its highest level in 15 years last month as an unexpectedly strong burst of year-end activity pushed capacity utilization to 85.4 percent, the Federal Reserve reported today.
With output of the nation's factories, mines and utilities rising 1 percent, the biggest gain in two years, many analysts said the industrial sector now had such potential for reigniting inflation that the central bank could not avoid further increases in short-term interest rates.


Marino Won't Need Surgery
Miami Dolphins quarterback DAN MARINO will not need further surgery on his Achilles' tendon and plans to continue his rehabilitation plan, the team announced yesterday.
Marino was examined by the Dolphins medical staff and three other foot and ankle specialists and all decided against further surgery.


THEATER
In Suburbia, in a Den Of Comic Sadness and Excess  'Living Proof' Jewish Repertory Theater
"Living Proof," Gordon Rayfield's new comedy, which opened on Sunday, rushes right to the edge of outrage in its almost breathless first act.
But then it turns to muddled moralizing about the values of people who could do the things that happened in that act, and finally ends in a silent moment that is perhaps meant to be ironic but comes off as sticky sentimentality.


Traders Slow Buying, With Dow Slipping 1.68
Following a two-day rally, stock traders slowed their buying spree yesterday after the Government reported new evidence of inflationary pressures.
But the market consensus that the Federal Reserve would ease its policy of raising short-term interest rates seemed to hold together surprisingly well.
Normally, inflationary data would send stock and bond prices plummeting, but both kept an even keel.
Indeed, the price of the 30-year bond rose slightly.


Pardee Is Near a New Post
JACK PARDEE, a former Houston Oilers' coach, said yesterday that he was working out the details to become head coach of the new Canadian Football League team in Birmingham, Ala.
Pardee, twice the N.F.L.'s coach of the year, has never coached in the Canadian Football League, which uses a larger field, three downs instead of four and a wide-open passing attack.
Pardee said he was working on a deal with the team's owner, ART WILLIAMS, who last week refused comment on whether Pardee was his choice as coach.
Pardee was coach of the Oilers from 1990 until midway through this season, when he was dismissed after an 0-9 start. (AP)


New 'Star Trek' Helps New Network
"Star Trek: Voyager," the newest version of "Star Trek," provided the United Paramount Network with a rocket-fueled start on Monday night: the new network beat all the established ones on its first night on the air in many of the largest cities in the country.
In the Nielsen overnight ratings, measuring 29 of the largest cities, the two-hour premiere of "Star Trek: Voyager" scored a 14.2 rating, easily beating the competition. (Each overnight rating point in those cities represents 488,735 homes.)


Investigators Unable to Determine Why Copter Hit Electrical Wires
In their final report on a helicopter crash in North Bergen, N.J., near the Lincoln Tunnel in May, investigators say they cannot figure out why the copter lost altitude 22 seconds before it flew into overhead electrical wires during a training flight.
Robert L. Hancock, an air safety inspector for the National Transportation Safety Board, said he found no evidence of mechanical failure with the helicopter's engine nor did he find any sign that the craft's two overhead rotor blades had failed before slicing into the lines, about 150 feet off the ground.
There were no radio distress calls in the five and a half minutes between the helicopter's takeoff after refueling at Teterboro Airport and the crash onto I-495 at the Manhattan-bound approaches to the tunnel at 12:50 P.M. on May 5.


Ex-Gov. Alexander Moves Toward '96 Run
Former Gov.
Lamar Alexander of Tennessee today announced the formation of a 1996 Republican Presidential campaign committee.
Although he stopped short of formally declaring his candidacy, the 54-year-old Mr.
Alexander sounded very much like a candidate in a speech here, saying he had come to New Hampshire because it was "the traditional place to start."


COMPANY BRIEFS
HAMILTON STANDARD CO., Windsor Locks, Conn., a maker of propellers and other aerospace equipment, said it had laid off 105 workers as part of a previously announced plan to cut its payroll.


One American Reported Dead Among 20,000 in Quake Area
Initial reports of American casualties from the earthquake in Japan put the death toll at one, out of an estimated 20,000 in the affected region, the United States Embassy in Tokyo said today.
In most cases American businesses with operations in the Osaka-Kobe region said damage to their operations appeared to be slight.
Shortly after news of the quake reached the United States, the State Department set up telephone lines and a task force yesterday to handle calls about the disaster.


Kotite Loses Only Jet Coach He Rehired
The new Jets regime headed by Rich Kotite took one of the stranger turns in club history last night when Johnny Roland, who had agreed Monday night to return as running backs coach, left a message on Kotite's answering machine: he changed his mind.
Roland had been the first and only coach from the Pete Carroll's administration that Kotite rehired.
But Roland then met yesterday with the Oilers' head coach, Jeff Fisher, in Mobile, Ala. -- where the coaching fraternity has gathered for the Senior Bowl -- and accepted the post with Houston.


TIME WARNER IN CABLE TALKS WITH HOUSTON INDUSTRIES
Eager to complete another acquisition of a cable operator, Time Warner Inc. is in talks with Houston Industries about acquiring the other half of the properties Time Warner already owns with the company, a utility based in Houston.
Many large cable operators have been talking with smaller cable concerns about acquisitions.
Time Warner is also talking with Cablevision Industries, based in Liberty, N.Y.
Each potential deal is valued at about $2.5 billion.
Time Warner and Houston Industries are already co-owners of systems that represent 1.2 million households in New York, California, Florida and Maine.
Dan Bulla, director of financial relations for Houston Industries, declined to comment on the talks, which were reported yesterday in USA Today, but recalled that his company had already said publicly that it hoped to sell half to all of its cable holdings.


Rap Performer Slain In Drive-by Shooting


Mexico Crisis Seen Spurring Flow of Aliens
With its $40 billion rescue plan for Mexico running into opposition from members of President Clinton's own party, the Administration told leaders of Congress today that the number of illegal immigrants crossing the border into Texas and California would increase by 430,000 this year if the Mexican financial crisis deepened.
That estimate would mean a rise of 30 percent over earlier projections of illegal 1995 border crossings, as Mexican workers are drawn to a dollar that has become 35 percent more valuable relative to the peso since the devaluation of the Mexican currency began just before Christmas.


Paul Delouvrier, French Official In Paris and Algiers, Dies at 80
Paul Delouvrier, the French civil servant and economist who administered French Algeria in the late 1950's and then gave the environs of Paris their modern look, died on Monday.
He was 80.
Friends in Paris said he died in a hospital but did not disclose the cause.


National Steel Corp.(NS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


State Work Overpaid? Statistics Explain Little
In his campaign to deny state employees raises, Gov.
John G. Rowland has tried to win over legislators by portraying state workers as overpaid, compared with their counterparts in private industry.
But with the State Senate scheduled to consider on Wednesday whether to approve the raises for 21,000 workers earning between $19,000 and $92,000, it is still unclear how state employees measure up, and whether such comparisons are ultimately a useful way to gauge public workers' compensation.


Texan Who Killed Ex-Wife And Her Niece Is Executed
The life of Mario Marquez, a life his lawyer called "sadness from beginning to end," was ended by lethal injection at 12:21 A.M. today, a short time after the condemned man said he wanted to "come home to my Lord Jesus, my savior."
Mr.
Marquez, who killed his former wife and her niece in a jealous rage 11 years ago, gasped deeply, strained once against the straps, then lay still as a dozen or so somber witnesses, including six reporters, watched through a glass partition.
Among the onlookers were two brothers, who wept quietly in each other's arms, and his lawyer, who said his client had been victimized by a "Catch-22" in the law.


Don't Snub Congress on Haiti
The American force in Haiti has largely completed the mission imposed on Washington by the United Nations Security Council last July -- to establish secure and stable conditions.
The moment has arrived, as agreed, for U.N. peacekeepers to take over.
The thuggish military Government has been dismantled.
The legitimate Government of President Aristide has been restored.
The initial U.S. expeditionary force of 20,000 has been scaled back to some 5,600 soldiers, joined by about 2,000 troops from 20 other nations.
Conditions in Haiti are far from ideal and democracy is not yet secure.
Many Haitians, particularly Aristide supporters, would like U.S. forces to stay on indefinitely.
But that would turn the present limited mission into a U.S. occupation of Haiti and increase the risk of Americans being drawn into Haitian political conflicts.


Chairman Loses Title At Kmart
The Kmart Corporation yesterday stripped its chairman, Joseph E. Antonini, of that title and gave it to one of the more outspoken board members, Donald S. Perkins.
At a news conference at the company's headquarters in Troy, Mich., Mr.
Perkins said that while he would spend about a third of his time on Kmart business, Mr.
Antonini, who continues as the president and chief executive, would keep running Kmart's operations.
Still, many analysts speculated that the events foreshadowed Mr.
Antonini's eventual end at Kmart.


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.(FRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Devastation Shakes Trust In Construction Standards
When a bridge and an elevated highway collapsed during the big San Francisco earthquake of 1989, Minoru Hirano, a Japanese highway designer, reassured his countrymen that Japanese bridges were stronger than those in America.
"I didn't think it would happen to Japan," Mr.
Hirano, director of project planning for the Japan Highway Public Corporation, recalled today.
"I thought our design code would be enough."


In H.M.O.'s, You Have to Know the Rules
To the Editor:
"H.M.O.'s Are Changing the Face of Medicare" (front page, Jan. 11) is a balanced piece on the rising enrollment of Medicare beneficiaries in health maintenance organizations.
But a harder look at the accessibility of services is needed.


Prodigy Leads Its Peers Onto the World Wide Web
The wired world is going wild over the World Wide Web.
The Prodigy on-line information service yesterday became the first consumer computer network to open its electronic portals to the popular Internet service known as the World Wide Web.
The Web allows even computer novices to easily search the global Internet network for text, pictures -- and, in some cases, sounds -- and analysts say it is rapidly emerging as the point-and-click prototype for the information superhighway.


Honeywell Inc.(HON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Seton Hall Handles B.C.


In H.M.O.'s, You Have to Know the Rules; Who Pays for Lawyers
To the Editor:
"Revolution in Health Care Industry Means Big Business for Specialist Lawyers" (Law page, Jan. 13) points out that this is a lucrative and expanding area of law.


Loral Corp.(LOR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON is due to visit New York City today.
She is scheduled to go to the Beth Israel Medical Center, on First Avenue and 16th Street, this morning, where she will meet with women whose breast cancer screenings have been covered by Medicare.
In the evening she will receive the Humanitarian Award of United Cerebral Palsy of New York City at the organization's 40th annual awards dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The presentation to Mrs.
Clinton is to be made by Katharine Graham, former publisher of The Washington Post, who was honored last year.


Hormone Replacement Study Answers Questions, but Not All
THE recently reported finding that various forms of hormone replacement therapy can lower the risk of heart disease in postmenopausal women has answered many concerns about the safety and effectiveness of taking estrogen and progesterone in middle age, but it has also raised important new questions, according to Dr.
Bernadine Healy, former director of the National Institutes of Health.
In an editorial in today's issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association, in which details of the study are also published, Dr.
Healy wrote that "after a half century of conflicting data, we can affirm with growing confidence that, at the very least, estrogen reduces key cardiovascular risk factors in women at a time when they become especially vulnerable to heart disease, namely, after 50 years of age."


Comerica Inc.(CMA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Masquerade Is Over At St. John's
TIME is beginning to run out on Brian Mahoney.
Not in a vocational sense: no one is calling for his head.
The folks at St.
John's say they are solidly behind their third-year coach.
What Mahoney is running out of is time out of the limelight where his young highly touted players and the third-year coach can take lumps without scrutiny.
Scrutiny the university sought.


Clinton Visits Sites of Disasters
Touring the California communities where natural disasters have struck, President Clinton today pointed to his Administration's provision of billions in Federal aid as evidence that Government can work.
From the Northridge section of Los Angeles, the epicenter of last year's earthquake, to the small town of Roseville north of here, where streets were still muddy from this month's flooding, Mr.
Clinton expressed admiration at residents' efforts to overcome their plight, and he reminded them of Washington's help.


Book Notes
Joyce Turns Up in China
When it comes to challenge, some people cast their gaze toward Everest; others test themselves against the triathlon.
And some try "Ulysses."


What a Cook Needs: A Few Good Tools
THERE are chefs, like Francesco Antonucci, who say that very, very little kitchen equipment is required to turn out wonderful food.
"All you really need," said Mr.
Antonucci, the chef and a partner at Remi, an Italian restaurant in midtown Manhattan, "are two knives and two pots and pans."


An Irate Bosnia Tells U.N. to Reopen Airfield or Remove Troops
Angered by the behavior of the United Nations commander here, the Bosnian Government gave him an ultimatum today to reopen a critical airfield in the northeastern town of Tuzla.
The airfield in the Muslim-held town was declared open by the United Nations last March, only to close immediately because of threats from Serbian gunners in the surrounding hills.
Today, the Muslim-led Government demanded that the United Nations military commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, either reopen the Tuzla airfield by Feb. 1 or remove the more than 200 United Nations soldiers stationed there.


Documents Released by Court Give Account of Simpson Violence Against First Wife
Court papers released on Tuesday revealed for the first time that on at least one occasion O. J. Simpson's first wife, Marquerite Simpson Thomas, reported that Mr.
Simpson had beaten her.
They also disclosed that Mr.
Simpson called Mrs.
Thomas shortly before his arrest last June, saying he had been framed and was about to kill himself.
The documents, contained in a motion to compel Mrs.
Thomas's testimony, contradict her repeated assertions that Mr.
Simpson never struck her during their 12-year marriage, which ended in March 1979.
That was what she told the police on June 23, 10 days after Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were killed.


Russians and Rebels Agree to a Cease-Fire
With both sides groping for a way out of the widening war in the seccessionist republic of Chechnya, Russian and Chechen officials agreed today on a cease-fire to begin Wednesday night.
Officials here immediately made clear that they held little hope for an end to the fighting, which has taken the lives of thousands of civilians and soldiers since President Boris N. Yeltsin sent 40,000 troops to the Caucasus region last month.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 13
Jan. 6
Jan. 14
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.7
7.6
7.5
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.3
3.5
Gasoline stocks
211.5
211.1
229.6
Distillate stocks
141.2
143.3
137.1
Crude imports, daily
6.6
7.3
5.9
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.6
2.1
Crude stocks
327.9
329.3
333.5
Crude production, daily
6.7
6.7
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
92.8
95.9
91.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


State Deficit Up Threefold, Officials Say
The Pataki administration said today that the state deficit for the current fiscal year has grown threefold since last month, to $300 million, because of continuing problems in the banking, insurance and securities industries.
Administration officials said they believed that simple belt-tightening by state agencies, like cutting back travel allowances, could close the gap by the end of the fiscal year on March 31, as is required under state law.
But they left open the possibility that more drastic measures, including layoffs, might be taken if the deficit continued to grow.


Parker Hannifin Corp.(PH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tong Leader Guilty
In what Federal prosecutors called a major blow against Chinese organized crime, the powerful former president of a Chinatown fraternal and business organization was convicted of murder, extortion and racketeering.
The authorities say such groups, known as tongs, often work with criminal gangs to protect and expand their businesses.
Article, page B3.


Overcoming In the South Of the 60's
Tonight's edition of "Dateline" looks back at some brutal aspects of Mississippi's resistance to the civil rights movement in the 1960's.
Stone Phillips talks with a repentant undercover informer for the Sovereignty Commission, a state agency that kept track of civil rights workers.
The assertion here is that information was passed by the commission to the Klan-infiltrated police, with dire results.
Mr.
Phillips also tells how the commission checked out potential jurors for the benefit of the defense in Byron de la Beckwith's trial in the murder of Medgar Evers, and he names a black businessman and state official as having alerted the commission to the plans of James Chaney, Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner, the three young civil rights workers who were killed in June 1964.


Italian Premier Lists Cabinet, Faces Warning
As promised, Italy's new Prime Minister-designate, Lamberto Dini, appointed a Government of largely nonpartisan ministers today, but its chances of winning approval in Parliament quickly dimmed as his predecessor, Silvio Berlusconi, threatened to withhold support unless he pledges to move toward early national elections.
The warning came after Mr.
Berlusconi and his remaining allies in the outgoing coalition tried unsuccessfully to get members of their parties into the new Cabinet lineup.


Scientists Anticipated Temblor but Not the Spot
The earthquake that hit Japan yesterday was both unusual and ordinary, geologists said.
It was unusual in that the devastated area in southwestern Japan has been seismologically quiet of late.
If a big earthquake was going to strike anywhere, the geologists said, they expected it in the northeast part of the archipelago, which has been shaken by a series of big temblors in the last two years.


Corrections
An entry in the Business Digest yesterday referring to the Market Place column, about investors who ignored a company's warning of a slowdown in sales of promotional items, misstated the company's name in some editions.
It was Cyrk Inc., not the Cyrix Corporation.


Pedro Juan Caballero Journal; Where Contraband Has Thrived, Cocaine Arrives
Well-stocked stores in this border town seem to support the official fib that Paraguay, a thinly populated farming nation, is Latin America's largest per capita consumer of scotch whisky, American cigarettes and French perfumes.
But Paraguay has a long and open tradition of smuggling, and nowhere is it more prevalent than in this town, where the international border is an unpatrolled strip of grass and Paraguayan shop clerks long ago learned to speak Portuguese, the language of their bargain-hunting Brazilian neighbors.


One Half Can't Make A Whole For Storm
St.
John's lost its fourth straight game and plunged even deeper in the Big East standings.
But if there is any way a team can salvage something positive out of such a plight, the Red Storm can.
Sixth-ranked Syracuse won its 13th straight game, outlasting St.
John's, 91-87, before 24,687 tonight in the Carrier Dome.
But the way the Red Storm battled back from a 19-point second-half deficit to have a chance to win indicates that it isn't ready to give up on its season despite what its record might suggest.


Mayor Acts To Stave Off School Cuts
Acknowledging for the first time that the city schools cannot handle further funding cuts before the summer, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the city would borrow money to help close its budget gap instead of turning to the Board of Education to find savings this school year.
But the plan prompted a major credit-rating agency to put the city on a negative credit watch, which is one step short of lowering the city's credit rating.
The agency, Standard &amp; Poor's, said the city's intention to save $120 million by borrowing to pay off debt owed on Feb. 1 is a fiscal gimmick that simply shifts the cost to future years.


Weyerhaeuser Co.(WY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Personal Health; Dysthymia: help for chronic sadness.
FOR more than 7 million Americans life is no bowl of cherries, the glass is nearly always half empty, the clouds have no silver lining.
They have a little-known and often medically ignored yet treatable emotional disorder called dysthymia.
Dysthymia (pronounced dis-THIGH-mee-a) is a mild but chronic depression that can spread a veil of sadness over people's lives for years, even decades, sometimes seemingly from the cradle to the grave.
Others may see the people with dysthymia as pessimistic, self-critical, underachieving and lacking in motivation, spontaneity or a sense of adventure.
Sufferers may see themselves as suffering from a lack of energy, dissatisfaction, an overall negativism and a belief that things will never get better.
They are less likely than others to get married and more likely to be divorced and unemployed or underemployed, although some become high achievers despite their depressed mood.


U.S. Is Fearful Of Alien Surge
Countering growing opposition from President Clinton's own party to its $40 billion rescue plan for Mexico, the Administration told leaders of Congress that the number of illegal immigrants crossing the border into Texas and California would increase by about 430,000 this year if the Mexican financial crisis deepened.
Article, page A3.


In a Stricken Kobe, Survivors Count Losses
Tamio Arima sat in the chilly hall of an elementary school and seemed overwhelmed, not by the debris of the buildings that had crumbled around him, but by the size of his losses.
"All I can see in my future is darkness," said Mr.
Arima, a 47-year-old businessman.
"I've lost everything, and I must support my wife and daughter. I can't imagine what I'm going to do. I don't even have my own place to sleep in now."


Struggling Is Allowed These Days At the Hall
Wherever P. J Carlesimo, the former Seton Hall coach, was tonight, he probably had the feeling that something was amiss.
Carlesimo's former team attempted an arena-record 27 3-point field goals against Boston College at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight and made 5 of them.
And get this: The Hall actually won, 66-58.


Riggs National Corp.(RIGS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kodak in a Software Deal
The Eastman Kodak company announced an agreement with a California software company yesterday to improve the ability of graphics users to transmit and manipulate images.
The agreement is part of Kodak's push to develop alliances in the computer field as a means of combining the company's traditional photography business with the emerging technology of digital imaging.
The agreement between Kodak and Live Picture Inc. of Soquel, Calif., will permit the transmission of color images across telephone lines and editing and manipulation on a typical desktop computer, rather than the more powerful machines previously required.


Affirmative Action Challenge Seems to Perplex High Court
As a vehicle for a major Supreme Court pronouncement on the constitutionality of Government-sponsored affirmative action, a case that came before the Court today appeared an unlikely, even a poor candidate by the end of an hourlong argument that left some of the Court's strongest opponents of affirmative action visibly frustrated.
"We may have a case here in which we can't decide an issue we thought we were going to decide," Justice Antonin Scalia said at one point after Solicitor General Drew S. Days 3d, defending the highway construction program at issue on behalf of the Clinton Administration, said the case might not properly be before the Court.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Harvard
Look out for the Crimson.
"I think we're going to be a pretty dangerous team in February," said Coach Ronn Tomassoni after his players completed a recent series of seven road games with a 6-1 record.


Wine Talk
WHEN Drew Nieporent decided to open a restaurant in New York that would emphasize the richness and informality of Burgundy, he named it after what many consider the greatest white Burgundy wine of all: Le Montrachet.
Last Thursday, the restaurant Montrachet paid homage to its namesake wine in a big way, with a five-course dinner for 28 centering on the Montrachet wine of the Domaine Ramonet, one of 16 owners of the Montrachet vineyard in east central France.
The domaine owns a little more than a half acre of the vineyard, from which it produces about 50 cases of the wine in a good year.


First Chicago Corp.(FNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Ticket-Sales Dilemma Requires Creative Approach
Steve Greenberg calls it a time for "hand-holding." Greenberg is the person in charge of selling season tickets for the Pittsburgh Pirates.
He has a season-ticket base of approximately 17,300.
At this time of year, he is supposed to get as many season-ticket holders as possible to renew their subscriptions.
It has not been an easy job this winter.
For Greenberg and others like him in major league baseball, the labor dispute has presented a complicated problem: How do you sell tickets when you can't guarantee what kind of product -- if any -- will be on the field opening day?


They Come, They Brew, They Bottle
AS Maureen and Bob Gold proudly poured pale ale at a tailgate party at this year's Rose Bowl, their hospitality raised a few eyebrows when they told their guests that they had made the beer themselves.
But by half time, they were rationing their concoction, which they called Victory Ale to commemorate Pennsylvania State University's winning football season.
Both Mr. and Mrs.
Gold are Penn State graduates.


Revolt Against School Spending Reaches the Wealthiest Suburbs
Martin Halpin and his family left the Bronx two decades ago and moved to this affluent riverfront village to take advantage of one of the most alluring trappings of suburbia: good public schools.
But a few years ago, Mr.
Halpin started feeling crushed under the weight of escalating school taxes.
His last tax bill climbed to roughly $7,500, and he has had to put off expensive house repairs, like replacing the plumbing in the bathrooms of his modest split-level home.


U.S. League Expects Its Stars to Come Home
Major League Soccer, the United States league that the 1994 World Cup is supposed to have left behind as its legacy, will sign most of the Americans playing overseas and make them available for its inaugural season, which will start in spring 1996.
"All the players overseas would like to play here, some sooner than others, and I think we will get most of them," Alan Rothenberg, the Major League Soccer chairman and president of the United States Soccer Federation, said yesterday in midtown Manhattan, where he attended a meeting of of sports executives.


Coastal Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Shawmut National Corp.(SNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Grand Union Proposes a Revamping Plan
The Grand Union Company said yesterday that it had submitted the outlines of a restructuring proposal to its creditors and was continuing to negotiate with them.
The struggling grocery store chain, based in Wayne, N.J., also said it had defaulted on $53 million of interest payments that were due on Jan. 15.


Chrysler Reports Record Earnings
The Chrysler Corporation reported today that record earnings in the fourth quarter helped make 1994 its most profitable year ever.
Fattened by robust sales of light trucks like mini-vans and the Jeep Grand Cherokee, the results capped a remarkable year for Chrysler, which was tottering financially as recently as four years ago.


Don't Begrudge Veterans Medical Care
To the Editor:
William Safire says that money spent on America's veterans is "the most wasteful special-interest spending in Washington" (column, Jan. 12).
Mr.
Safire may begrudge the men and women whose health was impaired by military service, but neither taxpayers nor their representatives share his attitude.


Japanese and U.S. Ways of Structural Engineering Differ
American engineering experts said yesterday that they were surprised by the extent of the collapse of roadways and other structures in the earthquake near Kobe, Japan.
But they said it was too early to tell if some of the damage was related to the fact that the Japanese take a slightly different approach to earthquake engineering than do Americans.
Sections of several major expressways collapsed, as did many modern buildings.
Some roads and overpasses buckled.
And as can be expected in an old, densely populated city, many wooden buildings with heavy tile roofs collapsed.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.00
5.50
3.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.77
5.53
2.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.19
6.06
3.15
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.67
7.66
5.69
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.77
7.78
6.26
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.64
8.63
7.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.78
6.80
5.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CHRONICLE
ROSEANNE, the comedienne who no longer uses a last name, has been ordered to bed in Los Angeles because of difficulties with her pregnancy, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
"Her doctor asked her to stay in bed in the early stages of her pregnancy," said Kevin Campbell, her publicity agent.
The baby, conceived through in-vitro fertilization, is due in July or August.


Fehr Cries Foul Play
The players' labor leader accused the owners yesterday of giving Congress a false picture of the status of talks between the two sides in baseball's labor dispute.
In a letter to Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, Donald Fehr wrote that he has been told that Selig and other owners have told members of Congress that the union "is refusing to return to the bargaining table" in an attempt to reach a negotiated settlement.
"As you well know," Fehr wrote, "that is false. The owners walked out, not the players."


Mexico Eases Crisis, Selling All Bonds Offered
Mexico's halting economic recovery passed a crucial test of confidence today as foreign and domestic investors bought $400 million worth of a type of Government bond that had prompted nervousness only last week.
In a similar auction last Tuesday, only 20 percent of the bonds the Government offered were sold, sending signals of uncertainty that caused Mexican stocks to plummet.


Russia Assures Anxious U.S. Of Its Commitment to Reforms
Russia's Foreign Minister assured Secretary of State Warren Christopher of his country's commitment to democracy and market reform and its determination to negotiate a peaceful settlement of the conflict in Chechnya, but did not say what concrete steps his country intended to take, senior Administration officials said tonight.
The sweeping but vague assurances by Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev came during a three-hour dinner with Mr.
Christopher that opened two days of intense discussions to repair a relationship between the two countries that was declining even before Russia's military offensive in the breakaway region of Chechnya.


Ascend Communications
Shares of Ascend Communications, a telecommunications equipment maker, surged yesterday, setting a 52-week high of $54.25, before closing at $53.75.
Ascend reported on Monday that its fourth-quarter net income tripled.


Plan for Cuts In Day Care Stirs Anxiety
It was nap time yesterday at the Police Athletic League's Miccio Day Care Center in Red Hook, Brooklyn, and the children in Virginia de Guzman's class were curled on their cots, resting from all that tracing of protest signs: "Scream, Shout, Don't Let Them Force Us Out."
All except Ivana Purvis, a 4-year-old, who thumbed through a Dr.
Seuss book, "Are You My Mother?"


Answering the Mail on Caffeine, Crisco and Even Marco Polo
LETTERS from readers request the most amazing range of information: "How can I become a food writer?" "Will you please send me the 100 best recipes you have ever published?" "I need help planning my daughter's wedding. What should I serve?"
Those are questions The Times can't answer.
But questions about cooking techniques, about recipes that have appeared in print and questions that are of general interest are gathered and answered from time to time in this column.


Singapore Court Finds a U.S. Scholar and Newspaper Guilty of Contempt
An American academic and an American- owned newspaper were found guilty today of contempt of court in Singapore over an opinion article critical of what it called "intolerant regimes" in Asia that use "a compliant judiciary" to bankrupt opposition politicians.
Putting aside protests from the Clinton Administration, a Singapore judge ordered the academic, Christopher Lingle; the newspaper, The International Herald Tribune, and its publishers and Asia editor to pay fines and court costs that are expected to total tens of thousands of dollars.


For Japanese in the U.S., a Frantic Hunt for News
Kazusa Yonema spent much of Monday night with a telephone pressed to her ear, urgently trying to get through to relatives in western Japan.
"I called and called and called," said Mrs.
Yonema, who moved to Westchester County four years ago but whose father and brother live near Kobe, close to the epicenter of the earthquake.
"I couldn't reach them."


Heroin Medication Approved As Treatment for Alcoholism
A drug used to treat heroin addiction has been approved as a treatment for alcoholism, the first new drug for this use in more than 45 years, a pharmaceutical company announced today.
The Du Pont Merck Pharmaceutical Corporation said the Food and Drug Administration had approved the drug, naltrexone, for the new use on Dec. 30.
The drug is available immediately to be prescribed as a therapy for alcoholism in conjunction with a comprehensive treatment program, the company said.


Collusion Case Grants Unusual Damages
Dave Kingman is the biggest winner in the latest awards stemming from the owners' collusion against free agents in the 1980's, but Butch Wynegar and Steve Kemp emerge with the most unusual awards granted by Thomas Roberts, the arbitrator.
Roberts, who 11 months ago awarded $59.5 million to players for lost salaries in 1986 and 1987, issued the latest awards for lost jobs and loss of mobility for those years plus assorted other damages, including emotional distress.
Owners were found guilty of collusion following the 1985, 1986 and 1987 seasons.


Redford and Showtime Plan New Cable Movie Channel
The actor and director Robert Redford and executives from Showtime Networks Inc. announced yesterday that they were forming a new cable channel devoted to independent films, a broad category that will include films distributed by Hollywood studios as well as some foreign films and many films that have never been widely seen.
The new channel, which will begin operating in the fall, is a 50-50 partnership between Showtime and Mr.
Redford.
The financial terms of the deal were not disclosed.


Message to Black Athletes
The Arkansas basketball coach, NOLAN RICHARDSON, said yesterday that black athletes must understand they are being neglected by the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
He made the remarks after the Black Coaches Association said Monday it has given up on working with the N.C.A.A. and will turn to outside groups for help in attacking what it considers to be inequities in college athletics.
The Black Coaches Association said it would urge those groups to try to influence black athletes in their choice of schools.


Everett Quinton, You're No Rise Stevens
As first imagined by Prosper Merimee in his novella and then as scored by Georges Bizet in his opera, the Gypsy beauty named Carmen is the quintessential, overwrought femme fatale: scornful, mocking, headstrong, doomed.
She's dangerous, and not only because she walks around with a rose sticking out of her mouth like a toothpick.
Carmen's a terminal vamp, a woman for whom men are playthings.
She uses them and tosses them aside, without heed to their feelings or her future.
In the Ridiculous Theatrical Company's exuberant, updated new "Carmen," which opened last night at the Charles Ludlum Theater, Carmen is all these things and more.
She's a man.


Composing a Kinship Between Classical and Pop
William Bolcom's music, which New York Philharmonic audiences will hear a lot of this week, is a wordless rebuttal to ideas of rank and category.
As a ragtime pianist and espouser of American popular song who writes operas and symphonies, Mr.
Bolcom works hard to erase the lines between the elite and the vulgar, the intellectual and the visceral, the select and the popular.
Music, he seems to be telling us, has pulled itself apart from both ends of the cultural spectrum: the classical extremity eager to isolate high-mindedness and rise above the everyday; the pop end cornered by a concern for the bottom line and an obsession with rigid species and subspecies of style.
Neither Mr.
Bolcom's "Commedia" nor his Fifth Symphony, which Leonard Slatkin will conduct tomorrow, Friday and Saturday at Avery Fisher Hall, are new pieces.
Both, however, create what the composer calls an "axis": a fulcrum on which the classical and the popular can sway in happy balance.


In H.M.O.'s, You Have to Know the Rules; Patient vs. Profit
To the Editor:
In "H.M.O.'s Are Changing the Face of Medicare" (front page, Jan. 11), Virginia Golden, whom you quote, is right on target in expressing concern about which specialists she and her husband could see and under what conditions.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; An increase in corporate campaigns points to a continuing recovery for Madison Avenue.
IN another sign that Madison Avenue is continuing to recover from one of its worst slumps ever, an annual study is reporting a healthy increase in corporate advertising.
The 1994 Corporate Advertising Practices survey by the Association of National Advertisers, the New York-based trade organization of leading marketers, found that corporate ads -- aimed at improving consumer and investor perceptions of a company rather than directly selling its products or services -- "have begun to rebound to historically high levels after a recessionary downturn in the late 1980's."


POP
Introducing a New Band, Featuring the Producer  Blackstreet Apollo Theater
Back in the deep history of pop music, almost 10 years ago, the producer Teddy Riley helped invent a style called New Jack Swing.
Mr.
Riley threw together a bit of Stevie Wonder, hip-hop rhythms and some church music and made black pop singing a viable thing again, a contender in the age of rap.


Chase Manhattan (CMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Union Pacific Offers Cash Bid for Santa Fe
The Union Pacific Corporation offered an all-cash bid yesterday for control of the Santa Fe Pacific Corporation, the latest move in a long-running bidding war with Burlington Northern Inc. to gain control of Santa Fe.
Union Pacific's $3.6 billion hostile bid of $18.50 in cash for each share of Santa Fe stock is simpler than the most recent offer by Burlington Northern working in concert with Santa Fe -- a two-step deal in which Burlington Northern would purchase a third of Santa Fe's shares for $20 a share in cash.
The remaining two-thirds would be traded in a stock swap.


A New Position At BBDO West
The BBDO West unit of BBDO Worldwide said yesterday that Thomas Hollerbach, previously an account director at Goodby, Silverstein &amp; Partners in San Francisco, had been hired in the new position of executive vice president and brand services director.
Mr.
Hollerbach, 36, who will be based in Los Angeles, becomes the No. 2 executive at BBDO West behind David Lubars, president.


Albany Toys With Court Cameras
Most states have permanently opened their courtrooms to television by permitting the presence of unobtrusive cameras strictly regulated by trial judges.
Not so New York, a communications hub and the venue for some of the nation's most important trials.
The State Legislature, distrustful of judges and wary of the news media, has kept courtroom cameras at bay, allowing only a series of "experiments" -- three in the past seven years.
The latest temporary authority expires Jan. 31.
The time for experimentation is over.
Television in courtrooms has been fair to the parties involved and to the legal system.
It has also been illuminating for the public.
Still, it seems that another period of probation, this one lasting two and a half more years, is the best that Albany is prepared to provide.


Market Place; Are merely good sales good enough? Wall Street's appetite rages on.
IN the hot-new-issues market of 1993, few initial public offerings had as much sizzle as the Gymboree Corporation.
Lately, though, signs of lagging demand at the children's apparel retailer are causing some analysts to question whether the stock is on the verge of a cyclical downturn.


On Sale: A Near-Death Experience
In hockey, we now have an in vitro case study: how to market a sport that nearly self-obliterated a season.
Obviously, the best marketing is to open -- or re-open -- the doors with major league players.
Nassau Coliseum opened for business on Monday.
And?
"We've sold four times the tickets on the first day of sales than we ever have," said Jim Johnson, the Islanders' vice president of sales.
So much for apathy.


Commerce Bancorp Inc.(COBA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wells Fargo &amp; Co. (WFC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Ends A $4 Billion Visit to India
A delegation of American business leaders concluded a visit to the Indian capital today after signing documents covering new trade and investment deals said to exceed $4 billion.
Secretary of Commerce Ronald H. Brown, leading the largest American business group ever to visit India, said the deals were just the beginning for American companies ready to exploit India's free-market economic changes.
He said a further $12 billion in potential deals between Indian and American companies was under negotiation.


Now, the Many Flavors of Vodka, the Flavorless Spirit
IN the United States, where a choice of flavors seems to be a culinary birthright, everything from bottled water to olive oil to bagels now comes in an array of flavors.
Vodka is no exception.
These days, drinkers are no longer content to mix plain vodka with orange or tomato juice.
Increasingly, they are buying flavored vodkas to sip straight, on the rocks or in mixed drinks.
As the demand takes off, the number of flavors has risen, too.
More than a dozen flavored vodkas are now on the market.


Farrakhan Plot Looks Like Old F.B.I. Caper
To the Editor:
Re "Much Black Skepticism on Charges of a Plot by Daughter of Malcolm X" (news article, Jan. 14):


Reece Overcash Jr., 68, Chief of Associates Corp.
Reece A. Overcash Jr., the chairman and chief executive of the Associates Corporation of North America, a financial service subsidiary of the Ford Motor Company, died today at the Zale Lipshy University Hospital in Dallas.
He was 68 and lived in Dallas.
The cause was a stroke that he suffered last week, the company said.
Mr.
Overcash, who had a colon tumor removed last September, had been undergoing chemotherapy.


Defendant in Rail Killings Wants to Question Clinton
Colin Ferguson announced today that he planned to subpoena President Clinton and former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to testify at his trial on charges of killing six people aboard a Long Island Rail Road train in 1993.
"They have both made certain comments about my case and I need to subpoena them," Mr.
Ferguson told Judge Donald E. Belfi in Nassau County Court as jury selection got under way.


Alco Standard Corp.(ASN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Colonial BancGroup Inc.(CLBGA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


McEnroe Ousts Becker in Opener
After a serenely sunny and uneventful opening day, the goings-on turned tumultuous today at the Australian Open.
There were rain delays, three major upsets and a long-awaited debut by a famous Las Vegas entertainer that nearly upstaged the rest of the dramas.
When the skies cleared and the stadium's retractable roof retreated, out trotted the Open's boldest and baldest debutante, Andre Agassi, whose look has launched a thousand shaven heads.
Ninety minutes later, he had earned safe passage to the second round.


Devastation Shakes Trust In Construction Standards
When a bridge and an elevated highway collapsed during the big San Francisco earthquake of 1989, Minoru Hirano, a Japanese highway designer, reassured his countrymen that Japanese bridges were stronger than those in America.
"I didn't think it would happen to Japan," Mr.
Hirano, director of project planning for the Japan Highway Public Corporation, recalled today.
"I thought our design code would be enough."


Conner Peripherals Inc.(CNR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
R.
NICHOLAS BURNS, a career Foreign Service officer who has been in charge of the Russian desk at the National Security Council, was named the State Department's spokesman yesterday, The Associated Press reported.
Mr.
Burns, 38, was in Geneva with Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who made the announcement.
"I am delighted to welcome Nick as a member of my team and look forward to working closely with him," Mr.
Christopher said.


Roosevelt Financial Group Inc.(RFED,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Federal Judge Is Ordered To Step Aside on I.B.M.
In an unusual rebuke to another jurist, a Federal appeals court yesterday ordered the Federal district judge who has overseen the Justice Department's antitrust settlement with I.B.M. for almost 40 years to remove himself from the case, saying he does not appear impartial.
The ruling, which orders the case reassigned, ends a long and bitter legal feud in which Judge David N. Edelstein has repeatedly rejected the demands of the International Business Machines Corporation that he step aside.
I.B.M. has been asking the judge to lift a 1956 consent decree that restricted the company's operations, saying the settlement was obsolete.
But almost from the beginning, the company has contended that Judge Edelstein has treated it unfairly.


Court Rejects Appeal of Man Convicted in Child Smut Case With Political Overtones
Although the Supreme Court issued no decisions today, the Justices gave the Clinton Administration some most welcome news: They turned down an appeal by a man convicted of violating the Federal child pornography law.
It was the second time in two years that the man, Stephen A. Knox, had brought his case to the Court.
Mr.
Knox, a Pennsylvania State University graduate student, received a five-year prison sentence for possessing three videotapes of young girls dressed in bathing suits and other scanty apparel.


GRABBING A BITE WITH: Mandy Patinkin; Scalpel . . . Passion . . . Rainbows . . . Hope
MANDY PATINKIN'S anger rises like the steam from a nice hot bowl of chicken soup.
"They're trying to break our legs!" he yells, his deep-throated tenor bouncing off the walls of his favorite Upper West Side nova emporium, Barney Greengrass (the Sturgeon King), where the owners allow him to charge an onion bagel extra-well toasted with nova and fresh-squeezed orange juice to his personal account, a luxury afforded to few in this life.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-15  CATASTROPHIC QUAKE  In Japan's sixth largest city, rescure teams struggled to contain fires and combed through rubble in the wake of an earthquake that killed more than 2,000 people.
A1  VICTIMS TRYING TO COPE  The earthquake in Japan has left the victims stunned, and people began trying to cope with the destruction that left many homes and businesses in ruins.
A1


Japan's Players Frantic Over Earthquake
The pre-dawn earthquake that hit Kobe, Japan, on Tuesday held frightening repercussions for several Japanese players in contention here at the Australian Open, particularly 26th-ranked Naoko Sawamatsu.
The 21-year-old player learned that although her immediate family had been spared, her home had been destroyed and her best friend was missing and presumed dead.
Sawamatsu was grateful for the drizzle that postponed her first-round match until today as it gave her time to spend a frantic morning on the telephone tracking down her relatives back in Japan.


Breast Cancer Weapons: Fruit, Vegetables and, Maybe, Olive Oil
EVIDENCE continues to mount indicating that many of the foods people eat may either protect against cancer or promote its growth.
In the newest report, being published today in The Journal of the National Cancer Institute, a survey in Greece of 820 women with breast cancer and 1,548 women who were free of cancer revealed that eating lots of vegetables and fruits and consuming olive oil seems to lower the risk of developing breast cancer.
The study found that women who ate the most vegetables had a 48 percent lower cancer risk than those who ate the fewest, and those who ate the most fruits had a 32 percent reduction in breast cancer risk compared with those who ate the fewest.


Congress Approves Measure Extending Work Laws to Itself
In a unanimous vote, the House of Representatives today cleared the first legislation of the Republican-controlled 104th Congress, a bill that would end Congress's exemptions from discrimination and workplace laws and from lawsuits by employees.
The 390-to-0 vote also gave the Republican majority its first, and probably easiest, victory in its quest to pass the "Contract With America," a package of campaign promises from the election last year.
Speaker Newt Gingrich of Georgia said it was the fastest that a piece of legislation had passed through Congress and reached the President since 1933.


METRO DIGEST
WEALTHY JOIN REVOLT ON SCHOOL SPENDING
Even the wealthiest suburban communities in the New York metropolitan region and across the country have begun to revolt against school spending -- particularly growing teacher salaries -- after years of supporting public education at almost any expense.
A1.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the drive for a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution misstated the minimum number of votes and the minimum number of Democrats needed to approve the amendment in the House.
If all 435 members were present, approval would take a two-thirds vote, that is 290 members (necessarily including 60 Democrats) -- not 283 members, of whom 53 would be Democrats.


A Man Reviled and Revered; Family and Friends Fete Joseph Bonanno on 90th Birthday
He is retired now -- no more of the murderous gangland mayhem the Federal Government says he used to mastermind.
He is, his son says, "somewhat frail." But not too frail to put on a trimly tailored tuxedo and celebrate with 300 friends and relatives: Joseph Bonanno is 90 years old today.
Actually, Mr.
Bonanno had his revelry a few days early.
On Saturday, Mr.
Bonanno's three children rented a ballroom in Tucson, Ariz., 2,070 miles from the scenes of what the Government says were major crimes like attempted murder, gambling and narcotics trafficking.


Corrections
A Man in the News article on Jan. 14 about the new chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, Representative Robert L. Livingston, Republican of Louisiana, misspelled his middle name.
It is Linlithgow.


John Paul Beatifies a Papuan Martyr
The Pope and the prelates wore red today to symbolize the blood of martyrs.
The warriors wore paint and feathers to show respect for the dead.
And between them they blessed the bones of Peter To Rot, a martyr in these Melanesian parts, in a rite that has become one of the most distinctive of John Paul II's papacy.
Mr.
To Rot was executed at the age of 33 by occupying Japanese forces during the last days of World War II for refusing to give up his work as a religion teacher.
The Pope was presiding over his beatification, the step before sainthood.


Jimmy Carter, It Turns Out, Is a Poet, Too
Stoically, with the economy of an engineer or a time-study man, the former President kept signing his new book of poems for customers lining up at Rizzoli's bookstore in the World Financial Center.
"JCarter," he wrote with a felt-tip pen, paring off the first name so as to squeeze in more signatures in the time allotted.
For two hours yesterday he signed, never even pausing for a drink of water.
"He's the best signer I ever saw," said Mary Beth Roche, the director of publicity for his publisher, Times Books.
"He's better than Tip O'Neill, better than Kirk Douglas. He not only signs, he makes eye contact. He says 'hi.' "


Smith (A.O.) Corp.(SMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lastly, Mitterrand's Musical Opus No. 2
Thirteen years and a multitude of problems after its conception, the Cite de la Musique opened on the outskirts of Paris this month, completing the fifth of six Grands Travaux, or great works, initiated by President Francois Mitterrand since he took office in 1981.
Only the new National Library will be unfinished when he retires in May.
But with the glass pyramid at the Louvre, the Grande Arche de la Defense, the Arab Institute and the Bastille Opera, Mr.
Mitterrand can already claim to have changed Paris more than anyone since Baron Haussmann over a century ago.


Boise Cascade (BCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hmm, Maybe the Tuna Surprise


Meditrust (MT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Amphenol Corp.(APH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Adolf Butenandt Is Dead at 91; Won Nobel for Hormone Work
Adolf Butenandt, a German scientist whose pioneering work on sex hormones earned him the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1939, died today in Munich at the age of 91.
His death came after a long illness, The Associated Press reported.
His work in isolating and synthesizing several hormones opened the way to a profound understanding of their role in human sexuality and reproduction and made possible the development of birth control pills.


S. Michael Higgins; Special Olympics Official, 44
S.
Michael Higgins, the president of the New Jersey Special Olympics since 1984, died on Sunday at the Hunterdon Medical Center in Flemington, N.J.
He was 44 and lived in Ringoes, N.J.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Pilgrim's Pride Corp.(CHX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ron Luciano, Former Umpire In Majors, 57
Ron Luciano, a former major league umpire known for his flamboyant style and later the author of a series of colorful reminiscences on the baseball world, was found dead yesterday afternoon in the garage of his home in Endicott, N.Y., the police reported.
He was 57.
"The preliminary investigation shows no obvious signs of foul play," said Detective Lieut.
Harlan Ayers of the Endicott police, who reported that officers found Luciano's body at about 3:50 P.M.
No one was at the home when the police arrived in response to a 911 call.


Sidney Visner, 77, Nuclear Plant Expert
Dr.
Sidney Visner, a physicist who was an expert on the commercial uses of nuclear power, died on Jan. 5 in his home in Atlanta.
He was 77.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son, Samuel Sanders Visner of Washington.


Two Brewers Modify Accounts
Two brewers have announced changes in their accounts.
The F. X. Matt Brewing Company in Utica, N.Y., has selected Leonard/ Monahan in Providence, R.I., to handle advertising for its Saranac family of beers, previously handled in-house and on a project basis.
Billings were estimated at $1 million.
Leonard/Monahan was awarded the account after a three-month review that began with six agencies and was narrowed to Leonard/Monahan and Houston Effler Hampel &amp; Stefanides in New York.


Mexico Needs Help, Not Extortion
The Clinton Administration faces surprising and shortsighted opposition in Congress to its bold plan to rescue the Mexican peso.
Critics, both Democrat and Republican, say the plan will leave American taxpayers dangerously exposed if Mexico defaults on its bonds.
They want Mexican concessions for American loan guarantees, including sale of the state-owned petroleum monopoly.
They would also force adoption of labor reforms that Mexico steadfastly rejected during negotiations over Nafta, the free-trade accord with the U.S. and Canada.
The opponents are wrong.
The Clinton plan is ingeniously designed to stabilize the Mexican economy without costing U.S. taxpayers any money.
By stabilizing the peso, it would protect U.S. exports and prevent a temporary influx of imports and illegal immigrants.
The plan would also stop financial turmoil from spreading elsewhere in Latin America.


Harry Golombek, Chess Writer, 83
Harry Golombek, a British international chess master and former chess correspondent for The Times of London and The Observer, died on Jan. 7, according to press reports from London.
He was 83.
Mr.
Golombek was an important figure in a resurgence of the game in Britain after he began to publicize it in The Times.
His name appeared on the prize list of the British championship 14 times, and he was British champion in 1947, 1949 and 1955.
He was the author of 38 books on chess.


Kent Electronics Corp.(KNT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies The enforcement staff for the S.E.C. plans to recommend civil complaints against a number of former top executives with Prudential Securities, including George L. Ball, the former chairman, people with knowledge of the inquiry said.  [ Page D1. ] The parent of American Airlines posted its first profit from operations in five years, but still had a loss for the quarter.  [ D4. ]


Identifying Asthma Risk In Children
Half of all babies and young children wheeze from time to time, but only a minority go on to develop asthma, researchers find.
The children most likely to develop asthma can be identified early in life, a new study shows, enabling doctors to concentrate their efforts on those most likely to benefit from preventive treatment and allow those who will not benefit to avoid unnecessary treatment.
The new study, directed by Dr.
Fernando D. Martinez, a pediatrician at the University of Arizona in Tucson, followed 800 children from birth to age 6 to see what factors predicted the development of asthma, a chronic lung disease in which the airways become obstructed and inflamed.
The results, experts say, show that the children who are likely to develop asthma not only wheeze but also have allergies and strong family histories of the disease.


Modern and Not Afraid to Admit It
IF today's pervasive design trend for twigs, fringe and flea-market finds makes one hanker for some good old-fashioned modern design, this sleek alarm clock is a quick fix.
The unabashedly high-tech but lyrically swooping Sony design is just 5 inches wide, 3 5/8 inches high and 5 inches deep.


U S West Inc. (USW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Linear Technology Corp.(LLTC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Health Management Associates Inc.(HMA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ray Johnson, 67, Pop Artist Known for His Work in Collage
Ray Johnson, a collage artist who was a pioneer in using images from popular culture, died on Friday in Sag Harbor, L.I.
He was 67 and lived in Locust Valley, L.I.
A spokesman for the Sag Harbor Police Department said that Mr.
Johnson checked into the Baron's Cove Inn in Sag Harbor on Friday afternoon and either fell or jumped from the Sag Harbor-North Haven bridge that evening.
The death is still under investigation, the spokesman said.


Buenos Aires Journal; With Spray Paint, Students Wage 'Safe Sex' War
"AIDS: For Love, Use a Condom," reads graffiti scrawled across walls in almost every neighborhood of this genteel city.
The spray-painted message may be the most effective tool yet in the fight against AIDS, which Government officials here say has reached dire proportions.


Commerce Bancorp Inc.(COBA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hunt Manufacturing Co.  (HUN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Bruno's Inc.(BRNO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


With Opposition Rising, Clinton Pleads for Mexico Rescue Package
With Democrats and freshman Republicans alike in open revolt over the Administration's plan for a financial rescue package for Mexico, President Clinton made an unusual, direct appeal today to keep that country afloat.
Making his case to a group of business leaders, Mr.
Clinton warned that Mexico's economic problems were "plainly also a danger to the economic future of the United States."


First Virginia BanksInc.FVB,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Raychem Corp.(RYC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dauphin Deposit Corp.(DAPN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For Baby: No Bunnies, Please
ANYONE who has attended a baby shower knows that although infants somehow bring out the sentimental goofiness in people, pastel bunnies and bows can wear out their welcome.
In 1992, when Gita Chowdhury left her position as general manager of the Paul Smith Boutique in New York to have a baby, she couldn't find linens she liked for her daughter's crib.
So, with a business partner, Seran Trehan, she created Little Dream Makers, a collection that manages to mix sweetness with an edge of international sophistication.


Housing Officer Kills Man
A housing police officer shot and killed a man yesterday during an altercation at a housing project in East New York, Brooklyn, the police said.
The officer, Gregory Contino, 23, was on patrol in a building of the project, the Pink Houses, about 12:20 P.M. when he saw the man, Sean McGovern, smoking marijuana, said Officer Carmen Ortiz, a housing police spokeswoman.
Officer Ortiz said that during a scuffle, Mr.
McGovern, 24, who lives in the complex, took the officer's nightstick and began to beat him on the head.
The two rolled down the stairs and Officer Contino drew his pistol and fired one shot, hitting Mr.
McGovern in the stomach, Officer Ortiz said.


Robley C. Williams, Virus Investigator, Dies at 86
Dr.
Robley C. Williams, a biophysicist noted for investigating the structure of viruses, died on Jan. 3 at the home of his daughter, Grace, in Oneonta, N.Y.
He was 86.
The cause was pneumonia after a long illness, his family said.


First Maryland Bancorp (AIB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Johnson, 2 Other Jet Starters in Draft Pool
The Jets have exposed three starters -- including the high-priced running back Johnny Johnson -- to help fill the rosters of the Carolina Cougars and the Jacksonville Jaguars.
Each National Football League team must expose six players for the Feb. 15 expansion draft but can lose only a maximum of three.
In addition to Johnson, the Jets' other starters were center Jim Sweeney and strong safety Brian Washington.
Three primary backup players complete the list: quarterback Jack Trudeau, tight end James Thornton and defensive lineman Paul Frase.


Revenue 216,652,000 149,541,000


Summit Bancorp (N.J.)(SUBN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Caremark's Founder Wants It Back
James M. Sweeney, who sold his Caremark home health business for $580 million in 1987, is negotiating to buy that business back from Caremark International for less than $400 million, people close to the discussions said yesterday.
They said a deal could be completed by late next week.
The Coram Healthcare Corporation, headed by Mr.
Sweeney, would then become the largest provider of home health care in the country, with about $900 million in annual sales -- more than a quarter of the fragmented $3.5 billion business, which provides intravenous drugs and nutrition to patients at home.


First USA Inc.(FUS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


UJB Financial Corp.(UJB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. and Russia at Odds, Despite Talks
The United States and Russia talked past each other today.
In intense meetings aimed at repairing the deteriorating relationship between their countries, Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev could not agree on how to resolve Russia's war in the rebel region of Chechnya or how to bridge the gaps on other issues.


Market Shrugs Off Possible Roadblock to a Viacom Cable System Sale
Wall Street showed little reaction yesterday to the possibility that the House Ways and Means Committee would create an obstacle to Viacom Inc.'s expected sale of its cable television systems to an investment group led by a black investor.
The committee plans to look into the minority tax certificate program that is a central factor in the sale.
Under the program, Viacom could defer more than $250 million in taxes if it sold the cable systems to the minority-led group for an anticipated $2.5 billion.


Events: Illustrations Show and Sale
Design Studio and Studies  Cooper Union, Foundation Building, Seventh Street at Third Avenue; (212) 353-4195.
An exhibition and sale of 83 illustrations by Seymour Chwast, Milton Glaser and Edward Sorel, who together founded the Push Pin Studios in 1954, opens tomorrow and continues through Feb. 11 in the Houghton Gallery.
Proceeds will benefit Coop er Union.
Open Monday through Friday, noon to 7 P.M.; Saturday, noon to 5 P.M.
Free admission.


Creating a Garden To Thrive in Winter
IT was bitter earlier this month, albeit briefly.
Windy, too.
And when that low winter sun doesn't blind, the days are just plain grim.
Yet the gardener who ignores the scene beyond the windowpane loses a quarter of the year.
For better or worse, winter is when the architecture of a garden plan is revealed.
Solids and voids are created by hedges and arbors, allees and topiary.
Patterns may be etched by paths, steps and borders, as well as the artful combinations of shrubs and trees.


Haemonetics Corp.(HAE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


King World Productions Inc.(KWP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Clinton Won't Break Faith With Veterans
To the Editor:
The Clinton Administration disagrees with William Safire's proposal (column, Jan. 12) that the Department of Veterans Affairs be eliminated and that the veterans health care system be turned over to private insurance companies.


Forest Laboratories Inc.(FRX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rooney Commentary Flagged by N.F.L.
The National Football League has penalized ANDY ROONEY of CBS's "60 Minutes." The infraction: unsportsmanlike humor.
The punishment: exile from a 75th anniversary program taped last night for airing next Thursday on ABC.
Rooney, a Giants season-ticket holder since the helmets were leather, had been invited by the league to deliver a football commentary.
"They said, 'How about talking about being a fan?' " Rooney said.
But when JOE BROWNE, the N.F.L.'s vice president of communications, examined the script, suggesting formation of a fans' union, he threw a flag.
Rooney was disinvited.
"My God," Rooney said.
"The N.F.L.'s got to loosen up."


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Announced the retirement of Dr.
Jules Rasinski, team physician, effective March 31.
Named Dr.
Lewis Yocum medical director of the team's organization.
Northern League
ST.
PAUL SAINTS -- Sold the contracts of Vince Castaldo, third baseman, and Mason Rudolph, catcher, to the Florida Marlins; Benny Castillo, outfielder, to the Cleveland Indians; and Matt Stark, first baseman-designated hitter, to the New York Yankees.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
UTAH JAZZ -- Activated David Benoit, forward, from the injured list.
Placed Jay Humphries, guard, on the injured list.
Football  National Football League
HOUSTON OILERS -- Named Johnny Roland running backs coach.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Named Chip Myers receivers coach. Canadian Football League
SHREVEPORT PIRATES -- Named Joe Barnes offensive coordinator.
Golf  United States Golf Association
USGA -- Named Barbara McIntire chairman and Joan Birkland vice-chairman of its national Women's Committee for 1995.
Hockey  National Hockey League
ANAHEIM MIGHTY DUCKS -- Signed Steve Rucchin, center, to a multiyear contract.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Traded Kevin Hatcher, defenseman, to the Dallas Stars for Mark Tinordi and Rick Mrozik, defensemen.
Traded Don Beaupre, goaltender, to the Ottawa Senators for a fifth-round pick in the 1995 entry draft.
Colonial Hockey League
BRANTFORD SMOKE -- Named Craig Newton director of business operations.
East Coast Hockey League
ROANOKE EXPRESS -- Announced Dave Gagnon, goaltender, and Michael Smith, defenseman, have been recalled by the Minnesota Moose of the International Hockey League.
Placed Jeff Jestadt, left wing, on the 14-day injured reserve list.
Transferred Darwin McClelland, right wing, from the 14- to the 30-day injured reserve list, retroactive to Jan. 13.
Signed John Bradley, goaltender.
College
ALABAMA-BIRMINGHAM -- Named Pat Donohoe defensive line coach.
TENNESSEE -- Announced the resignation of Lovie Smith, secondary coach, to take a similar job at Ohio State.
Named defensive coordinator Larry Marmie as secondary coach.
TRI-STATE -- Announced the resignation of Butch Perchan, athletic director, to become full-time director of development.


Earthquake Relief for the 200,000 Homeless Overwhelms Japanese Agencies
The authorities began full-fledged relief efforts on Wednesday across a large part of western Japan, but they acknowledged that they were overwhelmed by the challenge of caring for 200,000 people left homeless by the earthquake.
Food, water and medicine are in desperately short supply, and some of the refugees -- prosperous business-owners on Monday, homeless people on Tuesday -- are reduced to scooping water from puddles left by broken water mains.


Economic Scene; The shock therapy route: Is it the only true path to capitalism?
ISN'T there a better way?
With Mexico reeling from currency collapse, India shaken by an electoral backlash against pro-market reforms and the former Soviet bloc nostalgic for sausage-on-every-plate socialism, it is again fashionable to imagine alternatives to the straight and narrow path to capitalism.
And three contrarian economists, loosely identified with the political left, are happy to oblige.


Let Those Who Live in Flood Zones Bear Cost
To the Editor:
"California Storm Brings Rethinking of Development" (front page, Jan. 15) omits the major, realistic way of dealing with flooding: proper administration of the National Flood Insurance Program.


In Urgent Age of Newt, Byrd Slows the Pace
Over in the House, Republicans are intent on defying the traditional, ever-so-stately pace of the legislative process and pushing through their "Contract With America." But between the Republicans and their dream of a 100-day revolution stands the Senate.
More specifically, Senate Democrats.
And most specifically of all, Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia.


Sleepy Truckers Linked to Many Deaths
Truck drivers who fall asleep at the wheel are a factor in 750 to 1,500 road deaths every year, according to a study by the National Transportation Safety Board, which said that fatigue was more of a safety problem among commercial truck drivers than drugs or alcohol.
In the study it approved today, the board criticized Federal and state regulations that permit truck drivers to work with as little as eight hours between shifts, and said that drivers of trucks with sleeping berths had even less protection.
Those drivers' eight hours can be divided into two segments, one as short as two hours.


Of Dr. Seuss and Preening Princesses
MY friend Harriet often calls to dissect movies, books, magazines and the news of the day.
Because she is a speed reader, she manages to digest mountains of publications even though she, like me, has two children under 5.
The phone rang one morning.
"I've got a real problem with 'One Fish Two Fish Red Fish Blue Fish,' " she said.
"Have you read it? The only girl in the whole book is brushing hair."


Yale Club Had but One Hale to Lose
Nathan Hale, the Yale-educated patriot hanged by the British in 1776 for spying, said he had but one life to lose for his country.
The Yale Club in midtown Manhattan, where Old Blues hang out after bellying up to the bar and ordering tumblers of Johnnie Walker Black with the rocks on the side, had but one Nathan Hale statue to lose.


Oakwood Homes Corp.(OH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Integrated Device Technology Inc.(IDTI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Why Replanting Christmas Trees Is Noble Folly
To the Editor:
Like Samuel Leff (letter, Jan. 11) I also am a hiker and a nature lover, but as a horticulturist I must disagree with him about the annual "massacre" of Christmas trees.


MORE ON THE QUAKE
Shallow but Intense Shock
Japanese scientists cut by half their estimate of the depth of the quake that shook Kobe, helping explain why the temblor was so violent and deadly.
They also discovered long ruptures at the surface.
Page A12.
Higher Interest Rates Feared
The damages from the quake may put upward pressure on interest rates around the world as the huge cost of rebuilding -- made more expensive by a lack of insurance coverage -- is calculated.
Page D1.


2 Americans Reported Abducted in Turkey
A terrorist group claimed today to have kidnapped a United States Air Force officer and his son, who have been missing in Turkey for three days, and threatened to kill them unless a leader of the Iranian-backed Islamic militant group, the Party of God, was freed, a Turkish news agency reported.
It was not clear from the report who the Party of God leader was or where he was being held.


Ohio Edison Co.(OEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Owen Healthcare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Corrections
An article on Jan. 5 about the inauguration of Gov.
George E. Pataki credited Assemblyman Willis H. Stephens Jr. with a legislative precedent incorrectly.
Although Mr.
Stephens, a Republican from Brewster, is a third-generation Assemblyman, he is not the first; he was preceded by Joseph R. Lentol, a Democrat who represents northern Brooklyn, as did his father and grandfather.


No Big Deak, It's Just GOLD
HELLO, Charivari.
This is your wakeup call -- the one you requested three years ago in your cheeky billboard: "Ripped jeans. Pocket tees. Back to basics. Wake us when it's over."
Well, it's over. Rise and shine.


Corrections
A nutritional analysis in the Plain and Simple column of The Living Section on Jan. 11, with a recipe for beef fajitas, included erroneous figures.
Each serving contains 550 calories, 16 grams of fat and 50 milligrams of cholesterol (not 650 calories, 30 grams of fat and 95 milligrams of cholesterol).


American Maize Products (AZE,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pope, at Mid-Point In His Trip to Asia, Arrives in Australia
More than halfway through a challenging, 11-day trip through Asia, Pope John Paul II arrived in Australia today, saying divine providence had enabled him to travel halfway round the world.
But, before ending a two-day stay in Papua New Guinea to fly here, the journey seemed to have taken a toll on the 74-year-old Pope, who has yet to recover fully from a broken leg last April and subsequent hip-replacement surgery.


The Look Of Popcorn
IN 1990, when he graduated from the Academy of Fine Arts in Gdansk, Poland, Jerry Wozinski didn't envision that he would move to Westchester County and paint houses.
But his training has helped him fine-tune an interior painting technique he first saw in Poland.
Mr.
Wozinski uses a high-pressure compressor to spray walls with a lightly textured "popcorn finish" paint mixture that resembles speckled granite when it dries.
The nontoxic paint is washable and guaranteed for 10 years.
The technique is common in Switzerland and Japan, he said, and is a cheaper alternative to wallpaper: it costs about $650 for an 8-by-10-foot room.
"It is perfect for decaying Manhattan apartments," he said, because the textured finish "heals and smooths" cracked, uneven plaster walls, without expensive prep work.
Mr.
Wozinski can be reached at European Standard Painting Company, Mahopac, N.Y.; (914) 628-5963.


Survey by Fed Reports A 'Vibrant' Economy
Growth of the economy "remained vibrant" into early January, with divergences narrowing among various parts of the country, a periodic survey of conditions in the 12 Federal Reserve districts showed today.
But the robust expansion, which is widely thought to have approached an annual rate of 5 percent in the final quarter of 1994, has begun to generate evidence of spreading inflation, the report said.


Diebold Inc.(DBD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First of America Bank Corp.(FOA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An auto maker uses a cult artist's colorful images to make its mini-vans stand out from the pack.
ALTHOUGH much of his work hung in galleries and museums, Keith Haring also designed art to sell Swatch watches and Absolut vodka.
So perhaps it should come as no surprise that four years after his death his colorful, genderless people have been resurrected -- or should that be reanimated -- to plug mini-vans for the American Honda Motor Company.
Two gently comic television commercials and print advertisements for the Honda Odyssey use the figures to gild the image of the most unhip of vehicles.
Honda hopes the campaign will ease the angst of baby boomers contemplating their first purchase of a mini-van, a vehicle so terrifying to them, apparently, that Honda dares not speak its name.


Cuomo Testifies on Crown Heights Rioting
In another reverberation from the racial violence that rocked Crown Heights in 1991, former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo testified yesterday that former Mayor David N. Dinkins never told him that he had allowed "a day of grace" to blacks who attacked Hasidic Jews and the police during the disturbances.
Testifying under oath in a civil suit by some Hasidic residents against the city and Mr.
Dinkins, Mr.
Cuomo was questioned by the plaintiffs' lawyer about a report in The Jewish Press that quoted him after the violence as saying, "The Mayor on the second day of the trouble in Crown Heights said that the night before had been a sort of day of grace to the mob, and that wouldn't happen a second day because it was abused and because there were crimes perpetrated that were not prevented."


Donnelly Corp.(DON,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Security Corp.(FSCO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Finally, a Hockey Season Hits the Ice With Fewer Games but More Questions
Ready or not, the athletes of the National Hockey League will lace up their skates, buckle their chin straps and pull on their sweaters tomorrow night to finally begin the locked-out season.
With only a 48-game scramble for playoff positions, all games will be held within either the Eastern or Western Conferences.
The daily divisional standings will be virtually meaningless.
The conference standings will be all-important, because that's how teams are seeded for the Stanley Cup playoffs.
Eight teams from each conference will make the tournament.
No Eastern Conference team will meet a Western Conference team until the finals, which will conclude at the end of June.


CoreStates Financial Corp.(CFL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lennar Corp.(LEN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


D.R. Horton Inc.(DRHI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


City National Corp.(CYN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rowan Cos.(RDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Performance; CLASSICAL
Familiar Beethoven Made to Seem New  Orchestra of the 18th Century Avery Fisher Hall
Having recently completed their recorded traversal of the Beethoven symphonies, Frans Bruggen and his Orchestra of the 18th Century turned up on Sunday afternoon with a program that included the most popular one of them all, the Fifth.
Considered entirely in the abstract, the prospect of yet another Beethoven Fifth might seem unpromising.
Yet in a bracing, well-played concert performance, the tensions in the opening movement, the grandeur of the Andante and the moment when the Scherzo gives way to the big brass chords that announce the finale all conspire to melt even a skeptical listener's resistance.


Review/Fashion; In Milan, Brazen Men Parading
Guess who met her match on the runways of the Milan men's shows?
The Wonderbra-clad, stiletto-shod, boa-draped, disco-hopping vixen that women's fashion has been promoting so brazenly.
Next fall's Romeo has the strong shoulders and nipped waist of an American Gigolo, the pointy, shiny shoes of Sammy Davis Jr., the tight trousers of Mick Jagger and the sexy androgyny of British rock stars.


Henry Coords, 79, Fisher-Price Leader Who Shaped Growth
Henry Harrison Coords, former president of Fisher-Price toys, died on Thursday at Jupiter Medical Center in Jupiter, Fla.
He was 79 and lived in Jupiter.
The cause of death was Crohn's disease, said his wife, Gertrude.


Trinity Industries(TRN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mallinckrodt Group Inc.(MKG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cleo Rickman Fitch; Archeological Researcher, 84
Cleo Rickman Fitch, an archeological researcher who specialized in Roman lamps, died on Sunday in her home in Manhattan.
She was 84.
The cause was congestive heart failure, her family said.


Bowater Inc.(BOW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Woman in the News: Elizabeth Peterken McCaughey; Taking On a Challenge
When she wanted to sidestep a question during the campaign, Betsy McCaughey would often smile and say, "I'm an expert in policy, not politics."
Now, as New York's Lieutenant Governor, Ms.
McCaughey, a constitutional scholar with no previous experience in government, has taken on her first test as a policy maker with one of the state's knottiest and most expensive problems: revamping the $19 billion Medicaid system, which provides health care for the poor, disabled and elderly.


Carnegie Series by Opera Orchestra
The Opera Orchestra of New York, under Eve Queler's direction, is to present works by Massenet, Rimsky-Korsakov and Bellini in its annual series of operas in concert at Carnegie Hall.
The rarely heard "Herodiade," Massenet's reworking of the Salome legend, will lead off on Feb. 14, with Renee Fleming, Grace Bumbry, John Keyes and Yuri Mazurok to sing the principal roles.
On March 5, Nuccia Focile, Olga Borodina, Alexei Steblianko, Sergei Leiferkus and Paul Plishka are to lead the cast of "The Tsar's Bride," by Rimsky-Korsakov.
On May 8, Mariella Devia, Carla Wood, Gregory Kunde, Roberto Frontali and Ildebrando d'Arcangelo are to star in Bellini's "Puritani."


Gertrude Fogelson, Philanthropist, 92
Gertrude Fogelson, a New York philanthropist and artist, died on Sunday at her home in Palm Beach, Fla.
She was 92 and also had a home in Manhattan.
The cause was heart failure, her family said.


Accounts
Earle Palmer Brown, Philadelphia, was awarded two accounts with combined billings estimated to exceed $5.5 million: the Delaware Valley Mercedes-Benz Dealers Association, to handle its account, previously unassigned, and Healthcare Management Alternatives/Managed Healthcare Systems, Vienna, Va., to handle its advertising and public relations, previously at Crawley Haskins &amp; Rodgers, Philadelphia.
Linett &amp; Harrison, Milburn, N.J., was awarded two accounts with combined billings estimated at more than $1 million: Home Life Financial Assurance Corp., Piscataway, N.J., for advertising, previously handled by various agencies on a project basis, and Seiko Optical Corp., Mahwah, N.J., for multimedia advertising and communications, previously handled by the Alden Group Ltd., New York.


Film Festival Finds Itself Swimming Near the Mainstream
The Sundance Film Festival, the nation's premier showcase for independent movies, has always embraced diversity.
Women, minorities, disaffected post-adolescents and arty, esoteric directors have regularly been accorded such preferential treatment that other film makers have grumbled that quality was being sacrificed for trendiness.
Not anymore.


Arcadian Partners (UAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Board Adopts A Curriculum About AIDS
After years of debate and the ouster of one schools chancellor, the New York City Board of Education adopted a mandatory junior high school AIDS curriculum that stresses abstinence and allows for condom demonstrations and discussions of society's treatment of homosexuals.
The 224-page curriculum, adopted last night in a unanimous vote by the seven-member board, expands on the state-mandated AIDS prevention program.
In its final form, the curriculum includes discussions of abstinence in all six of its 45-minute lessons as the best means of preventing the transmission of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.


College Basketball Report
Manhattan  Fran Fraschilla's Jaspers (13-2), who knocked off St.
Peter's by 76-55 on Tuesday night, are off to their best start in 40 years.
Manhattan, which got 16 points apiece from Heshimu Evans and Ted Ellis against the Peacocks, is preparing for Saturday afternoon's clash with Siena (3-10) at Knickerbocker Arena in Albany, where last season, the Jaspers crushed the Saints in a regular-season game before more than 13,000 spectators.
"Going into the first game of the season, we had no idea how good we were," said Fraschilla, whose team has reeled off four straight victories after a disappointing loss to Iona.
"After the Iona game, we took a good look at ourselves in the mirror. We weren't doing the things that people took notice of earlier in the season. We needed to get back to playing great team defense, playing with great intensity and enthusiasm and using our depth to win."
Despite getting his team back on a winning track, Fraschilla thinks there is still much room for improvement.
"We're only 70 percent of where we can be six weeks from now, so we just want to keep getting better," he said.
"I don't even think our kids realize that it's our best start in 40 years. We just have them focused on asking 'Who's next?' "  Canisius  The Golden Griffins (9-6), who have defeated Cincinnati, Penn and North Carolina-Charlotte this season, pose the biggest threat to Manhattan in the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference.
Three big reasons for Canisius's strong play has been its frontline of Micheal Meeks, a 6-foot-8-inch junior center from Brampton, Ontario; Darrell Barley, a 6-5 junior forward from Rochester, and Craig Wise, a 6-4 forward from Philadelphia.
Meeks, who is leading the M.A.A.C. in scoring with an 18.4 average, is also hauling down 6.6 rebounds per game.
Barley is the league's fourth-leading scorer at 16.5 points a game, and Wise is seventh over all, producing 14.9 points a game.
"Great teams can have a bad day and still win. That won't happen at Canisius because we do not have that type of talent," said John Beilein, the Canisius coach.
"But if we do play well, we've shown we can play with anybody."
Canisius is preparing this week for Saturday's home game against St.
Bonaventure (8-7).
St.
Bonaventure
The Bonnies of the Atlantic 10 had lost 45 consecutive league road games until last week's 78-56 blowout of Duquesne.
Oddly enough, St.
Bonaventure's road hex, which began in February 1989, was ended on Friday the 13th.
"I didn't know that," St.
Bonaventure Coach Jim Baron said yesterday.
"We're getting better. It was a great effort on our part and I think our enthusiasm carried over from the Massachusetts game, which we lost in overtime. We set a goal for ourselves at the beginning of the year that we would win some road games in the league, and we got one."  Army
The Cadets (9-5), who are coming off an 89-82 upset of Patriot League-leading Holy Cross on Tuesday night, are off to their best start since the 1978-79 season.
That season, the Cadets jumped out to an 11-3 start under a coach named Mike Krzyzewski.
"We're real pleased with the victory over Holy Cross," said Army's current head coach, Dino Gaudio.
"We beat a very good team, and we were just fortunate at the end to pull it out."
Army, which next plays at Navy on Saturday afternoon, is led by Mark Leuking, the nation's third-leading scorer.
Leuking, a 5-10 junior guard from Austin, Ind., who is averaging 26.8 points a game, had a team-high 24 points against Holy Cross.
"We knew this was an important game as far as the season was concerned," said Leuking.
"Coach kept reminding us, kept drilling us how much we needed this game, but we were already prepared to play it."  Syracuse  Syracuse (13-1) has won 13 straight games, including Tuesday night's 91-87 victory over St.
John's, a contest in which the Orangemen squandered almost all of a 19-point lead.
Despite their winning streak and rise in the national polls, the Orangemen, who have lost big leads on several occasions this season, are not happy with their overall performance.
"It's been shown the past couple of games that we don't have the killer instinct," said Lawrence Moten, who scored 21 points against the Red Storm.
"We have to want to stick the dagger in their hearts. We kind of let people back in the ball game. We can't be doing that."
The Orangemen, who have wasted big leads against Villanova and Pittsburgh, will be shooting for more consistency Saturday afternoon at Providence (10-3).
Penn  After being routed by Massachusetts last week, the Quakers (9-2) returned the favor against La Salle on Tuesday night, hammering the Explorers, 90-71.
Although Penn had six players in double-figure scoring, one of them was not the team's leading scorer, Jerome Allen, who finished with just 2 points on free throws and 6 turnovers.
"Jerome Allen doesn't have to score for us to be effective," said Coach Fran Dunphy, whose team plays at St.
Joseph's (8-4) on Saturday evening.
"He does so many other things well."


Grand-Scale Choreography in Small-Scale Presentation
How exciting it is to see a talented young choreographer develop!
In recent seasons, Pascal Rioult, a French-born former member of the Martha Graham Dance Company, has successfully choreographed for several groups.
On Saturday night, the Pascal Rioult Dance Theater offered two premieres at the Kaye Playhouse.
Each was neatly constructed and quirky and had its own distinctive impact.
"Wien" was the title Ravel first thought of giving to the lush orchestral score that eventually became "La Valse." And "Wien" was what Mr.
Rioult called his work to a recording of this piece.
The music's combination of extravagance and feverishness has led many choreographers, including George Balanchine, to create dances showing the decadence of an aristocratic society.


Standard ProductsCo.(SPD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gardens and Therapy
To The Home Section:
I read "When Hope Falters, Balm for the Soul" (Dec. 29) with delight and dismay.
I was delighted to read about the healing powers of working in the natural environment.
I was dismayed to read the reference to physical therapy and not to occupational therapy.


Corrections
An article yesterday surveying the economic disruption caused by the earthquake in Japan misspelled a brand name of Matsushita, an electronics company that reported little disruption.
The brand is Technics, not Techniques.


Chrysler Financial Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Critic of the Left Ready to Step Aside
Norman Podhoretz, an outspoken champion of the political left who went on to become one of its leading scourges, will step down in May from his 35-year term as editor in chief of Commentary magazine.
In 1960 at the age of 30, Mr.
Podhoretz -- who turned 65 Monday -- took over the small, relatively obscure journal, which was published by the American Jewish Committee with a circulation of 10,000.
During the 1960's Commentary was a leading voice of radical, social and political criticism.
From the 1970's on, however, it came to be known as a catechism of neoconservatism.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report in the sports section on Sunday about the New York Baseball Writers Association dinner misstated the date of the event in some editions.
It will be held Sunday night; it was not last Sunday.


Prehistoric Art Treasure Is Found in French Cave
In the mountains of southern France, where human beings have produced art for thousands of years, explorers have discovered an underground cave full of Stone Age paintings, so beautifully made and well preserved that experts are calling it one of the archeological finds of the century.
The enormous underground cavern, which was found on Dec. 18, 1994 in a gorge near the town of Vallon-Pont-d'Arc in the Ardeche region, is studded with more than 300 vivid images of animals and human hands that experts believe were made some 20,000 years ago.


Italy's New Premier Pledges to Exit Office After Passing Reforms
In a move intended to appease his predecessor, Italy's new Prime Minister, Lamberto Dini, said today that he and his Cabinet of "technicians" would stay in office long enough to enact its program, and then make way for a newly elected government.
The outgoing Prime Minister, Silvio Berlusconi, said on Tuesday that he would not support Mr.
Dini's new Government in Parliament unless he was assured that it would lead to new elections soon.
Today, Mr.
Berlusconi said he wanted a public commitment not only from Mr.
Dini but also from President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, who he said had promised a mid-June election date in private conversations last week.


In Attack on Gingrich, Democrats Use His Tactics and Reap Chaos
The House chamber was brought to the brink of chaos today as Democrats, blocked from discussing Speaker Newt Gingrich's book deal on the floor, used the same disruptive tactics he had perfected during his rise to power and accused the Republicans of trying to silence the minority with "totalitarian" behavior.
The fracas was touched off when Representative Carrie P. Meek, a Florida Democrat delivering remarks critical of Mr.
Gingrich's book arrangement, was ruled out of order by Representative Cliff Stearns, Republican of Florida, who was presiding over the House in the Speaker's absence.


Tighter Standards Urged For Buried Gas Pipelines
In its final report on a natural gas explosion last March that sent a fireball roaring into the sky above Edison, N.J., the National Transportation Safety Board said today that the accident was a warning to the whole pipeline industry that it needs tougher standards on how pipelines are built, how they are inspected and what the public is told about them.
The safety board concluded that the Edison blast, which left hundreds homeless when a nearby apartment complex was devastated, occurred because the 36-inch pipe was made of steel too brittle to withstand a gouge that had been inflicted by construction equipment, perhaps a backhoe, months or years earlier.


RESULTS PLUS
YACHTING  Light Breezes Limit Competition  With barely a breeze strong enough for racing, America's Cup officials yesterday postponed two of the Louis Vuitton Cup challengers' races off San Diego.
Only one pairing was able to get in a match in the 3-to-6-knot winds.
Team New Zealand's Black Magic 2 defeated its rival from Down Under, One Australia, by 1 minute 36 seconds.
One of the Black Magic 2 crewmen climbed the mast and stayed perched about 100 feet up for most of the race -- a new ploy to look for wind.
On the Citizen Cup defenders' course, PACT 95's yacht, Young America, edged Dennis Conner's boat, Stars &amp; Stripes, by 18 seconds.
Paul Cayard, strategist for Stars &amp; Stripes, replaced Conner at the helm for the day's race.


In Performance; POP
Blues With a Bit of Jazz, Still Witty After 40 Years  Clarence (Gatemouth) Brown, guitarist The Bottom Line
In the early 1950's, the guitarist Clarence (Gatemouth) Brown recorded a series of singles that rang with nasty and metallic guitar improvisations.
Mr.
Brown, from Texas, brought together a handful of traditions, from the electric guitar playing of early blues musicians to the jump and big-band styles.
Suave and elegant, with swelling big-band horn riffs, Mr.
Brown's music was also down home, and without him Johhny (Guitar) Watson and Albert Collins wouldn't have existed.


Corrections
A listing of symptoms on the Health page yesterday with an article about dysthymia, a mild but chronic depression, misstated the telephone number for information about a treatment study at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
The number is (212) 821-0772.


The Pop Life
Best of the Rest
Last year, almost all of pop's heavy hitters put out new albums.
With Madonna, the Rolling Stones, Pink Floyd, Pearl Jam, R.E.M., the Eagles and Eric Clapton having released new work, it's surprising that new bands like Green Day, Collective Soul and Sheryl Crow were noticed.
But for every Green Day, there is a Screeching Weasel; for every Collective Soul, a Cardinal.
Listed here are a few of the many exceptional records that almost slipped by unnoticed last year, by bands that are, for the most part, on labels that don't have the money for tours, advertising or wide distribution of their records.
In addition to being available by mail, many of these recordings can be found at Manhattan stores like Adult Crash (66 Avenue A, East Village) and Kim's Underground (144 Bleecker Street, West Village).


Contractors Struck 2,000 Buried Utility Lines Last Year
More than 2,000 buried utility lines were hit during digging operations last year in New Jersey, disrupting electrical and telephone service, threatening explosions from leaking natural gas and causing millions of dollars in damage.
The daylong blackout at Newark International Airport, which occurred after a pile driver severed three high-voltage cables, highlights a problem that occurs on a less disruptive scale several times a day under streets, construction sites and backyards across the state.


We Need Also to Look at Orphanage Results
To the Editor:
Julian Moynahan (letter, Jan. 15) had a tough time in the orphanage to which he was sent in 1932, but his personal experience has limited relevance to the question of whether orphanages are a good thing or not.
The public policy issue is not personal experience, but future behavior.


Labor Gains Nothing In Company Unions
To the Editor:
"Useful, if Tame, Labor Reforms" (editorial, Jan. 12) states that eliminating the ban on company unions would be a "pro-labor" step.
Company unions have been outlawed since the passage of the National Labor Relations Act in 1935 for the simple reasons that they are dominated by management, and they are used to thwart democratic right of workers to organize real unions.


Ameritech Corp.(AIT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Malcolm X's Daughter Enters Not Guilty Plea
In a crowded Federal courtroom here, the second-oldest daughter of Malcolm X pleaded not guilty today to plotting the murder of her father's protege-turned-bitter-enemy, Louis Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam.
Though the arraignment of Qubilah Bahiyah Shabazz took less than five minutes, the Government's case against her has churned up 30 years worth of pain, conspiracy theories, ghosts and accusations about the assassination of Malcolm X.


Modine Mfg. Co.(MODI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


AMR Posts Profit From Operations
The parent company of American Airlines, the AMR Corporation, reported its first fourth-quarter profit from operations in five years yesterday, although an after-tax restructuring charge related to cost-cutting measures resulted in a net loss for the period of $123 million.
The company said that its earnings were also hurt by disruptions to its American Eagle commuter division caused by the grounding in icy conditions of its fleet of ATR aircraft, the same type of plane that crashed in October near Roselawn, Ind.


Scientists Assert Quake Took Place Near Surface
Japanese scientists yesterday cut by half their estimate of the depth of the quake that shook the Kobe region, helping explain why the temblor was so violent and deadly.
They also discovered long ruptures at the surface produced when rock formations deep in the earth suddenly broke apart along a fault line, a clue buttressing the idea that the quake was quite shallow.
The preliminary estimate on Tuesday was that the quake's focus lay at a depth of 20 kilometers, or 12.4 miles.
But the Japanese scientists, working with an array of data from instruments that measure various kinds of shock waves, yesterday revised their estimate to 10 kilometers, or 6.2 miles.


Bubka Coming to Millrose Meet
As a 10-year-old in Ukraine, SERGEI BUBKA was a good athlete -- soccer, basketball, anything.
He had never seen a vaulting pole.
"But I was a sporting person," Bubka said yesterday in a conference call from his home in Berlin.
"This friend was vaulting. I tried it and liked it and I continued. I caught on very quick." In the last decade, he has broken the world records 18 times indoors and 17 outdoors.
He raised the records to 20 feet 2 inches indoors in 1993 and 20-1 3/4 outdoors last year.
He has made history's 24 highest vaults.
Bubka will compete Feb. 3 in the Chemical Bank Millrose Games in Madison Square Garden, his first New York appearance since 1987.
Of 1994's 10 top vaulters, the field will include seven.


Southern Exposure


Good Guys Inc.(GGUY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Digital, Surprising Wall St., Posts Second-Quarter Profit
The Digital Equipment Corporation said yesterday that it returned to profitability during its second quarter, after five consecutive quarterly losses.
The results surprised analysts, who had been expecting a quarterly loss of 28 cents a share, based on the mean estimate of 17 analysts recently surveyed by Zacks Investment Research.


Hartford Senate Backs Rowland by Denying State Workers' Raises
In a series of votes that Gov.
John G. Rowland had called crucial to the success of his administration, the State Senate today rejected eight arbitrated awards granting pay raises to state workers while allowing another one to survive.
The denial of raises for about 14,000 state workers was a major victory for Mr.
Rowland, who had risked much of his political capital in an effort to put public pressure on senators.
In starting his bid to overturn the awards 10 days ago, he reversed campaign pledges to honor such agreements, explaining that the raises would make it almost impossible for him to keep what he considered a more important campaign promise -- to cut spending and reduce the income tax.


People
David Cathers, president at Franklin Spier Inc., New York, has resigned, the agency said, to write a book on Stickley furniture.
Alix Nelson, chief executive, will serve as acting president, assisted by Steve Kahler, partner.
Roger M. Winsby was named to the new position of executive vice president and chief operating officer at Chadwick Martin Bailey, Boston.
He was previously group vice president at DRI/McGraw-Hill, Lexington, Mass.


Not Only the Poor Appreciate SUNY
To the Editor:
David J. Steinberg, in "Best Deal in Town" (Op-Ed, Jan. 12), identifies the cost of higher education as a serious problem.
As the father of a child who will be a freshman next year, I know.


For Youth, Fun at Camp Is a Dream Come True
Rodney C. is a 13-year-old with big dreams.
Last summer, he dreamed of going to camp, acting in a television comedy and playing professional basketball.
He got his first wish, at least, thanks to the Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies.
The agency sent Rodney and his little brother Brandon, 11, to Camp Wilbur Herlich in Holmes, N.Y.


U.S. Bancorp (USBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Police, Seeking Bronx Executive, Find Her Slain in Her Apartment
Trying to reassure the family of a Federal Express executive who had not reported for work, the police went to her apartment in the Bronx yesterday and made a gruesome discovery.
They found her handcuffed, blindfolded, gagged and shot to death.
The body of Denise Raymond, 39, was found at 3:05 P.M., shot twice in the head, with two pillows over her head, said Sgt.
Edward Caro, a police spokesman.
He said her body was found in her bedroom, face-down and fully clothed, with three sets of handcuffs binding her wrists.
Her mouth was stuffed with a sock and sealed with duct tape.


Harman International Industries Inc.(HAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Performance; CLASSICAL
Once Again for Her Birthday, The Celebrator Gives the Gifts  Marilyn Horne Alice Tully Hall
Last year Marilyn Horne put her 60th birthday concert to altruistic use, inviting a starry slate of guests and using the event to raise money for a foundation that would support young singers.
In its first year the Marilyn Horne Foundation has presented recitals by two young singers, Olafur Bjarnason, a tenor, and Bridgett Hooks, a soprano.


Stepping Out With the 49ers' Taylor
John Taylor entered this season firmly established as one of pro football's best receivers, with three of the five longest touchdown receptions in San Francisco 49ers history.
But when his numbers went down because of injuries, some said he was losing it.
Getting old at age 32.
A step slower.
Even now, as the 49ers prepare for Super Bowl XXIX in Miami on Jan. 29 against the San Diego Chargers, there is talk.
The Dallas Cowboys' receiver, Alvin Harper, is rumored to be the 49ers' hope as Taylor's replacement via free agency next season.


Faldo Is Back on Tour, Aiming to Reclaim No. 1
A broad smile creased Nick Faldo's face as he heard the question.
He was clearly amused.
Asked how his departure from the PGA European Tour -- and his decision to play full time in America on the PGA Tour -- was greeted by his European peers, Faldo began to chuckle.
"They all just waved," he said, mimicking an exaggerated hand wave.
" 'Bye-bye. Just go,' I think they said. 'How long are you staying? Great!' "


Exabyte Corp.(EXBT,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Republic New York Corp.(RNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Breed Technologies Inc.(BDT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Developments in Congress
HOUSE: It was easily the most chaotic day since lawmakers convened two weeks ago.
First there was a clash on the floor as Democrats pressed their attack on Speaker Newt Gingrich's book deal and Republicans sprang to his defense.
On a party-line roll-call of 217 to 178, the House voted to strike from the record comments made by Representative Carrie P. Meek, a Florida Democrat who asked -- in a part of her text that Republicans prevented her from delivering -- "Who does this Speaker really work for? Is it the American people or his New York publishing house?" Then the Mexican financial crisis threatened to become a flash point.
Republican leaders said they would demand that Democrats produce substantial votes for the $40 billion rescue measure the Clinton Administration is drafting.
Representative Dick Armey of Texas, the majority leader, said he wanted more than half the Democratic caucus to support the measure.
"It's their President," he said.


No Headline
"This discovery is of exceptional value because of its size and variety and because it was found undisturbed. It will help us to understand how human symbolism evolved." -- JACQUES TOUBON, the French Minister of Culture.  [ A8:1. ]


Beard Tells His All-Stars To Lead Like All-Stars
Butch Beard hears it everywhere he goes.
From loudmouths in other cities.
From former broadcast partners.
From sympathetic coaches.
The pleasantries always begin something like this: "Keep your head up, Butch. Those misfits, man, they'll drive any coach nuts."
Beard is fed up with the perceptions of his players and his team.
And today he made Kenny Anderson and Derrick Coleman keenly aware of this in hopes that his two All-Stars will take it upon themselves to say, "Enough already."


Corrections
An article on Jan. 10 about tensions between ethnic Albanians and Slavs in Macedonia misstated the history of the area.
The international borders between Albania, Yugoslavia and Greece were drawn after the Second Balkan War in 1913, not after World War I, which ended in 1918.


Players Thank a Congressman
Ten striking major leaguer players seeking to repeal baseball's antitrust exemption met with Representative JAMES TRAFICANT, Democrat of Ohio, and thanked him for his support.
"My goal is to end the strike and ensure that major league baseball players enjoy the same rights and privileges as other professional athletes," Traficant said.


Orange &amp; Rockland Utilities Inc.(ORU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sysco Corp.(SYY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Canwest Global reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  JAPAN FACES AFTERMATH OF QUAKE  The cold and weary residents of Kobe tried to collect the broken pieces of their homes and their lives in the aftermath of an earthquake that has left 3,109 confirmed dead and more than 15,000 injured.
A1


141 Years in Shooting
Rashid Baz, 28, a Lebanese immigrant, was sentenced to 141 years in prison for firing into a van of Hasidic students on the Brooklyn Bridge last year, killing a student and injuring three others.
Article, page B3.


GenCorp (GY,N) reports earnings for Year to Nov 30


Hill, a Rookie, Leading All-Star Vote
GRANT HILL of the Detroit Pistons could become the first rookie in the history of National Basketball Association All-Star fan balloting to lead all players in votes received.
Latest Eastern Conference returns released yesterday show Hill with 701,530 votes and Orlando's SHAQUILLE O'NEAL, who is second, with 696,815.
The 45th N.B.A.
All-Star game will be on Feb. 12 in Phoenix. (AP)


Bridge Gunman Gets 141-Year Term
Rashid Baz, the 28-year-old Lebanese immigrant who was convicted of firing a hail of bullets into a van of Hasidic students last year, was sentenced to 141 years in prison yesterday for the attack, which killed onestudent and injured three others.
Mr.
Baz, a stocky livery-cab driver who was found guilty last month in the attack on the Brooklyn Bridge, sat placidly throughout the hourlong proceeding and chose not to speak on his own behalf.


In Milan, brazen men on parade


D'Amato the Gentleman Senator?; In Leadership Role, a Firebrand Is Mellowing Just a Touch
Bob Dole and Don Imus insist that Alfonse M. D'Amato in power is not the same man who sang "Old MacDonald had some pork (ee-eye-ee-eye-o)" on the Senate floor.
As the newly installed chairman of the banking committee, they say, he is far more serious, and very senatorial.
Senator Dole went so far as to call his Republican colleague from Long Island a statesman, though he looked to be stifling a guffaw as he said so.
"He's got a lot of responsibility," the majority leader said.
"He doesn't have time to laugh -- or get in trouble."


IMC Global Inc.(IGL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


All Work, No Play Hinders Hingis
It was a potential star, not one of the acknowledged superstars, who felt the sting of a premature loss at the Australian Open, where a burning sun illuminated every mistake.
Like a little girl lost, 14-year-old Martina Hingis, a player burdened by great expectations ever since she was old enough to learn her namesake's identity, found herself sent home early from her first Australian Open on Wednesday afternoon.


Uni-Marts Inc.(UNI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Panhandle Eastern (PEL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tandem Computers (TDM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


PROSECUTORS WIN KEY SIMPSON FIGHT
Jurors may hear crucial testimony about O. J. Simpson's prolonged and repeatedly abusive treatment of Nicole Brown Simpson, including the tape of a telephone call Mrs.
Simpson made to a 911 operator eight months before she was killed, Judge Lance A. Ito of Superior Court ruled today.
After deciding one of the most bitterly fought issues in the extraordinary double-murder trial, Judge Ito put off opening statements until Monday, citing several unresolved matters.
But his decision today assured that once testimony in the case began, jurors would see a side of Mr.
Simpson drastically different from the amiable image he long cultivated: a man given to repeated jealous rages, capable of kicking down Mrs.
Simpson's door, throwing her out of a moving car and smashing her windshield with a baseball bat.


Bailey Is on the List, But Will He Still Play?
There are no surprises among the six players the Giants have decided to expose in next month's expansion draft.
The unprotected players are tight end Derek Brown, linebacker Carlton Bailey, the former Princeton running back Keith Elias, linebacker Andre Powell, cornerback Corey Raymond and the backup quarterback Stan White, according to several people in the organization who asked not to be identified.
The names aren't surprising, but one thing is: Bailey may consider retirement rather than going to an expansion team.


Hospitality Franchise Joins in Casino Deal
Hospitality Franchise Systems Inc., the nation's largest hotel franchiser, has taken its first big step in the gaming industry, agreeing yesterday to help finance the merger of two small gambling companies with a $100 million note.
The merger is between Boomtown Inc., which operates four Western-themed casinos, and the National Gaming Corporation, which was spun off to Hospitality Franchise shareholders in November.


Groupe Videotron reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Building a Railroad Deep Into Brazil
High in the corner office of a glass-sheathed office tower here, Olacyr de Moraes passed a ball-point pen across a map of Brazil, tracing a new railroad network westward through agricultural lands, then north across the Amazon.
"My mission is to build this railroad," Mr. de Moraes said of an initial 1,072-mile section that is expected to cost him $2.5 billion.


Let Those Who Live in Flood Zones Bear Cost; A Very Old Problem
To the Editor:
"Some Officials Begin Exploring How to Keep People From Building in Flood Zones," reads a Jan. 15 front-page subheading.
Well, it's about time.
We have been wrestling with this issue since the days when much of the New World was ruled by Spain.
Yet we still haven't come to terms with the problem.


Let Those Who Live in Flood Zones Bear Cost; Global Warming?
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 14 front-page article on the unusually mild weather in the East and stormy weather in the West ignores the possibility that global warming might be contributing to these events.
Surely, that omission reflects our social climate: we seem determined to avoid any mention of dangers to our planetary future.
MICHAEL PERLMAN  Williamsburg, Mass., Jan. 14, 1995 The writer teaches environmental philosophy at Vermont College.


Pataki Plans Tighter Security at State Psychiatric Hospitals
After a spate of escapes, including one by a mentally ill man who was accused of pushing a woman in front of a subway train two weeks ago, Gov.
George E. Pataki announced a plan yesterday to tighten security at psychiatric hospitals throughout the state.
The plan calls for identification tags to be worn by everyone on the grounds of the state's 29 mental hospitals; assignment of staff members to locate missing patients, and a review of how patients are granted privileges to go into the community.


Lam Research (LRCX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fetisov Rejoining Devils for Season
When the Devils came off the ice after practice this afternoon, they found a familiar face standing in the middle of their dressing room, wearing a bright smile that brought brighter smiles from them.
"Big Slava is back," shouted center Jimmy Dowd when he spotted Slava Fetisov.
The heralded Russian defenseman played out his option last season and was not signed by any other team after the Devils failed to offer him a contract.


Norwest Corp.(NOB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Electronic Arts (ERTS,NNM)


Oscar Mayer Joins the Rush With a Fat-Free Meat Line
And now, the no-fat hot dog.
Yesterday the Oscar Mayer Foods Corporation, the $2.3 billion packaged-meat division of Kraft Foods, introduced its new fat-free line of frankfurters, bologna, chicken and turkey breast.


Lamson &amp; Sessions Co.  (LMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Adaptec Inc.(ADPT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Florida Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rebels' Hopes For a Truce With Moscow Collapsing
Hopes for a cease-fire in the besieged city of Grozny collapsed today as President Boris N. Yeltsin said he would never negotiate with the leader of the Chechen rebellion and Chechen officials charged that Moscow had reneged on its commitments.
Mr.
Yeltsin said in Moscow that he wanted his representatives to resolve the conflict by dealing directly with field commanders, local clan leaders and regional officials in Chechnya, and not with the secessionist republic's leader, Dzhokhar M. Dudayev.
But the commander of the Chechen rebels here in Shali, a village outside Grozny, rejected the proposal.


Ruddick Corp.(RDK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Court Rules Frequent Fliers Can Sue Over Retroactive Changes
The Supreme Court ruled today that members of frequent-flier plans can sue airlines for breach of contract over retroactive changes in benefits that diminish the value of miles already accumulated.
The 6-to-2 decision did not address the merits of a class-action lawsuit brought in the Illinois state courts on behalf of four million members of American Airline's AAdvantage program.
The plaintiffs contend that changes the airline made in the program in 1988 to restrict the availability of free seats on certain dates and flights amount to consumer fraud and a breach of contract.


Integra Financial Corp.(ITG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


L.I.R.R. Suspect May Rethink His Own Defense
Colin Ferguson is having second thoughts about acting as his own lawyer and may reconsider an insanity defense, his court-appointed legal adviser said today.
The adviser, Alton G. Rose, said Mr.
Ferguson was aware that should he continue to represent himself, he might offend the jurors now being selected for his trial on charges of killing six people aboard a Long Island Rail Road train in 1993.


Garden Q.&amp;.A.
Blooming Too Early
Q.
Since we had such a warm autumn, and have had a mild winter so far, several of my plants, including forsythia and crab apple, had blooms a few weeks ago.
Will they flower again when spring comes? -- Nicki Green, Cambridge, Mass.


Rollins Truck Leasing Corp.(RLC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kay B. Barrett, Talent Scout And Entertainment Agent, 93
Kay Brown Barrett, who bought "Gone With the Wind" for the movie producer David O. Selznick after discovering the novel as his New York representative, died yesterday at the Meadow Lakes retirement community in Hightstown, N.J., where she had lived for the last 14 years.
She was 93.
The cause was a stroke, said her daughter Laurinda Barrett.


American Teacher Is Among Quake Victims
When Henry Wong talked to Ambassador Walter F. Mondale yesterday, his only remaining hope was that a search team of American Embassy officials in Japan would find the body of his daughter, apparently the only American killed by Tuesday's earthquake.
Mr.
Wong said he had told Mr.
Mondale that he wanted the body of his daughter, Voni Lynn Wong, retrieved and sent home before it was cremated with many of the thousands of Japanese who were killed.


Deposit Guaranty (DEPS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cogeco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


In Performance; CLASSICAL
Playing Chopin As If Born to It  Garrick Ohlsson, pianist Alice Tully Hall
Garrick Ohlsson is a seriously undervalued artist.
Perhaps this injustice will finally be set right by the project he began on Sunday afternoon, performing all of Chopin's published works for solo piano over the next 14 months.
In Romantic repertory, his broad range -- from finespun lyricism to grand, powerful rhetoric -- and his remarkable stamina serve him superbly, and Chopin in particular seems his native tongue.


Jazz Remains King of the Road
Jazz 99, Pistons 86
Karl Malone scored 17 of his 31 points in the third quarter to lead the Utah Jazz to its 14th consecutive road victory last night, 99-86, over the Detroit Pistons at Auburn Hills, Mich.
The Jazz, which is two road victories shy of tying the Los Angeles Lakers' National Basketball Association record set in 1972, has won seven straight over all.
Detroit has lost 11 of 13.


Hillenbrand Industries Inc.(HB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 3


Constable Is Renamed
On the same day that Federated Department Stores announced it would convert all its Abraham &amp; Straus department stores to other chains it owns, another venerable New York name in dry goods quietly disappeared from the scene.
The Arnold Constable Corporation, which closed the last of its luxury department stores in 1975, said on Tuesday that it was dropping the 170-year-old Constable name and assuming the name of its surviving chain of sportswear specialty stores.
It formally became No-Name Stores Inc. yesterday.


Lawrence O'Brien; Executive Was 81
Lawrence J. O'Brien, former chief executive of one of the nation's largest suppliers of commercial and residential security systems, died last Thursday at the Hospice of Northern Virginia in Arlington, Va.
He was 81.
The cause was lung cancer, said Martin McLaughlin, a family friend.


Shrines in Home of Emperors Damaged
Kyoto, traditionally the home of emperors, was rocked by the earthquake and suffered some cultural casualties, but no human ones.
The capital of Japan from the 8th to the 12th centuries, Kyoto is a tourist favorite, and its gardens, shrines and temples have a relaxed and traditional flavor.
It lies about 40 miles northeast of Kobe.


Meridian Bancorp (MRDN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stocks Are Mostly Flat on Fed Data
In unusually heavy trading, the stock market closed mixed but essentially unchanged yesterday as new data from the Federal Reserve indicated that inflation might still be lingering in the economy.
The prospect of favorable corporate earnings this month is helping to support what would otherwise be a market depressed by inflation fears, analysts said.


CCB Financial (CCBF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


George Kinzler, 81, a Consultant On the Selling of Specialty Foods
George Kinzler, a specialty food consultant and former gourmet foods buyer who helped to create the Cellar Marketplace at the Macy's at Herald Square, died on Sunday at his Manhattan home.
He was 81.
The cause was liver failure, his family said.


Yankees Read Paper And Then Sign Pitcher
The pursuit of replacement players to fill rosters promises to be a bizarre procedure.
The Yankees yesterday signed the former minor league pitcher Doug Cinnella to a contract, three days after he expressed a desire to cross the picket line in a newspaper article.
The Yankees said the 30-year-old Cinnella was on their list of 800 potential replacement players, but they contacted John Harper, The New York Daily News sports reporter who wrote about the right-hander last Sunday, to get Cinnella's phone number.
Cinnella signed a National Association contract as a minor league free agent and would make $125,000 if he played the entire season for the Yankees.


CHRONICLE
Romance writers and the Ikea home furnishings chain have kissed and made up, maybe.
Two weeks ago, Ikea aroused the ire of romance book authors when it used this tag line for an advertisement: "By the time our next sale rolls around, you'll be reading novels at the beach. (You know, the trashy romance kind.)"
Some editors and writers took umbrage and fired off letters of protest to executives of the company.


A Call to Deregulate Rules and Regulations
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE How Law Is Suffocating America  By Philip K. Howard  202 pages.
Random House. $18.
Americans may well take pride in living under what Aristotle called "government by laws, not men," but the situation has lately become ridiculous, writes Philip K. Howard in his exasperated book, "The Death of Common Sense: How Law Is Suffocating America."


Coffee Commercial Withdrawn by Kraft
Kraft Foods said yesterday that it had stopped running a national television commercial for one of its coffee products after the spot drew a number of complaints.
The commercial, by Young &amp; Rubicam New York, began appearing on Jan. 2.
During the spot, in which two actresses discussed how a cup of the French Vanilla Cafe flavor of General Foods International Coffees had only 60 calories, one sought to cajole the other into trying the product.


Birmingham Steel Corp.(BIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gingrich's 'Piggies' Poked
In the midst of a chaotic afternoon in which House members traded barbs over Newt Gingrich's book deal, Representative Patricia Schroeder paused to reflect on the Speaker's ideas about the roles of men and women in military combat.
While teaching his history course at Reinhardt College in Georgia a couple of weeks ago, Ms.
Schroeder noted, Mr.
Gingrich had expressed some thoughts on the subject.


Grgurich to Rest; Return Is Uncertain
U.N.L.V. basketball Coach TIM GRGURICH said he thought he had to go "100 miles an hour" when he took over the troubled Rebels program in November, and it nearly wrecked his health.
"I was at the end of my rope," he said of his hospitalization this month for symptoms related to exhaustion.
"It was time to take a rest."
Doctors have advised Grgurich to spend six weeks away from the game, but the coach said yesterday, "I'm not saying anything about the future.' (AP)


Prudential Case May Bring Suits
The enforcement staff for the Securities and Exchange Commission plans to recommend civil complaints against a number of former top executives with Prudential Securities, including George L. Ball, the former chairman, people with knowledge of the inquiry said yesterday.
Under the recommendations, at least seven former executives and brokers with Prudential would face civil charges stemming from widespread securities law violations at the firm's Dallas branch during the 1980's and early 1990's.


Journal; Saviors On the Right
If Charlton Heston could part the Red Sea, can he also save the N.E.A.?
He just might.
Though Newt Gingrich has blasted the National Endowment for the Arts as "patronage for an elite group" and Dick Armey has said it "offends the Constitution of the United States," they have not heard yet from Mr.
Heston and many other conservative Republicans who beg to differ.
While N.E.A. demonizers like William Bennett and George Will would have you believe that the agency's defenders are mainly liberal esthetes, the hidden story is the rescue posse forming on the right.


Bettman Will Not Discipline Chelios
Emphasizing that the National Hockey League has "a lot of healing to do," Commissioner GARY BETTMAN said yesterday that he would not discipline CHRIS CHELIOS of the Chicago Blackhawks for his threatening comments before the lockout.
Chelios had made vague menacing remarks regarding the safety of Bettman and his family, suggesting a crazed fan or player might attack the commissioner.
He apologized yesterday. (AP)


Century Communications (CTY,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


California Microwave Inc.(CMIC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BB&amp;T Financial Corp.(BBTF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fleet Financial Group (FLT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Treasury Prices Decline For 2d Consecutive Day
Prices of Treasury securities declined yesterday for the second consecutive day as expectations increased that the Federal Reserve would soon raise short-term interest rates.
While many analysts and traders have for some time expected the Fed to raise rates for the seventh time since February, the size and the timing of the Fed's next move have been debated.
Market participants' opinions change from day to day on each new economic report.


MBNA Corp.(KRB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tyco International Ltd.(TYC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
Pinning Down Asthma Risk
A new study has found that the young children most likely to develop asthma can be identified so doctors can give them preventive treatment.
Page A21. 141 Years in Bridge Attack
Rashid Baz, the Lebanese immigrant convicted of firing into a van of Hasidic students, killing one, was sentenced to 141 years.
Page B3.


Pacific Bank
Shares of Pacific Bank rose sharply yesterday, establishing a 52-week high of $18.75 before closing at $18.25.
Pacific Bank, based in San Francisco, announced on Tuesday that Western Bank of Medford, Ore., had agreed to buy it for at least $20 a share.


Mexican Leader Gambles on Reform to Rebuild His Support
At a private meeting with some Mexican intellectuals last week, President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon gave a succinct explanation for his readiness to finally level the electoral field on which his governing party has always played with great advantage.
Among the changes still needed in the once-authoritarian political system, meeting the opposition's longstanding demands for truly fair elections "is the easiest one," Mr.
Zedillo said, according to two people who attended the meeting.


In Los Angeles, Relatives and Friends Dial and Wait
Across Los Angeles, a city with a thriving Japanese population of about 45,000, the news from Kobe struck hard.
In Little Tokyo, a bustling commercial district downtown, people congregated somberly in brightly decorated stores and restaurants, hoping the grapevine would provide a scrap of good news about someone they know or love.
Others stayed by the phone for hours on end, dialing the clogged lines to Japan.


Snowboard Parks Have Roots in Geometry Class
When David Olcott was growing up in Morristown, N.J., he would put 25 cents in a coin-op machine to play Excite Bike, a motocross video game.
And now, as a designer of snowboard parks for major ski areas, he draws on some of the same graphics he saw on those arcade screens.
"Basically, you open a geometry book, and it's all the things an Excite Bike runs on," the 25-year-old Olcott said recently.
"It's a reason to study hard in geometry, because that's where the shapes and design ideas for a snowboard park come from."


CONGRESSIONAL ROUNDUP: Budget Amendment; Gain in Senate, None in House
Senate Republicans shook off a Democratic stall and sent a final version of a balanced-budget constitutional amendment out of the Judiciary Committee and toward a final vote on the floor next month.
House Republicans were less fortunate.
They spent the day mending frayed relations between rival Republican camps that back two versions of the proposed amendment with distinctly different approaches to the question of future tax increases.


Kings' Brickowski Is Lost for Season
Frank Brickowski, a newcomer to the Sacramento Kings, will miss the entire National Basketball Association season because of a shoulder injury.
The forward, acquired in the off season to bring some muscle to the Kings' front court, will have surgery to repair his partially dislocated right shoulder.
Brickowski was hurt in the preseason, and aggravated the injury last week in practice.


Radiation Tests Used Some Healthy People
Some patients injected with small amounts of radioactive substances in experiments at the University of Rochester at the dawn of the atomic age were not terminally ill, according to documents unearthed by a Presidential panel.
The findings contradicted statements by the experimenters that the patients had not been expected to live very long, said the panel, the President's Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments, which made the documents public today.
The panel also said patients were not informed of the experiments.


Appropriating the CD and Invoking (Other) Famous Names
Gianni Versace seems to be spending more money on photographers than on fabric these days.
As men's fashion editors filed into his show on Tuesday night, they were greeted by four-story blowups of photos that Steven Meisel took of a fleshy Madonna for Mr.
Versace's latest women's ready-to-wear advertising campaign.
Those were quickly replaced during the runway show by huge male nudes by Bruce Weber, publicity photos for the spring men's collection.
And on their chair seats, editors found a CD called "Versace's Runway Hits," with a cover by Richard Avedon and a booklet inside of his photos for Mr.
Versace's last haute couture campaign.


Starks and the Knicks Keep Forgetting to Remember to Forget
Told that John Starks still believes the Knicks have better personnel than the Houston Rockets, Hakeem Olajuwon was amused.
The Rockets, led by Olajuwon, are the defending National Basketball Association champions.
The Knicks are not.
Nothing that happens during Thursday night's long-awaited Knicks-Rockets rematch at the Summit can change what happened during last year's finals.
And Olajuwon, Houston's center and the league's reigning most valuable player, is in a position to have the last laugh.


A Fragile Truce in Bosnia: No Will or No Way
Like its 30 and more predecessors, the cease-fire that took effect this month in Bosnia is slowly unraveling because the killing cannot be stopped while the political will to find a settlement is absent.
Today the Serbs flew close to 20 helicopter sorties to resupply their positions just west of Bihac, in the north, where Muslim-led Government forces have taken Vedro Polje and Klokot in a counteroffensive begun after the cease-fire took effect on Jan. 1.


Affiliated Computer Services Inc.(ACSA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp.(BGG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
Three Oscar-winning British actors, ANTHONY HOPKINS, JEREMY IRONS and DANIEL DAY-LEWIS, never forgot the teacher who set them on the road to fame.
When they heard that RUDI SHELLEY, whom they studied with at the Old Vic Theater School in Bristol, England, had been hospitalized after a stroke and was unable to pay his medical bills, they each contributed $:1,000, or about $1,620.
They weren't the only ones.
Some 200 of Mr.
Shelley's former students donated about $40,500, London newspapers reported yesterday.


Jacobs Engineering Group Inc.(JEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For Banks and Insurers, A Window to an Alliance
Banks and insurance companies, long at war over selling annuities and insurance products, now appear about to become allies.
Following yesterday's Supreme Court ruling, banks are expected to move rapidly to increase their already growing share of annuity sales.
And now that life insurance companies have failed to keep banks out of that business, it is their agents who stand to lose the most.


A Sound Ruling in the Simpson Case
Judge Lance Ito has ruled that the jury may hear a considerable amount of evidence about domestic violence in O. J. Simpson's marriage to Nicole Brown Simpson, who was murdered last June along with her friend Ronald Goldman.
This much-awaited ruling in Mr.
Simpson's trial for those killings will be the court's last major decision on evidence before both sides make their opening statements.
Judge Ito's conclusion, reached after long argument, is clearly correct in its broad principles.
That is so even though it carries some danger of convicting Mr.
Simpson on the basis of prior bad acts, like an episode that produced Ms.
Simpson's frantic 911 call to police.


Sports of The Times; The Return Of 'Bonnie And Clyde'
THE way Don Klosterman remembers it, the Rams' check to settle the team's 1981 bills with Anaheim had to be at City Hall by 4 o'clock that afternoon.
If not, Klosterman, then the Rams' general manager, knew that the club would be obliged to pay a penalty of at least $10,000.
But the Rams' owner, Georgia Frontiere, was balking.
"We're not signing any checks today," she said.


A Family Worth Fleeing
"You be him and I'll be her," says a young woman in "The House of Yes," Wendy MacLeod's new play at the SoHo Repertory Theater, as she hands her twin brother an American flag.
That's the signal for the siblings to become Jack and Jackie Kennedy on the day the President was shot.
She wears a pink suit; he pretends to die.
Then, of course, they have sex.
Incest inspired by images of assassination is, as far as I know, an entirely new kink in absurdist comedies about dysfunctional families (an extremely popular genre these days).
Otherwise, Ms.
MacLeod's aggressively arch play is pretty familiar stuff, although deftly executed.


Ben Franklin Retail Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bridge
The strongest invitational event in world bridge is the Cap Volmac World Top tournament, which begins today in The Hague, the Netherlands.
The 16 pairs include 4 from the United States: David Berkowitz and Larry Cohen; Zia Mahmood and Michael Rosenberg; Bobby Wolff and Edgar Kaplan, and Eric Rodwell and Jeff Meckstroth.
There are three pairs from the host country, two from France and one each from Denmark, Norway, Brazil, Poland, Israel, Britain and Indonesia.
The longest journey is that of the Indonesian players, Henky Lasut and Eddu Manoppo, who are from Menado on the island of Sulawesi, nearly 2,000 miles from the capital, Jakarta.
A year ago, they faced the diagramed deal in the Indonesian Club Championships, sitting East and West.


Jean Coutu reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Dickstein In First Bid For Company
Mark Dickstein, the young investor best known for aggressively wielding his influence as a shareholder to increase the value of his holdings, made his debut as a corporate raider yesterday with an offer to buy the Marietta Corporation for $11 a share, or about $40 million.
Dickstein Partners Inc., which manages $250 million, made its offer for Marietta, a supplier of the miniature soaps, shampoos and sewing kits found in hotel bathrooms, in conjunction with Calibre Capital Advisers Inc., another investment management company.
In a letter to Chesterfield F. Seibert, chairman of Marietta, Mr.
Dickstein said the two firms controlled 14.6 percent of the company's shares outstanding.


Whimsy With a Scrimshaw Look
TWO years ago, Peter Diepenbrock, 34, a sculptor and part-time faculty member at the Rhode Island School of Design in Providence, switched from designing what he called "functional but wacky" furniture to designing whimsical tabletop accessories.
His newest pieces, king-and-queen candlesticks and picture frames, are made of cast resin meant to look like carved bone or ivory.
In 1983, Mr.
Diepenbrock spent the summer in the Inuit village of Kotzebue, Alaska, and worked as a salmon fisherman.
His Inua Series (above) is inspired by indigenous scrimshaw art he saw there.
The booties that he made into pewter candlesticks (right), $72 a pair, were originally meant to decorate the legs of a table that was shaped like a jester, "when I was into medieval themes," he said.
All items are available from his company, Troy Accessories, (401) 421-8140, or at Felissimo, 10 West 56th Street in Manhattan, (212) 247-5656.


Where to Find It
ASK an appraiser how a client is most likely to describe a cherished heirloom, and the answer is almost always the same: "It's very old."
Unfortunately, age is not synonymous with value.
"You can get a work of ancient art for $200," said Barry Leo Delaney, an appraiser with O'Toole-Ewald Art Associates, a Manhattan firm.


METRO DIGEST
REPORT URGES 13 PERCENT CUT IN MEDICAID A report commissioned by Gov.
George E. Pataki calls for cutting state Medicaid costs by 13 percent, sharply reducing payments to hospitals and nursing homes and limiting home services, like housekeeping, feeding and bathing for the elderly.
The proposal, drafted by Lieut.
Gov.
Betsy McCaughey, is a central part of Mr.
Pataki's plan to cut taxes while balancing the state budget.
A1.
When she wanted to sidestep a question during the campaign, Betsy McCaughey would often smile and say, "I'm an expert in policy, not politics." Now, as Lieutenant Governor, Ms.
McCaughey has taken on her first test as a policy maker with one of New York's knottiest problems: revamping the $19 billion Medicaid system.
Woman in the News, B6.


Man Accused of Killing Son Borne by a Surrogate Mother
In a Pennsylvania case that experts say could raise new questions about surrogate-mother contracts, a single man who paid $30,000 for an Indiana woman to bear his child was charged yesterday with beating the infant to death.
The man, James Alan Austin, took his son, Jonathan, to a hospital in Bethlehem, Pa., on Jan 8.
The five-week-old baby, who had a fractured skull and internal bleeding, died on Tuesday evening at Children's Hospital in Philadelphia.


The Speaker Wades In
When it comes to sleazy-looking deals, some politicians can claim naivete, but Newt Gingrich is not one of them.
He rightly exposed one of his less worthy predecessors as Speaker of the House, Jim Wright, for using his position for personal gain.
More to the point, Mr.
Gingrich rallied national support for the idea of a Congress that was not addicted to its perks or blind to ethical standards.
In running the old Democratic barons out of town, the voters clearly endorsed Mr.
Gingrich's vision of a Congress free of compromising entanglements.
That makes all the more puzzling his decision to cash in on his new prominence with a suspect book deal, secret fund-raising and meetings that reek of favoritism.


Market Place; From Japan's Quake, Fear of Higher Interest Rates
Losses from Japan's earthquake, largely uninsured and therefore likely to stimulate huge deficit spending by the country's Government, may put upward pressure on interest rates around the world, especially if it turns out that the damages are far greater than initially estimated.
Perhaps the greatest challenge to be faced by the Japanese authorities will be for the central bank, which must decide whether it wants to tighten monetary policy -- and thus help to offset the inflationary aspects of government spending -- or keep it relatively loose for fear of damaging a banking system that has not fully recovered from bad loans made in earlier years.


Russell Corp.(RML,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gunmen Kill 2 in Queens
Two men were killed, execution-style, as they ate in a Chinese restaurant in Flushing, Queens, yesterday afternoon, the police said.
The victims, two young Asian men whose names were not released, were killed in the Foo Chou restaurant at 135-32 Road, in front of several eyewitnesses.
At 4:49 P.M., two Asian men with handguns entered the restaurant, shot both victims in the head and left, the police said.


Bailey Is on the List, But Will He Still Play?
There are no surprises among the six players the Giants have decided to expose in next month's expansion draft.
The unprotected players are tight end Derek Brown, linebacker Carlton Bailey, the former Princeton running back Keith Elias, linebacker Andre Powell, cornerback Corey Raymond and the backup quarterback Stan White, according to several people in the organization who asked not to be identified.
The names aren't surprising, but one thing is: Bailey may consider retirement rather than going to an expansion team.


Morton Intl.(MII,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


UST Inc.(UST,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


REPORT TO PATAKI CALLS FOR 13% CUT IN MEDICAID COSTS
A report commissioned by Gov.
George E. Pataki calls for cutting state Medicaid costs by 13 percent, sharply reducing payments to hospitals and nursing homes and limiting home services, like housekeeping, feeding and bathing for the elderly.
Lieut.
Gov.
Betsy McCaughey drafted the proposal as a central part of Mr.
Pataki's plan to cut taxes while balancing the state budget.
The $1.2 billion in cuts Ms.
McCaughey is seeking in her proposal represents about one-quarter of the $5 billion the Governor needs to close a $4 million budget gap and deliver $1 billion in income-tax cuts.


Sun Microsystems Inc.(SUNW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Britons Ask Whither The Throne?
"No man is a hero to his valet," remarked Mme.
Cornuel, the 17th-century Parisian hostess.
The scalding truth of that statement was brought home with a literal vengeance this week for the British royal family.
Stealing the march on its rivals, a weekend tabloid, News of the World, plied the Prince of Wales's valet of 15 years with a large sum, reportedly in six figures, to spill intimate details of his master's bedchamber.


Fehr's Charge Rejected
Bud Selig, baseball's acting commissioner, rejected yesterday the union charge that he and other owners have told members of Congress that union negotiators have refused to return to the bargaining table.
Responding to a letter the day before from Donald Fehr, head of the union, Selig, in a letter to Fehr, referred to his information as secondhand and said owners have told members of Congress "that the strike will be resolved only when both parties return to the bargaining table and address the fundamental issue of labor costs."


Keystone Financial Inc.(KSTN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Commercial Corp.(FCLR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


AT COURTSIDE WITH: Spike Lee A Famously Unquiet Fan
IT was a few minutes before tipoff at Madison Square Garden, and Spike Lee was courtside, wearing his genuine Knicks jersey, John Starks's No. 3, along with his most solemn game face.
Shaking his head, he said, "Ain't nothing going to happen between Reggie and me tonight," referring to Reggie Miller, the Indiana Pacers' loquacious star guard, who had made Mr.
Lee a front-page tabloid rogue for 48 very restless hours last spring.


Executive Changes
AT&amp;T CORP., New York, appointed George Foyo president and managing director of the communications services group for the Caribbean and Latin America.
DAZEL CORP., Austin, Tex., named Gary R. Neill chief financial officer.


Quake-Shattered Kobe Turning to the Task of Survival
As they stepped among the fallen beams and crumbling plaster that are everywhere, the cold and weary residents of this city tried to collect the broken pieces of their homes and their lives today, and many sought shelter in schools, cars, municipal buildings and hospitals.
They stood in line -- very patiently -- to buy food, to get water, to make telephone calls to friends and relatives.
Classes in schools were suspended, but teachers still paid house calls to check on their students.
Public transportation was virtually halted, but doctors and nurses still showed up for work.
And food was scarce, but neighbors still shared their reserves.


Court Slows S.I. Secession
A State Supreme Court justice placed a major obstacle today before Staten Island's effort to secede, ruling that the State Legislature cannot consider a secession bill unless the New York City Council authorizes it to do so.
Both Council President Peter F. Vallone and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani oppose secession and are highly unlikely to issue the home-rule message that the court required.


Midlantic Corp.(MIDL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Annuity Sales by Banks Upheld
In a major victory for banks and for the Federal agency that regulates them, the Supreme Court today unanimously upheld the Comptroller of the Currency's policy of permitting national banks to sell annuities.
Beyond its immediate impact, the decision, written by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, was also significant as a broad endorsement of the Comptroller's authority.
That office has moved in recent years to permit banks to offer services that are not traditionally considered part of the "business of banking," the key phrase from the 19th-century law that still provides the basic regulatory framework for the national banking system.


Great Western Financial Corp.(GWF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $25 million of notes due in 2000 through Smith Barney Inc.
Callable in two years, the issue is priced at par to yield 8.31 percent.
*
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac, is selling $30 million of notes due in 1997 through Chase Securities Inc.
The noncallable notes are priced at par to yield 7.63 percent.


Idex Corp.(IEX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


International Game Technology (IGT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gartner Group Inc.(GART,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Damage Survey Points to Design As a Weakness
Kunitomo Sugiura took one look at the 550-yard stretch of the Hanshin Expressway, lying on its side like an overturned banquet table, and saw immediately what was wrong.
In much of the elevated highway, which was heavily damaged on Tuesday in the earthquake here, the roadbed rests on horizontal steel girders.
But exactly at the points where the toppled section begins and ends, the girders change from steel to reinforced concrete.


Rowland Halts Raises
In a major victory for Governor Rowland, the Connecticut Senate rejected arbitrated awards granting pay raises to 14,000 state workers, though one raise survived.
Article, page B1.


William Dillard, 83, A Jazz Trumpeter
William Dillard, a jazz trumpeter from the swing era who also acted on Broadway, died on Monday at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 83 and lived in Queens.
The cause was complications from lupus and pneumonia, said his wife, Celestine.


Lab Samples Of Smallpox Win Reprieve
The smallpox virus got an unexpected stay of execution yesterday from the governing board of the World Health Organization.
The last known stocks of the deadly virus were to be destroyed in June, but the latest decision puts off its demise for at least a year, and perhaps indefinitely.


Whitman Corp.(WH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Santa Fe Pacific Corp.(SFX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Helping to Keep the Art of Coloratura Alive
When things are going particularly well for Ruth Ann Swenson -- as they are at the Metropolitan Opera, where her colorful performances in "L'Elisir d'Amore" are proving that the art of lyric coloratura singing is alive and well -- she sometimes reminds herself of less glamorous days.
As a student singer in the Merola Opera Program at the San Francisco Opera, Ms.
Swenson signed on for a Pacific cruise in which she and a few young colleagues were to entertain passengers with opera scenes.
"We had not one day of sunshine," Ms.
Swenson said, "and the stabilizer on the boat broke, so were all green and doing our best not to get sick. I remember holding onto the piano, singing 'Batti, batti' and watching the drum kit for the evening performance falling over and people hanging onto chairs that were sliding across the floor. And I thought, 'What's wrong with this picture?' "


CONGRESSIONAL ROUNDUP: Natural Resources; 'Entirely New Era,' Babbitt Concedes
Conciliatory, even contrite, Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt appeared before a Republican-controlled Congressional committee for the first time and acknowledged that the new majority was now effectively in charge of Federal policies on natural resources.
He apologized in agreeing that the Clinton Administration had failed to allow the resumption of logging on public lands fast enough in the Pacific Northwest, where the Administration's plan to protect the spotted owl has already been in place for seven months, and he promised that Federal agencies would do no more than the law demanded in protecting endangered species on private lands.


Let Those Who Live in Flood Zones Bear Cost; Relief Block Grants
To the Editor:
Before the Republican Congress converts Federal welfare programs into block grants to the states and eliminates its subsidy of elite tastes on public television, I recommend that it first apply this approach to disaster relief for California.


The Basics, Word for Word
WHETHER buying a gilded object or taking a course in the craft, a gold bug should know the basics.
Here are some frequently used terms: BOLE: A mix of gilder's clay and rabbit-skin glue, used as an undercoating for water-gilded finishes in applications of real gold leaf.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ABB COMBUSTION ENGINEERING, Windsor, Conn., has laid off about 40 employees as part of a larger reorganization of its Swiss-based corporate parent Asea Brown Boveri.
McDERMOTT INTERNATIONAL INC., New Orleans, received a contract worth more than $100 million to provide eight nuclear steam generators to Commonwealth Edison Co. of Chicago.


Top Prospect for C.I.A. Post Is Said to Have Doubts About Job
Deputy Defense Secretary John M. Deutch, once regarded as the front-runner to become Director of Central Intelligence, has expressed serious reservations about taking the job, leaving the White House to widen its search.
Associates said today that Mr.
Deutch was reluctant to give up his policy position at the Pentagon.
They also said he had concluded that because of academic sensitivities about the Central Intelligence Agency his serving as its chief could prevent his becoming president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he was provost.


A Possible Pitcher: Phil Niekro, Age 55
The uncharted waters in which baseball is dog paddling are rife with replacement rumors.
The latest that popped up yesterday was that Phil Niekro had signed to play replacement games with the Atlanta Braves.
"That is incorrect," John Schuerholz, the Braves' general manager, said.
But he quickly added that he planned to talk with the 55-year-old knuckleballer about that very subject.
And Niekro earlier in the week indicated that he just might be receptive to an offer.


Essay; Sacred Cow, II
When you zap a sacred cow, you have to brace yourself for the ensuing mooing.
The cow most sacred here is the veterans' lobby.
In this space last week, the unwritable was written: "the most wasteful special-interest spending in Washington" was the $37 billion to provide mediocre government medicine to veterans.


French Premier, Already Leading, Enters Race for President
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, the front-runner in spring presidential elections according to all the opinion polls, finally said today that he was a candidate.
In a statement broadcast on television and radio from his office, the soft-spoken 65-year-old conservative promised a "positive, serene and optimistic" campaign that would steer clear of personal attacks on rivals to succeed the 79-year-old Socialist incumbent, Francois Mitterrand, who will retire in May.


Mildred Hughes, 92, New Jersey Senator
Mildred Barry Hughes, who in 1965 was the first woman elected a state senator in New Jersey, died on Jan. 11 at the Cranford (N.J.) Health and Extended Care Center.
She was 92 and had lived for many years in Union, N.J.
The cause was a heart attack, said a son, Peter L. Hughes 3d of Annandale, N.J.


Paul Simon's Father Dies
Louis Simon, the father of the pop singer Paul Simon, died on Tuesday at his home in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
He was 79.
Mr.
Simon, who was born in Newark, was a professional musician who performed on television shows and in nightclubs from the 1930's through the 60's.
He also earned a doctorate in linguistics from New York University and was a professor of education at the City College of New York.


Ogilvy to Begin New York (love) Affair
The New York State Department of Economic Development said yesterday that it had selected Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York to handle its travel and tourism account, also known as the "I (love) New York" campaign.
Billings, subject to legislative review, were estimated at $8 million to $10 million for the state's fiscal year, which runs from April 1 to March 31.
The assignment came after a mandated review in which McCann-Erickson New York, the agency on the account from August 1991 through July 1994, decided not to participate; McCann New York's decision came after the department asked another agency, Anderson &amp; Lembke in New York, to produce two television commercials for the campaign.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.24
5.69
3.20
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.69
5.77
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.15
6.19
3.10
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.69
7.67
5.71
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.77
7.77
6.29
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.64
7.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.75
6.78
5.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


No Catching Carolina, As Virginia Finds Out
The persistent Virginia Cavaliers have made a habit this season of mounting comebacks, sometimes from seemingly impossible deficits.
Yet no matter how many times they challenged the lead against North Carolina tonight, they were unable to catch the Tar Heels, who held on for a 79-76 victory.
Third-ranked North Carolina enjoyed its largest lead, 63-49, with 10 minutes 42 seconds remaining.
But No. 18 Virginia calmly fought back, and not until the Cavaliers missed three shots on their final possession, two of them 3-pointers that would have tied the score, did Carolina escape.


King Shrine to Reopen
Visitors to the birthplace of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. will once again be allowed to tour the house, but now it will cost them.
The board of the Martin Luther King Jr.
Center for Non-Violent Social Change voted on Tuesday to charge admission to the home of the slain civil rights leader, to help offset a $600,000 budget deficit.


Orange County Sells Risky Securities and Cuts Its Loss
Officials of Orange County, Calif., announced today the sale of all risky securities in the county's ill-fated investment pool, leaving it with a loss of $1.69 billion rather than the $2.02 billion predicted earlier.
"The hemorrhaging has stopped," said Thomas W. Hayes, the former California state treasurer who was hired by the county to sell the portfolio.
"The pool now has short-term liquid securities and is safe. The pool will continue as an investment entity."


Elco Industries (ELCN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Panhandle Eastern (PEL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Judge Rules Woman Who Provides Eggs Has Right to Decide Embryos' Fate
In the first decision in New York involving a dispute over frozen embryos, a State Supreme Court justice has ruled that the woman who provides the eggs has the sole right to determine the embryos' fate.
The ruling contradicts the findings of the Tennessee Supreme Court in a similar case and is expected to lead to widespread debate in the legal and medical community.
An appeal is expected.


Diner's Journal
For Children and Fun
There are people who go to the Jekyll and Hyde Club without children, but they are missing half the fun.
It takes a child to truly appreciate this new theme park of a restaurant.
While grown-ups grouse about the wait to get in (count on at least an hour), the wait to be fed (I waited another hour) and the quality of the food (see below), children are usually enchanted.
Herewith a report from an almost-6-year-old patron:
"When you walk in, the doors slam shut behind you and you're trapped. This ugly talking head says, 'You have to pass a test to get in.' After he says that, the roof starts to go down and the room starts to get smaller. Then the man laughs for a long time. It's very scary.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
More Bankers Trust clients have had problems with derivatives than the handful of cases that have been made public so far.
The company disclosed the problems as it reported fourth-quarter earnings, which fell 63.8 percent from a year earlier.  [ Page D1. ]


Documentary Images Of Bikers and Prisoners
A documentary photographer's real skill lies in the ability to blend in, to gain access to disparate groups not only to observe, but also to do so with a camera.
As an impressive 35-year retrospective at the Lowinsky Gallery demonstrates, Danny Lyon has long shown that skill, and with it the ability to create formally evocative images in a wide variety of situations.
Mr.
Lyon's most famous image, of a group of motorcycle riders cruising along an otherwise deserted road in Wisconsin, demonstrates these strengths.
Taken from "The Bike riders," his classic 1968 study of Chicago-area motorcycle gangs, the picture shows the bikers from the back, spaced across the frame in a precise balance of forms, frozen by the photograph to a sculpturelike stillness.


Delchamps Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Dec 31


Some Familiar Names On Expansion Lists
There were few surprises on the list of players provided by 26 of the National Football League teams for the Feb. 15 expansion draft.
The players available to the Jacksonville Jaguars and Carolina Panthers include 14 Pro Bowl selections, 12 former first-round draft picks and a couple of hefty siblings.
Among the more prominent names were defensive end Chris Doleman of the Atlanta Falcons, a five-time Pro Bowl selection; quarterback Mark Rypien of Cleveland, a former Super Bowl most valuable player with Washington; quarterback Chris Miller of the Los Angeles/St.
Louis Rams; Jets running back Johnny Johnson, and the Perry brothers, Michael Dean and William (the Refrigerator).
Also on the list, from the Washington Redskins, were Desmond Howard, a wide receiver and former Heisman Trophy winner, and Leonard Marshall, the defensive lineman and former Giant.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; At Coke, a Shift to Many Voices
Four decades after Mao Zedong declared, "Let a hundred flowers bloom, let a hundred schools of thought contend," that most capitalistic consumer marketer, the Coca-Cola Company, has adopted his philosophy for that most capitalistic pursuit, advertising.
And in what would no doubt have brought a moue to Mao's face, his advice seems to be working.


PPG Industries(PPG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clayton Homes (CMH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Young America Outsails Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes
It was the essence of match-racing yesterday for two of the America's Cup defense teams.
PACT 95's sailboat, Young America, won the 18.5-mile race, beating Dennis Conner's yacht, Stars &amp; Stripes, by five minutes off San Diego.
But Young America's victory didn't come easily.
Until the last half-hour of racing, the wind blew at a fairly steady 8-11 knots, a noticeable change from the light, fluky breeze of the previous two days.


Region News Briefs; Arrested Man, 30, May Be Serial Rapist
A 30-year-old man charged with rape this week may be the rapist who terrorized a neighborhood in Centereach for nine years, the Suffolk County police said today.
Detective Lieut.
Alan Rosenthal, commander of the Sixth Squad detectives, said the suspect, James H. Quinitchette, an unemployed mechanic who was convicted of sexual abuse in 1981, has admitted to breaking into homes and attacking women who were alone or with children.


Arco Chemical Co. (RCM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Memories of a Hostage Crisis With Loud Music and Beer
In "S.F.W.," terrorists trap a group of hostages inside a convenience store for 36 days, until the place runs out of beer.
Sure, the hostages suffer, but their ordeal is nothing beside what an audience endures watching Jefery Levy's noxiously smug film.
Mr.
Levy satirizes the tabloidizing of American culture in ways that make "Natural Born Killers," another film aimed at the same barn-sized target, look like a model of insight and good taste.
The title comes from a catch phrase -- an obscenity-dotted variant of "So what?" -- that is delivered by one hostage and supposedly sweeps the country, a la "Network" and "mad as hell." Count on every review of "S.F.W." to point out that this film deserves its title.


Sun Microsystems Inc.(SUNW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Congressional Roundup: Military Readiness; Republicans Fire An Opening Salvo
In the opening move of what is sure to be a yearlong Republican assault on the Administration's stewardship of military readiness, the Senate Armed Services Committee heard field commanders' testimony as to whether Pentagon budget cuts were imperiling the armed forces' ability to fight.
Maj.
Gen.
Douglas D. Buchholz of the Army Signal Center said he was sending new computer technicians to the field ill prepared to handle the latest technology.
Comdr.
James Stavridis, skipper of the Barry, one of the Navy's newest destroyers, said sailors were now away from home so much that he feared that many of the best would burn out and leave the fleet.
Col.
Jennings B. Beavers 2d, commander of the Eighth Marine Infantry Regiment, said he had no money to replace aging equipment that was breaking down from heavy use.


Cable Group To Complete Offer for QVC
Tele-Communications Inc. said yesterday that it would complete its tender offer for QVC Inc. by Feb. 6, a move that could force a showdown with the Federal Trade Commission.
The Federal Trade Commission has been investigating the proposed $1.4 billion buyout of QVC by Tele-Communications and the Comcast Corporation, and its staff members have indicated that they oppose the deal on antitrust grounds and that they question whether Tele-Communications should even hold its existing 22 percent stake in QVC.


Deluge Leaves California's Wineries Wary but Hopeful
Napa Valley's vineyards, producers of some of California's most prized and pricey wines, came through last week's flooding scarred but intact, with some experts even seeing a positive side to the state's latest natural disaster.
The sight of flooded vineyards had sent shivers through the $1.5 billion California wine industry, which has been staggered by years of recession, a decline in wine consumption and a plant louse called phylloxera that has threatened the health of the vines.


Sampras Coach Is Hospitalized
Tim Gullikson, the coach of top-ranked Pete Sampras, was rushed to a local hospital today after he collapsed in the locker room.
Gullikson had just finished warming up Sampras, the Australian Open's defending champion, who went on to win his third-round tennis match.
Gullikson had been on medication for a congenital heart condition after suffering strokes in Sweden and Germany, where tests in December revealed a valve problem.


New York Schools Consider Year-Round Classes
Every September from now until the year 2001, the New York City public school system will have 21,000 more students than the year before, the equivalent of adding an entire community school district every 12 months.
So overcrowded is the system now, according to school and city reports, that 1 of every 11 schoolchildren does not have a desk and chair.
Officials are so concerned about the rapid growth, and about the city's inability to build more classroom space as it is consumed by its own budget crisis, that a commission appointed by Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines will recommend that the school system begin a pilot test of a year-round school calendar in September, in two yet-to-be-named high schools.


Peruvian Leader, Adored by All, Except His Wife
Facing a re-election vote in less than three months, President Alberto K. Fujimori might have been expected to cringe at the sight of his wife starting a sidewalk hunger strike against the Government.
But he took the news in stride on Wednesday.
He ordered his health minister to send an ambulance.
Then, he sat down for lunch.
That evening, television news programs first showed the President, eating seafood washed down with white wine, seated at a cloth-covered banquet table.
Then, viewers saw his wife, Susana Higuchi, being rushed to a hospital after fainting in the summer heat from dehydration and hunger.
"It's quite dramatic," mused Augusto Alvarez Rodrich, a pollster here.
"Six months ago, she was in the Presidential Palace, now she's fainting on a sidewalk. But at the end of the day, I don't think it will cost Fujimori many votes."
Mr.
Fujimori seems to be weathering an unrelenting six-month assault by his worst political enemy, his wife of 20 years.
Opinion polls routinely show Mr.
Fujimori favored by about 45 percent of voters, more than the sum of the 12 other candidates, including his closest rival, Javier Perez de Cuellar, the former United Nations Secretary General.
Today, Peru's major electoral mystery revolves around whether Mr.
Fujimori will be re-elected in the first round of voting on April 9 or in a June run-off.
But in a new twist for Peru's traditionally messy electoral politics, the President's wife is doing her best to make sure that his first term is his last.
Using Peru's radio, television, newspapers and magazines to wash the Presidential palace's dirty laundry in public, Ms.
Higuchi over the last six months has accused her husband of having a mistress, lying to the public, being heartless to the poor, tolerating official corruption, being a dictator, locking her out of the palace, preventing her from seeing their four teen-age children, sabotaging her political aspirations, and plotting to kidnap her.
"It appears that the intention was to put me in a cellar -- then goodbye Susana," the diminutive, 44-year-old civil engineer and businesswoman told reporters.
Just before Christmas, she filed for divorce, and then told reporters that her husband, a self-described Catholic, was really an agnostic.
Through it all, the 56-year-old Mr.
Fujimori, an iron-willed figure who in four years has broken the backs of hyperinflation and of the Shining Path guerrilla movement, has smiled, albeit thinly, knowing that his public approval rating has not budged much since July, hovering around 65 percent.
"Fujimori's relationship with the people is similar to Ronald Reagan's," said Mr.
Alvarez Rodrich, who directs Apoyo, the nation's leading polling group.
"He comes under heavy criticism. But in the end people support him. Perez de Cuellar has yet to explain, in simple language: Why bother to change a President who in the eyes of the public is successful?"
In addition to smashing the Shining Path, Mr.
Fujimori has slashed inflation, from 7,000 percent in 1990 to 15 percent last year, sparking an economic boom that has given Peru the fastest-growing economy in North or South America for the last two years.
Mr.
Perez de Cuellar, a patrician career diplomat who turned 75 today, seems to lack the common touch on the campaign trail and draws only small crowds.
His coalition, Union for Peru, is a lightning rod for a diverse group of opponents to Mr.
Fujimori: Socialists, retired army officers, Indians, Protestants and union leaders.
After three months of the campaign, no candidate has seriously dented Mr.
Fujimori's support, despite opposition charges that the Peruvian Government is bankrolling Mr.
Fujimori's reelection campaign.
Two weeks ago, Peru's Congress, controlled by Fujimori supporters, passed a watered-down election law that bars the President from making campaign speeches while he inaugurates public works projects.
With public works a key source of political patronage, Lima's Mayor, Ricardo Belmont, decided last year to run for president on a ticket called Obras, or Public Works.
Sensing a threat, Mr.
Fujimori promptly cut $22 million in federal funds from Lima's city budget, forcing the Mayor to cancel 14 major public works projects.
Once a popular figure, Mr.
Belmont now runs fourth in the polls, winning 3 percent of voter preferences.
Bristling at the complaints, the National Electoral Board vows that the general elections in April will be fair.
Responding to an opposition complaint, the board last month invalidated about 14,000 voter identity cards that were illegally issued to army and police officers.
At every turn, Mr.
Fujimori and his supporters have sought to stifle Ms.
Higuchi's own political aspirations.
Last July, Peru's Congress approved what is widely called "the Susana law," barring the spouse or blood relative of a Peruvian President from running for Congress or for the Presidency.
Ignoring the law, Ms.
Higuchi formed a political movement, called, ironically, Harmony.
In October, she filed a petition to run for President, and, in January, a petition to run for Congress.
In both cases, the board rejected the petitions on technical grounds.
Protesting the latest rejection, Ms.
Higuchi embarked on the hunger strike.
Today, with doctors urging her to abandon the protest, Ms.
Higuchi might seem to be running low of ammunition in her war against her husband.
But few people expect harmony to settle over the Presidential Palace.
A few weeks before the election, book stores are to start selling Ms.
Higuchi's tell-all memoirs.


Farm Sold At Auction To Diocese
When polo was the rage among the elite of this Gold Coast heartland more than a half-century ago, Tommy Hitchcock Jr. rode to fame as a 10-goal player, the equivalent of a .400 hitter in baseball.
Today, a remnant of the village's polo-playing legacy, a 97-acre horse farm once owned by the Hitchcock family, was sold for $5.6 million at an auction in Indianapolis ordered by Federal authorities.


Accounts
*
Earl Scheib Inc., Beverly Hills, Calif., to Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws Advertising, Los Angeles, to handle its account, previously in-house.
Billings were estimated at more than $5 million. *
Conagra Pet Products Co., Omaha, to Ogilvy &amp; Mather Houston, to handle the creative portion of its Sergeant's flea and tick products account, previously at Smith, Kaplan, Allen &amp; Reynolds, Omaha.
Billings were not disclosed.


Frederick J. Schlink, Writer and Pioneer In Consumerism, 103
Frederick J. Schlink, a founding father of the American consumers movement and a best-selling writer on consumerism, died on Sunday at Warren Hospital in Phillipsburg, N.J.
He was 103 and lived in Washington, N.J.
He died after a brief illness, said Peter L. Spencer, editor of Consumers' Research magazine.


Parties Clash at Hearing On Securities Litigation
Democrats and Republicans clashed at a House subcommittee hearing today over a central element of Speaker Newt Gingrich's legislative agenda -- a plan for far-reaching changes in the nation's securities-litigation process.
Despite the subject matter, the hearing omitted any witnesses from the Securities and Exchange Commission, whose chairman has opposed a key provision of the proposal that requires the loser of a securities-fraud lawsuit to pay the winner's expenses.


Fed Move To Increase Rates Seen
Comments from three Federal Reserve governors yesterday convinced traders and analysts that the Fed would raise interest rates after its policy meeting at the end of the month.
While another increase in short-term interest rates has been anticipated, weaker-than-expected retail sales figures last Friday raised questions in the minds of many market participants about the size and the timing of the next Fed move.


CHRONICLE
CRAIG LUCAS, the author of the play "Prelude to a Kiss" and the film "Longtime Companion," is returning to his playwriting roots with the production of "Missing Persons," opening Feb. 1 at the Atlantic Theater Company.
He wrote the play in 1981, when he was 28.
"I had no real desire to see it again, because it was a first play and suffers from all the things first plays suffer from," he said.
"It had good ideas, but I didn't know how to implement them."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.38
5.24
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.68
5.69
2.93
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.16
6.15
3.08
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.73
7.69
5.66
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.82
7.77
6.26
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.70
8.65
7.22
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.74
6.78
5.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Dealer's Plea in G.M. Fraud May Be Bargain of His Life
A year after he admitted bilking General Motors out of $436 million in one of the largest frauds in American corporate history, John M. McNamara, a former Port Jefferson car dealer, was back in the car business.
Out on bail in 1993, with hundreds of creditors waiting to collect millions of dollars from him, Mr.
McNamara took $300,000 from a $500,000 trust fund he had established in the 1980's for his teen-age daughter, and started a company in Florida that remade auto parts, he told a court last month.
He also continued to live in a rambling white house with an indoor pool in this affluent village on Long Island Sound, and commuted freely between New York and Florida.
He has not spent a day in jail.


Genentech Inc.(GNE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Broadway Dance: At Play With the Past
THERE are more dancing feet on Broadway than in 1992, when choreography rode back on a creative jag to reclaim equal time with songs and dialogue.
No longer subordinate to music as it was in a spate of British imports in the 1980's, dancing in the early 90's regained its traditional role in the so-called integrated musical.
In shows like "Jelly's Last Jam," "Crazy for You," "Guys and Dolls" and, more recently, "Carousel," the dances were not conceived as isolated numbers; in show-business parlance, they were intended to "move the story forward."


Park Neighbors Could Face Tax
New York City's Parks Commissioner is pushing a plan to increase the real-estate taxes of people who live around Central Park to help pay for upkeep.
The commissioner, Henry J. Stern, said the idea was one of a number of measures his department was pursuing to make up for a series of budget cuts that have drastically reduced the size of the maintenance staff and left scores of city parks in dilapidated conditions.


RESULTS PLUS
MEN'S BASKETBALL  UMass Keeps Winning  Marcus Camby scored 27 points as Massachusetts, the nation's top-ranked team, coasted to a 91-75 victory last night over Rhode Island, the last-place team in the Atlantic 10, in Providence.
It was the 11th straight victory for the Minutemen (12-1, 4-0).
Rhode Island (4-9, 0-4) dropped its sixth in a row. (AP)


Derivatives Losses Up For Bank
The Bankers Trust New York Corporation indicated yesterday that it has had far more customers with problem deals involving derivatives than the handful of cases that have been made public so far.
The bank said it had forgiven $72 million owed by those clients in such transactions.
The problems were disclosed as part of the bank's announcement of its fourth-quarter earnings, which were less than analysts expected because the bank, normally a trading powerhouse, broke even in trading during the quarter.
The bank earned $101 million in the quarter, down 63.8 percent from a year earlier.


Dr. Anthony A. Lofaro, Vascular Surgeon, 79
Dr.
Anthony A. Lofaro, a vascular surgeon who taught surgery and anatomy, died on Jan. 10 at his home in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 79.
The cause was a heart attack, said his daughter, Laura Lofaro of Manhattan.


No Headline
"If the minority has any steel in its spine and fire in its belly it will stand up." SENATOR ROBERT C. BYRD, exhorting his fellow Democrats.  [ A24:1. ]


Crime in Subway Declines
As the Transit Police Department battles for its survival, its commanders could take solace yesterday in new figures showing that subway crime overall had declined 21.7 percent last year.
The decline continued a long-term trend that has seen crime in the city's subway system drop 49.7 percent during the last five years.


Norbert Leeseberg, College Official, 64
Dr.
Norbert H. Leeseberg, a former professor and administrator at Wagner College on Staten Island and the former chairman of the board of Staten Island University Hospital, died on Saturday at the hospital.
He was 64 and lived in West Brighton, S.I.
The cause was cancer, said Dr.
Eleanor Meyer Rogg, a professor of sociology at Wagner College, from whose faculty he retired last year.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICAN STORES CO., Salt Lake City, completed the sale of 45 Acme stores in northern Pennsylvania and New York to the Penn Traffic Co. for $95.7 million.


The Ugly Side of a Tax Cut
Lieut.
Gov.
Betsy McCaughey of New York has tried to give a responsible answer to an irresponsible question.
Gov.
George Pataki asked her to propose ways to cut $1.2 billion from the state Medicaid -- the program that provides health coverage to the poor.
The target was not, however, dictated by a desire to improve Medicaid, but rather by the need to pay for Mr.
Pataki's tax cuts.
Ms.
McCaughey answered the best way she could.
But lopping off 20 percent of the programs would be ugly.
Some New York City hospitals, already driven to the edge by state regulations, would close.
The New York City region would be hit hard because it would give up the largest share of Medicaid reimbursements for the sake of honoring Mr.
Pataki's tax cuts.
And the proposals would reduce the quality of care for the poor.


On Stage, and Off
Let the Tony Politics Begin
There's no Tony in Off Broadway's immediate future.
Late last year, the possibility was raised when officials of the two organizations that administer the Tonys, the American Theater Wing and the League of American Theaters and Producers, invited Off Broadway producers to submit a proposal under which they might become eligible for one award.


Gains Cited In Approval Of New Drugs
The Food and Drug Administration reported this week that the time it took to approve new drugs dropped 20 percent to 50 percent in a single year.
The report, released on Tuesday, comes at the end of the first year of the agency's new User Fee Program, under which its drug-approval system was redesigned and more reviewers were being trained, financed by fees paid by pharmaceutical companies.


CHRONICLE
BILLY JOEL has a knack for being on the spot when major upheavals occur.
He was in Berlin on the night of German reunification, in October 1990, for example.
And on Tuesday, he was trying to sleep in a hotel room in Osaka, Japan, 20 miles from Kobe, when the earthquake struck.
The singer, who was not hurt, said mirrors and paintings fell from the walls, a heavy desk flipped over and his bed lurched across the room.


Insurer Seeks 21% Increase In Some Rates
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the financially troubled company that is New York State's largest health insurer, said yesterday that it was seeking rate increases averaging 21.4 percent for several types of policies, including the comprehensive coverage it provides to individual subscribers with AIDS, cancer and other serious diseases.
The company delivered its voluminous rate application late in the afternoon to officials of the State Insurance Department, the regulatory agency that will rule on the requested increases.
A spokesman for the department, John Calagna, said it would not comment until it has time to review Empire's documents.


O.J. Simpson Deserves Final Say on Lawyers; The Courtroom Stage
To the Editor:
I once served on a jury where we found for a doctor sued for malpractice who was represented by two lawyers, while the plaintiff had only one.
There was an argument during trial between the doctor's lawyers.


Union Camp Corp.(UCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Unifi Inc.(UFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about a human rights official in the Russian Government cited his recent activities incorrectly in some editions.
The official, Sergei A. Kovalyov, has been involved in human rights causes for years, and did not interrupt his activities in the early 1990's.


Parts Strike Is Shutting G.M. Assembly Lines
Several General Motors assembly lines ground to a halt today, deprived of spark plugs, instrument panels, oil pumps and other critical parts made at a sprawling complex here that was struck by 6,600 workers on Wednesday.
In Pontiac, Mich., an assembly plant that produces two popular pickup trucks closed before noon, idling 3,000 workers.
Later, a small car plant in Lansing and an assembly line in a Wisconsin truck plant also shut down, idling more than 10,000 workers.
Other plants were expected to close soon.
Negotiators for G.M. and the United Automobile Workers met here again today, but did not resolve their dispute over whether G.M. should hire new workers and give them more parts to manufacture.
They agreed to meet again on Friday morning.


Art in Review
Maureen Connor  'Discreet Objects'
Alternative Museum  594 Broadway (near Houston Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 11
This nicely judged selection of Maureen Connor's sculpture, with Andrew Perchuk of the Alternative Museum as curator, not only traces the path of an impressive career in progress but also gives a shorthand sense of the temperamental development in feminist art in the last two decades.


When Does Pain Make A Murderer A Victim?
"Murder in the First" is the semi-true story of Henri Young, who in March 1938 was placed in solitary confinement in an underground vault at Alcatraz and remained thus cruelly confined for more than three years.
Released into the prison population and suffering the mind-altering effects of his ordeal, he killed a man he thought had wronged him.
Was Henri Young responsible for his own actions after suffering such duress?
Was he murderer or victim?
The conventions of courtroom drama provide an easy answer to that question, just as they provide James Stamphill (Christian Slater), the idealistic young lawyer who takes the case of Henri Young (Kevin Bacon).
Stamphill, a composite of the lawyers who defended Young, is kind, brash and fresh out of Harvard Law School.
He's principled.
He admires Clarence Darrow.
This case means a lot to him.
He treats his client with great compassion.
It's essential, in this sort of storytelling, that both Stamphill and Young become better individuals because they work together toward a just cause.


Death Penalty Agreement Near
Gov.
George E. Pataki and Democratic lawmakers have overcome a major sticking point in negotiations over death penalty legislation, having reached agreement in principle on safeguards for poor and minority defendants, aides to both sides said yesterday.
The safeguards would include requiring judges in death penalty cases to instruct juries that race should not be a factor in their verdicts; having State Appellate Division judges select experienced lawyers to represent indigent defendants, and ordering the Court of Appeals to periodically review how capital punishment is being applied to see if there is systematic racial bias.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about discussions on combining the home health businesses of the Coram Healthcare Corporation and Caremark International misstated the potential ranking of Coram.
If it bought the Caremark unit, Coram would be the largest company providing intravenous drugs and nutrition to patients at home, not the largest provider of home health care.


Art in Review
Lorna Bieber
Julie Saul Gallery  560 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 18
Homes take on a funereal air in Lorna Bieber's large works.
Ms.
Bieber manipulates photographs of interiors from design magazines published in the 1950's, then uses them as negatives to make prints.


Pataki Takes His Message To City Hall And Council
Overshadowing the Mayor who didn't endorse him, Gov.
George E. Pataki took center stage at City Hall yesterday, delivering a rare speech by a governor to the City Council and calling for a more direct relationship between the state's chief executive and the Legislature.
In the vaulted City Council chambers, the new Republican Governor spelled out his vision of cutting taxes and shrinking government.
Council officials said it was the first time since the modern Council was formed in 1938 that a governor had addressed the lawmakers.





National Convenience Stores Inc.(NCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Discount Retailer Picks W. B. Doner
Venture Stores Inc., a discount retailer based in O'Fallon, Mo., said yesterday that it had selected W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Southfield, Mich., to handle its account, previously at Publicis/Bloom in Dallas.
Billings were estimated at $6 million to $8 million.


Inacom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


RJR Nabisco Begins Foods Unit Stock Offering
In an announcement that was greeted optimistically by analysts, the new foods unit of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation priced the initial public offering of its stock at $24.50 a share yesterday.
The 45 million shares, which would be worth $1.1 billion, will begin trading today.
In October, RJR Nabisco, announced the offering in its plan to begin separating its food operations from its tobacco business.
The class A shares in the new company, Nabisco Holdings, which will be listed on the New York Stock Exchange under a new symbol, NA, represent about 17 percent of Nabisco Holdings, and will be used to repay bank debt.


Court Is Asked To Order Audit Of N.A.A.C.P.
Officials with the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People have asked a Federal court in Baltimore to order an independent audit of the group's financial records in a move intended to weaken the board chairman's hold on the troubled organization.
The legal action was the latest in an array of problems and embarrassments within the country's oldest civil rights group.
It was devised to explore accusations that Dr.
William F. Gibson, the board chairman, misused N.A.A.C.P. money by double billing the group for expenses and taking money from the organization as a personal loan.


Trade Deficit Widened in November
Despite continued vigorous export growth, the nation's trade deficit widened in November, the Government reported yesterday, and is well on the way to reaching record levels for all of 1994.
During the month, the deficit on goods and services rose by 4.3 percent from October, the Commerce Department said, to $10.53 billion from a revised $10.10 billion.


The Lawyers
Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., the leader of O. J. Simpson's team, has built a 30-year career as a defense lawyer around what one client calls "enormous powers of persuasion." First of three profiles.
Page A26.


Tax Proposed To Maintain Central Park
Saying he has given up hope on New York's financial ability to maintain its parks, the city parks commissioner is pushing a plan to increase the real estate taxes of people who live around Central Park.
The commissioner, Henry J. Stern, said yesterday that the idea was one of a number of measures that his department was pursuing to make up for a series of budget cuts that have drastically reduced the size of the maintenance staff over the last few years and have left scores of city parks in dilapidated conditions.


Another State in Mexico Challenges the Government
In an extraordinary rebellion that could threaten a new agreement to open up Mexico's political system, governing-party supporters threw the southern state of Tabasco into chaos today, shutting down businesses and transportation to protest the central Government's reported agreement to new elections in the state.
Responding for the second day to rumors that President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon had bowed to leftist demands that his party's Governor in Tabasco resign because of fraud in November's elections, governing-party members blocked highways, closed schools and shut hundreds of businesses.


Kimball International Inc.(KBALB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Programming Venture by Bates
Bates USA in New York said yesterday that it would join a venture with two television-programming syndicators to develop, distribute and market syndicated and interactive TV programming and home video projects.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.


Congressional Roundup: Budget Amendment; The Difficulty, Again, Is in Details
House Speaker Newt Gingrich promised to give voters something that the White House and Congressional Democrats had been demanding of him for weeks: an explicit description of how Republicans plan to erase the $200 billion-a-year Federal deficit by 2002.
But he quickly backtracked after the chairman of the House Budget Committee, Representative John R. Kasich of Ohio, said the promise could not be fulfilled.


Council Creates Police Monitor, But Giuliani Plans to Ignore Vote
Defying Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the City Council voted yesterday to create an independent agency to monitor the police and guard against corruption.
But Mr.
Giuliani said he would ignore the vote, forcing the Council to take him to court to establish the agency.
The Mayor had vetoed an earlier Council vote on the agency, and has long said that he opposed it because it would have too much power, duplicating the work of district attorneys.
He said yesterday that the Council was seeking to create its own law-enforcement agency, because the selection process it had set up would give it a role in appointing members to the agency's five-member governing board.


Raychem Corp.(RYC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Sky Isn't the Limit As Stich Tumbles in 3d
With the roof shut tight over the stadium to close out the morning drizzle that returned to haunt the Australian Open, the seventh-seeded Michael Stich found his game shut down by the 28th-ranked Karel Novacek.
This was the same 29-year-old Czech Republic veteran who obediently fell to Stich in the semifinals of the 1994 United States Open, but today he rendered the German the first upset victim of this event's third round with his 7-5, 6-2, 6-4 victory.
While Novacek operated with radar in his racquet, Stich was out of sorts and out of bounds for the duration of their 1-hour-39-minute match.
Stich had one ace and earned only two break points against Novacek's serve.


Region News Briefs; Police Officer Shot After Bank Robbery
A Suffolk County police officer was shot in the leg after a robbery today at a NatWest Bank branch office in South Huntington.
The police said Officer Lawrence Marcheschi, 29, and a second officer pulled up to the bank in a squad car as two suspects were fleeing.
The police said a suspect opened fire, striking Officer Marcheschi above the right knee.


Art in Review
William Christenberry
Pace/MacGill Gallery  32 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Feb. 11
The architecture of the rural South has been the focus of William Christenberry's art for over 30 years.
A central piece in this small survey is a large, loosely rendered painting from 1960 showing a run-down shack; also included are photographs and drawings of similar structures, as well as detailed models of both actual and imaginary shacks.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "A DOLL'S LIFE," York Theater Company at Citicorp Center, St.
Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street.
A revised production of the 1982 musical sequel to the Ibsen drama; with book and lyrics by Betty Comden and Adolph Green; music by Larry Grossman.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 2:30 P.M.
Tickets: $30 and $35.
Information: (212) 935-5820.


In Japan's Capital, the Big Question Is What if the Quake Happened There?
With the public transfixed by the horrifying images of toppled buildings and raging fires after Tuesday's earthquake, the almost universal question here is: What if it had happened in Tokyo?
Earthquakes are relatively uncommon in western Japan, where the devastating temblor was centered, but seismologists have been warning for years that the Tokyo area should be prepared for a severe quake.
Suddenly such warnings are being taken much more seriously.


A Korean Coming of Age; Pan-Asian Superstore in Queens Defies Stereotypes
When Syng Man Rhee opened a vast ethnic supermarket in Fairfax, Va., four years ago, 30 greengrocers from miles around closed their doors within 18 months, yielding to the giant whose prices and variety they could not beat.
Now, Mr.
Rhee has opened a huge pan-Asian superstore in downtown Flushing, bulging with bok choy and cuttlefish, and hundreds of immigrant merchants here fear that his Korea Town Plaza will force them out of business, too.


Suspect Helps Pick 4 Jurors In Rail Deaths
At times appearing confused and disorganized, Colin Ferguson helped select four more jurors today for his trial on charges of killing six passengers on a Long Island Rail Road train a year ago.
Mr.
Ferguson, 37, who is acting as his own lawyer, plied prospective jurors for the second day with a variety of questions, including what they thought about Gov.
George E. Pataki, immigrants, and African-Americans and whether the jurors were hockey fans.


CSX Corp.(CSX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


The Time Has Come To Earn Their Pay
Yes, our long, icy North American nightmare is over.
Hockey is back.
ESPN and the MSG Network will tag-team coverage of tonight's Rangers-Buffalo Sabres season opener.
Great changes will come to the National Hockey League, besides the "Game On!" logo painted on the ice.
Commissioner Gary Bettman will arrive in a Chelios-proof Zamboni.
A hologram of the union chief Bob Goodenow's face will be on each puck.
MSG's John Davidson will emit his first "Oh, Baby!" of 1995.
ESPN's Mike Milbury, the former Boston Bruins' player and coach, will have his long-delayed debut as studio analyst.
ESPN's telecast is blacked out in the New York market.


Legg Mason Inc.(LM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Family Excursion Into the Canyons
MY family hit upon the notion of spending the weekend in lower Manhattan at the newly reopened Vista Hotel.
Our thought was to peruse the sights not as day trippers but as overnighters, after the 350,000 workers who make the area the nation's third largest business center, after midtown Manhattan and Chicago, have left.
Oddly enough, visitors also beat quick retreats from downtown, with studies indicating that most visit one attraction and then flee to midtown hotels.


Dover Corp.(DOV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Women Who Soar The Friendly Skies
Women have begun to soar through the air in track and field, competing in the last exclusive male event in a sport that has been slow to give parity to female athletes.
The event is the pole vault, one of the sport's toughest challenges.
Several recent decisions by ruling bodies have led to widespread sanctioning of the women's pole vault, validating the efforts of such national-class athletes as Melissa Price, Pam Reynolds and Philipa Raschker.


Region News Briefs; Arrested Man, 30, May Be Serial Rapist
A 30-year-old man charged with rape this week may be the rapist who terrorized a neighborhood in Centereach for nine years, the Suffolk County police said today.
Detective Lieut.
Alan Rosenthal, commander of the Sixth Squad detectives, said the suspect, James H. Quinitchette, an unemployed mechanic who was convicted of sexual abuse in 1981, has admitted to breaking into homes and attacking women who were alone or with children.


In Kobe, Families Keep Sad Vigils In the Ruins Where Loved Ones Lie
Kaori Matsuoka stared at the small vase of flowers and the rice cakes at her side as she huddled with her two boys where her house once stood, now an expanse of gray and red rubble.
She remembered telling her 13-year-old son to put on two pairs of socks to guard against broken glass when he crept out of his crushed bed after the earthquake, and she remembered hearing her husband rush after her older son as he screamed for help.


Art in Review
Alan Belcher  'Self Portraits'
Jack Shainman  560 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Jan. 28
The self-portraits in Alan Belcher's show are small cloth dolls, hand-stitched and fastidiously personalized.
Locks of the artist's hair sprout from their heads, his fingernail clippings are sewed to their bodies in symmetrical patterns, and photographs of his face appears where the dolls' face should be.


House Speaker Says Democrats Are Trying to Destroy Him
Speaker Newt Gingrich, who made his name in Congress with relentless attacks on one of his predecessors, Speaker Jim Wright, said today that he was "a little disturbed" to think Democrats were out to destroy him.
"I think a strategy based on the personal destruction of somebody is pretty amazing," the Georgia Republican said at his daily briefing for reporters who were questioning him about his book deal.


Draft Rule Is Keeping Fetisov and Devils a Pact Apart
The Devils and Slava Fetisov have not wrapped up an agreement and may not for another month because of an adjustment in the waiver draft rules as a result of the National Hockey League lockout.
Lou Lamoriello, the team's president and general manager, said today that free agents who are signed before Feb. 20 must first be exposed to waivers, where they could be claimed by another team in the league.


Bristol-Myers Sets Charge For Implants
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company said yesterday that it had set aside an additional $750 million to settle injury claims by women who received silicone breast implants.
Analysts called the $750 million charge, which pushed the company's fourth-quarter earnings down 61.4 percent, "a huge number" and a sign that the total cost of the settlements might significantly exceed the $4.25 billion that Bristol-Myers Squibb, Dow Corning Inc. and several other companies have pledged to a fund for thousands of women who may accept a negotiated settlement.


Hartman and Olczyk Get Names on the Cup
The day before the Rangers' lockout-delayed quest for a third Stanley Cup victory in 55 years, two players who saw limited action in last season's campaign learned yesterday that their names will be added to the venerable trophy.
Acting on an appeal by the Rangers president, Neil Smith, Gary Bettman, the National Hockey League commissioner, waived a rule barring players who did not appear in at least 40 regular-season games and at least one game in the Stanley Cup finals.


MCN Corp.(MCN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An entry in the Business Digest referring to the article misstated the scope of the discussions.
Coram is negotiating to buy Caremark's home health business, not the entire company.


Art in Review
Robert De Niro Sr.
Salander-O'Reilly Galleries  20 East 79th Street  Manhattan  Through March 4
Yes, the father of the movie star.
But hardly a Sunday painter.
De Niro was a student of Hans Hofmann and Josef Albers, and lived and worked in New York City from the 1940's through the 1980's. (He died in 1993.) His paintings appeared regularly in New York galleries and were acquired by museums ranging from the Metropolitan Museum of Art to the Hirshhorn.
The zenith of his career was in the 1950's, when he showed at the Charles Egan gallery in Manhattan, along with Willem de Kooning, Franz Kline and Philip Guston.


Market Place; Fertilizer stocks, including Terra, IMC Global and Potash, are gaining a following.
IT did not take Terra Industries' stock price long to shake off the effects of a huge explosion last month that leveled the company's Sioux City, Iowa, fertilizer production plant, killing four people.
The closing price of the shares dropped $1 on Dec. 13, the day of the explosion, to $9.125 and another 12.5 cents the following day, then headed back up.
It closed at $12.75, up 12.5 cents, in trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.
How can a company so easily sail through a terrible accident that destroys a plant that accounted for 25 percent of its operating income in the first nine months of last year?
The short answer is that Terra -- and its investors -- are convinced that insurers will pick up most of the tab.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 19 about the aftermath of a 1976 airline hijacking included an erroneous report from the State Department on the diplomatic status of Julienne Busic, who was convicted in the crime.
Mrs.
Busic, who works for the Croatian Embassy in Washington, is in fact registered with the State Department's Office of Protocol, as required under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
A letter from Croatian officials pointing out the error was misdirected at The Times, delaying this correction.


Whitman Gets National Role And Tax Test
Even as Christine Todd Whitman prepares to play her biggest role on the national stage -- this Tuesday she is to become the first governor picked by her party to rebut a Presidential State of the Union address -- at home she is facing the sternest test of her young administration as she unveils her second round of state income tax cuts on Saturday.
In announcing his choice of Mrs.
Whitman to deliver the party's reply to the President Tuesday night, Newt Gingrich, the House Speaker, told a luncheon audience at the Republican National Committee in Washington today that the New Jersey Governor had become an emblem for his party.
"We wanted to send a signal about what kind of team we are. We wanted to send a signal about how broad-based we are," the Speaker said.


American Electric Power Co.  (AEP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Holy Bull Is 3-5 Choice In 4-Year-Old Debut
Holy Bull drew the No. 5 post position and top weight of 126 pounds for his 4-year-old debut on Sunday in the Olympic Handicap.
And although his owner and trainer, Jimmy Croll, said "he might not win," the Gulfstream Park oddsmaker made the great gray horse the 3-5 favorite to outrun Patton and four other sprinters in the seven-furlong dash.
"I still think that Patton and I are the ones who will make the lead," Croll said.
"I think he's right where he should be, but he hasn't raced in four months since the Woodward. But I'm more confident than I was two weeks ago."


Insurer Seeks 21% Increase In Some Rates
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the financially troubled company that is New York State's largest health insurer, said yesterday that it was seeking rate increases averaging 21.4 percent for several types of policies, including the comprehensive coverage it provides to individual subscribers with AIDS, cancer and other serious diseases.
The company delivered its voluminous rate application late in the afternoon to officials of the State Insurance Department, the regulatory agency that will rule on the requested increases.
A spokesman for the department, John Calagna, said it would not comment until it has time to review Empire's documents.


Evidence Contradicts Texas on Execution
To the Editor:
As the lawyer for Jesse Dewayne Jacobs, executed in Texas on Jan. 4, I must respond to the Jan. 13 letter of Ron Dusek of the Office of the Texas Attorney General, which supports the execution despite strong indications Mr.
Jacobs did not commit the crime for which he died.


Pope, in Sydney, Defends Vatican's Ban on Ordaining Women
Nearing the end of an 11-day journey through Asia and Oceania, Pope John Paul II sought today to quell a debate among Catholics here over the ordination of women and said women's role in society was specially tied to motherhood.
But while accusing his many feminist critics of misunderstanding the Vatican's views, he told a gathering called to honor a nun who fought the male-dominated Australian church hierarchy that "the church stands firmly against every form of discrimination which in any way compromises the equal dignity of women and men."


Bankers Didn't Fall From Grace Until 30's
To the Editor:
Paul Anka (letter, Jan. 12) asserts that the banker and dabbler in music Charles G. Dawes was Coolidge's Vice President "in 1929 at a time when bankers were not exactly held in high esteem!"


Met Museum Pre-empts Sale of Old Master
The Metropolitan Museum of Art announced yesterday that it had exercised an option to buy a work that was part of an auction of Old Master paintings from the financially troubled New-York Historical Society at Sotheby's last week.
The highest bidder for the painting -- Lo Scheggia's "Triumph of Fame," a 1449 circular painting that was the birth plate of Lorenzo de' Medici -- was Reiner Zeitz, a London dealer who was willing to pay $2.2 million.
But under an agreement worked out last fall by the Historical Society, Sotheby's and the New York State Attorney General, state institutions had the right to match any offer made on the 183 Old Master paintings within seven days of the Jan. 12 sale.
The New York Times erroneously reported such an action by the Met last Friday, when it had not yet taken place.


Barbara Jelavich; Scholar and Expert On Balkans Was 71
Dr.
Barbara Jelavich, a prominent scholar of Eastern European history with a particular interest in the Balkan countries, died on Saturday at Bloomington Hospital in Bloomington, Ind.
She was 71 and lived in Bloomington.
The cause was cancer, said a spokesman for Indiana University.


IBP Inc.(IBP,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Praxair Inc.(PX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


James Michalos, 82, A Retired Professor
James Michalos, a retired professor of civil engineering at Polytechnic Institute of New York and a consultant to government agencies and private builders, died on Jan. 7 in his home in Manhattan.
He was 82.
The cause was a brain tumor, said his son, Peter, of Manhattan.


FINAL TERMS TO BE SET FOR SALE OF VIACOM CABLE SYSTEMS
Tele-Communications Inc. and Viacom Inc. are expected to announce, perhaps as early as this week, that the sale of Viacom's cable television systems with 1.1 million subscribers would be valued at $2.2 billion to $2.4 billion.
Several people close to the transaction said the deal would include $1.6 billion in cash and notes valued at $600 million to $800 million.
The Viacom systems are being acquired by RCS Pacific, an investment group.
Frank Washington, a black investor, is the general partner of the purchase and holds a 21 percent interest of RCS.
As a result, the sale qualifies for a minority tax certificate that allows the seller to defer taxes if the acquiring group includes a minority person or group.
The balance of RCS is owned by Intermedia Partners of San Francisco, which is 31 percent-owned by Tele-Communications.


For '96, Clinton Looks to Ickes, Another Survivor
Harold M. Ickes has survived some of the bitterest Democratic Party wars of the last quarter-century, but he recently passed a new sort of milestone.
With 54 weeks of service, he is now the longest serving deputy chief of staff in the Clinton White House, which has had five of them.
Not that he has had an easy time of it.
The three main tasks of his tenure -- legislative stewardship of the President's health care plan, damage control on the Whitewater inquiry and strategy for the midterm elections -- all came unglued, if through no particular fault of his own.


Rockets' Touch Is Gone
The Houston Rockets have discovered why championship teams have so much difficulty repeating.
Tonight's humbling 93-77 loss to the Knicks was the third consecutive setback for the Rockets (22-13).
Earlier this week, they lost to the Minnesota Timberwolves.
And Houston has already lost seven games at the Summit this season, compared with six at home all of last season.


Pataki Urged To Impose Welfare Cuts On the Able
As they work to draw up Gov.
George E. Pataki's budget for the coming year, top administration officials are urging the Governor to propose a 90-day limit on welfare benefits for employable, childless recipients, as well as a reduction of up to 25 percent in benefit levels for those recipients.
The officials also want to eliminate grants made by the state to certain disabled people through the Federal Government's Supplemental Security Income program.
The Federal Government currently pays up to $458 a month to blind, aged and handicapped individuals who qualify for the benefits, and the state supplements those checks with payments of up to $86 a month, depending on the recipient's outside income and living arrangements.
The officials would not say which individuals might be affected by the cuts.


Maurits Dekker, 95, A Retired Publisher
Maurits Dekker, a retired New York publisher of scientific texts and materials, died on Monday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Stamford, Conn.
A Greenwich resident, he was 95.
He had been in failing health for several years, his family said.


Electronic Arts (ERTS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Crosby Bonsall, 74, Children's Author
Crosby Newell Bonsall, the author and illustrator of more than 40 children's books, died on Jan. 10 at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, where she lived.
She was 74.
The cause was a stroke, said Barbara Phillips, her niece.


Orioles Say They Won't Play Without Regulars
If baseball proceeds with its plan to use replacement players for major leaguers on strike, it will proceed without the Baltimore Orioles, the team's owner, Peter Angelos, said today.
The owner of the American League East club reiterated that stance even though the league informed him earlier in the day that he could face penalties ranging from a fine of $250,000 a game to suspension to the possible confiscation of his franchise.


White House Pledges to Do Better in Publicizing Clinton's Deeds
With President Clinton at the midpoint of his term, the White House pledged today to better inform the American people of his accomplishments.
It began by issuing a report that said Mr.
Clinton had at least partly fulfilled three-quarters of his campaign promises.
The gesture, on the eve of the second anniversary of Mr.
Clinton's inauguration, reflected a strongly held conviction among the President and his top aides that the public's view of him is a consequence not so much of antipathy as of ignorance about what he has done.


Winter Antiques Show Goes Back to Its Roots
FINALLY, the Winter Antiques Show has stopped competing.
After the International Art and Antique Dealers Show came to New York City six years ago, the organizers of the Winter Antiques Show felt compelled to bring a more European flavor to what had arguably been the greatest American antiques show in the country.
The only problem was, their efforts didn't quite succeed: while the show steadily improved from an all-time low seven years ago, for the last several seasons it has seemed rudderless.


Nurse Accuses Doctor in Death of Heiress
When Doris Duke, the billionaire tobacco heiress, died in 1993 at the age of 80, her doctor said the causes were the natural disasters of age.
Miss Duke had suffered a stroke a two months earlier and was bedridden.
Her lungs slowly filled with fluid.
Her heart finally failed.
But now a witness -- the private nurse who took care of Miss Duke in the last two months of her life -- has raised questions about just how natural those causes were, throwing a bizarre twist into an already tangled fight among the heirs to Miss Duke's $2.1 billion fortune.


Developments in Congress
HOUSE -- The Corporation for Public Broadcasting, long a favorite target of conservatives who have accused its operators of liberal bias, came under the critical gaze of the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services and Education.
"There won't be an argument in this room by anybody about the merits of public broadcasting," said Representative Robert L. Livingston, the Louisiana Republican who is the Appropriations chairman.
"The issue is that over last 25 years we have accumulated a $5 trillion debt." Like many other Republicans, Mr.
Livingston said that while he supported public broadcasting, he questioned whether it could make up for the $285 million a year that the Federal Government now provides to the corporation, which broadcasts cash cows like "Sesame Street" and "Barney."
Speaker Newt Gingrich of Georgia promised to come up with something that Democrats had been demanding of him for weeks: an explicit description of how Republicans plan to erase the $200 billion-a-year Federal deficit by 2002.
But he quickly backtracked after the chairman of the House Budget Committee, Representative John R. Kasich of Ohio, said it could not be done.
SENATE -- Exhorted by Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, to "show some steel in your spine and some fire in your belly," Senate Democrats blocked the Republicans on one of the first major procedural votes of the new Congress.
The 54 to 44 vote came on an effort by Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, to limit debate and carried more political than legislative meaning, since the Senate is almost certain to pass a bill now on the floor intended to make it more difficult for Congress to impose mandates on state and local governments without their consent.
In a hearing that one senior Pentagon official called "death by 1,000 anecdotes," the Senate Armed Services Committee invited field commanders to testify about whether Pentagon budget cuts in this Administration were imperiling the armed forces' ability to fight.


Congressional Roundup; DEMOCRATS BLOCK BILL ON MANDATES
Exhorted by Senator Robert C. Byrd to show "steel in its spine and fire in its belly," the Senate's Democratic minority asserted its prerogatives today and blocked the Republicans on one of the first major procedural votes of the new Congress.
The vote came on an attempt by Senator Bob Dole, the new majority leader, to limit debate by invoking cloture, a parliamentary procedure that requires the support of 60 senators.
Mr.
Dole got only 54, to 44 for the opposition, on what was almost entirely a party-line vote.


Evidence Contradicts Texas on Execution; Pataki Acted Logically
To the Editor:
Re "Mr. Grasso's Death Wish" (editorial, Jan. 17): Why imprison a twice-convicted killer for 20 years at a cost to taxpayers of $500,000 when he can be executed in months?
Regardless of Thomas Grasso's wishes, Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York chose the logical course of action in this case.
R.
BRADFORD HUDSON Lancaster, Pa., Jan. 17, 1995


Dispute Leads to Deaths of 2 In Shooting at Brooklyn Club
Two people were shot to death and another seriously injured at a Brooklyn night club early yesterday morning, as hundreds of patrons scurried for cover, the police said.
The exact motive in the shooting was unclear, but the police said the incident apparently started as a minor dispute that reeled out of control.
Sgt.
John Clifford, a police spokesman, said the shooting did not appear to be drug related.


Rome Journal; A Slur, Cry Italy's Cat Ladies, and the Fur Flies
It doesn't take much to stir Rome's "gattare," the dedicated army of cat ladies who feed the estimated 200,000 wild cats that make their home in the city's ancient monuments.
So when a recent article in a popular Roman newspaper shocked local pet owners with the news that an AIDS-like virus was on the rise among Roman strays, Elena Bruni was indignant.
She took the report as a slur against her charges, a mangy melange of cats that haunt the empty arches of the Teatro di Marcello, across the street from the cafe-bar she and her family own.


Union Pacific Corp.(UNP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Canadian Teams Face More Labor Tangles
Replacement Baseball, North America's newest sport, produced more bizarre developments yesterday.
The Toronto Blue Jays decided to create a two-platoon system of managers and coaches, and the Montreal Expos faced the prospect of creating a two-platoon system of players.
Some of the people who could render those acts moot, the owners' negotiating committee, met with mediator Bill Usery Jr. and Secretary of Labor Robert Reich, but there remained no indication when the owners and players might resume talks in their effort to settle their five-month-old dispute.


Tyco International Ltd.(TYC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
Defiance From Oriole Owner
Peter Angelos insists his Baltimore team will skip the season rather use replacement players for striking major leaguers.
Page B9.
Year-Round Classes Planned
With overcrowding on the rise, Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines will recommend testing a year-round calendar in two schools.
Page B1.


Anarchistic John Cage
To the Editor:
George Stevens Jr. says in his Jan. 12 letter that Merce Cunningham was included in the Kennedy Center Honors.
However, John Cage did not attend the honors in 1985.
Cage was an anarchist to the last, and would have nothing to do with them.
Merce Cunningham was accompanied by Carolyn Brown, his dance partner from 1953 to 1972.
DAVID VAUGHAN  Archivist Cunningham Dance Foundation New York, Jan. 13, 1995


The Neediest Cases; Chasing Her Dream Through Education
On the Lower East Side of Manhattan, where generations of poor New Yorkers have struggled toward a better life, Verbet Silva lives out a modern-day version of the story.
She shares a home with her companion of 10 years, Tony, their three children, her two children from a previous relationship, and two of her brother's children.
The family lives in the Baruch Houses, a brown-brick apartment complex on Delancey Street with a close-up view of the Williamsburg Bridge.
They sleep two to a single bed and dine on rice and beans, and every day Ms.
Silva and Tony try to make something of themselves and motivate the children to do the same.
All the children know Ms.
Silva's creed by heart: "I can do anything I can put my mind to."


Apple Has Big Increase In Earnings
Buoyed by strong Christmas sales, Apple Computer Inc. reported today that its earnings surged more than fourfold in its first fiscal quarter, far exceeding Wall Street analysts' estimates.
Apple said that it had shipped its one-millionth Power Macintosh personal computer or upgrade, reaching this milestone two months ahead of plan, or 10 months after introduction of its systems based on the Power PC microprocessor jointly developed by Apple, Motorola and I.B.M.


Accused L.I.R.R. Gunman Seeks To Impress Prospective Jurors
Hoping to convince prospective jurors that he is not an insane murderer who shot 25 people on a Long Island Rail Road train a year ago, Colin Ferguson personally began questioning each potential juror today, despite the objections of his own legal advisers.
"It is Mr. Ferguson's opinion that he alone can best introduce himself to the potential jurors," said Alton G. Rose, one of the defendant's advisers.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the approaching retirement of Norman Podhoretz as editor in chief of Commentary misstated the magazine's deficit in the late 1980's.
It was about $300,000 a year -- not $100,000 or $500,000.


Cataclysm in Kobe
Could a Kobe-scale disaster happen here?
By the latest count more than 4,000 people are dead, 21,000 injured and 275,000 homeless.
More than 30,000 buildings have been damaged or destroyed and property losses are about $50 billion.
Indeed it could.
Earthquakes, which strike without warning, can inflict enormous destruction anywhere.
Each full point on the logarithmic Richter scale represents a tenfold increase in energy released.
Last year's Los Angeles quake measured 6.8.
The Kobe quake, at 7.2, was more than twice as powerful.
Seismologists say that a 7.5-magnitude quake, many times more powerful than Japan's, is a realistic possibility for the Los Angeles area.


Women in Puerto Rico Find Marriage Offers No Haven From AIDS
When Yvis A. married at age 18, she was in love and dreamed of having two children, a boy and a girl.
Then, in a doctor's office less than two years later, she was told that the fever, diarrhea and swollen lymph glands that had afflicted her young son for more than a year were caused by H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
She looked no farther than the man sitting next to her, her husband, and finally believed the persistent talk from family and friends that he was bisexual.
She said she believed he gave her the virus, which she then passed on to her fetus.


Another Overhaul in Trenton


Editorial Notebook; What Ever Happened to Prussia?
A sleeper awakening in Berlin after 75 years might be most amazed by something less obvious than the physical changes in Germany's once and future capital.
The Prussian Kingdom, which united Germany and then dominated much of Europe in the previous 75 years, has simply vanished as a political or geographic entity.
This erasure was the result of a decision in 1947 by the Allied Control Council, representing Germany's four occupying powers.
Under Law 46 the council abolished what used to be the state of Prussia and all its agencies.
What was left of Prussia's feudal elite was also eliminated when the Communists in East Germany confiscated former Junker estates and razed the old Royal Palace.


Congressional Roundup: Crime; Another Battle On Guns at Hand
Less than five months after its epic battle over the $30 billion crime bill and the legislation's ban on a variety of assault weapons, Congress is bracing for yet another all-out struggle over guns.
There is little question that the Republican-controlled House has the votes to dump the ban; the questions there are how and when to do so.
But it seems doubtful that Senate Republicans can muster the votes to go along with the repeal.
And even if they do, Administration officials said today, a veto is certain.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
NBA -- Suspended Olden Polynice of Sacramento and Rod Strickland, Clyde Drexler, Mark Bryant, Harvey Grant, Jerome Kersey and James Edwards of Portland one game each for their roles in a fight during a game Tuesday night, and fined Polynice and Strickland $5,000 apiece.


JAPAN QUAKE TOLL MOVES PAST 4,100, HIGHEST SINCE 1923
The death toll from the huge earthquake that devastated this city passed 4,100 today, and 275,000 homeless people huddled on floors and in stairwells of public buildings and other shelters, their initial shock giving way to discontent and even despair.
The homeless included more than one-tenth of this city's population of 1.5 million and many others in surrounding areas.
In Kobe, they gathered mostly at City Hall and 471 other public buildings and schools that have been converted into shelters.
With water, food and gas in short supply, city officials were worried about food panics or epidemics, though so far such problems have not occurred.


Higgins Back For the Nets
The Nets made another roster move today to help offset the loss of the shooting guard Kevin Edwards (partly torn left Achilles' tendon).
Eric (Sleepy) Floyd was placed on the injured list today, with tendinitis in his knees, making room for Sean Higgins, who was signed by the club as a free agent in the off season and, on Dec. 27, placed on the injured list with asthmatic bronchitis.


At Pepsi, the New Theme Is There's 'Nothing Else'
Seeking to emphasize the strength of its trademarks, the Pepsi-Cola Company will change advertising themes again in a campaign to begin running on Jan. 29.
The new theme, "Nothing else is a Pepsi," will appear in six minutes' worth of commercials created by BBDO New York, which will run before, during and after the ABC broadcast of Super Bowl XXIX.
"Gotta have it" was the theme during 1992 and "Be young. Have fun. Drink Pepsi" ran from 1993 through last year.


Jostens Inc.(JOS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


O.J. Simpson Deserves Final Say on Lawyers
To the Editor:
Re "A Feud Begins Among Simpson's Lawyers" (news article, Jan. 16): Robert L. Shapiro states that because of his breach with F. Lee Bailey, he is leaving the decision of Mr.
Bailey's role at trial to the third defense team member, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr.
Since Mr.
Simpson is the one facing life imprisonment and paying the legal bills, Mr.
Simpson, not Mr.
Cochran, should have the final word on who will represent him at trial.
STEPHEN M. B. PINCUS  New Haven, Jan. 16, 1995 The writer is a Yale Law fellow.


Matsushita
American depository receipts for shares in the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company fell for a second day as two of the Japanese consumer electronics maker's plants in the Kobe area remained closed following the earthquake, which also hindered the company's product distribution.


Inland Steel Industries Inc.(IAD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Why Russia Worries About NATO Expansion; Admit Warsaw Pact
To the Editor:
Re "How to Ruin NATO" (Op-Ed, Jan. 11): Fred C. Ikle is wrong to judge that admitting former Warsaw Pact countries to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization would weaken it.
It would strengthen the alliance because it would include countries like the Czech Republic, which has in many ways returned to its place as a European democracy.


Suspect in Subway Bombing Is Indicted in Earlier Blast
The man accused of the firebombing last month that injured more than 40 subway riders and terrified hundreds of others was indicted yesterday in that case and charged formally for the first time in an earlier blast that burned two teen-agers.
Edward Leary, a 49-year-old unemployed computer technician from Scotch Plains, N.J., was named in a 39-count indictment by a Manhattan grand jury announced by District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau.
The charges are attempted murder, assault, weapons possession and attempted grand larceny.


Raytheon Co.(RTN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Two Kozyrevs: U.S. Plays to the Good Russian
The way Secretary of State Warren Christopher and most of his foreign policy team see it, there is a bad Andrei V. Kozyrev and a good Andrei V. Kozyrev.
The bad Foreign Minister of Russia is a master grandstander who is quick to pull attention-getting stunts, score rhetorical points and play to the audience back home.


U.S. Dispute on Loan Guarantees Hurts Mexican Stocks
Mexican financial markets deteriorated today for a third straight day as investors worried about a huge package of American loan guarantees that has been caught in a political crossfire in the United States.
The Mexican stock exchange lost 4.83 percent, closing at 2,051.9.
In the last three days since the United States Congress started wrangling in earnest over the loan-guarantee package for Mexico, the stock market here has lost 191 points, about 8.5 percent of its value.
Since the peso was devalued a month ago, the stock index has lost more than one-third of its value in dollar terms.


On My Mind; The Nuclear Smugglers
On Dec. 20, the Czech Government announced that it had arrested a band of nuclear smugglers.
They were caught with 6.6 pounds of highly enriched uranium, a stash greater than any ever seized outside the former Soviet Union.
Such enriched uranium can be used as a nuclear-bomb trigger or to create different, easily transportable radiation-spreading weapons.


Sun Co.(SUN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Moody Assignations of Lovers and Spies
You would have to comb the archives of Hollywood to find more coldblooded lovers than the industrial spies portrayed by Laurence Fishburne and Ellen Barkin in the sleek film-noir thriller "Bad Company." In the movie, stylishly directed by Damian Harris from a screenplay by Ross Thomas, Mr.
Fishburne plays Nelson Crowe, a terminally cynical ex-Central Intelligence Agency agent whom Ms.
Barkin's character, Margaret Wells, hires for an industrial espionage company called the Tool Box.
The Tool Box, which is run by Vic Grimes (Frank Langella), a glittering-eyed killer and Margaret's sometime boyfriend, deals in bribery, kidnapping, blackmail and subversion in the upper echelons of business.
Its main client, Walter Curl (Spalding Gray), is the whiningly neurotic owner of a company whose disposal of toxic waste has been blamed for disabling several children.
Nelson's first major assignment is to force a million-dollar bribe on Judge Beach (David Ogden Stiers), a State Supreme Court justice whose vote will decide the outcome of a $25 million lawsuit against Curl Industries.


Carpenter Technology (CRS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Suspect Helps Pick 4 Jurors In Rail Deaths
At times appearing confused and disorganized, Colin Ferguson helped select four more jurors today for his trial on charges of killing six passengers on a Long Island Rail Road train a year ago.
Mr.
Ferguson, 37, who is acting as his own lawyer, plied prospective jurors for the second day with a variety of questions, including what they thought about Gov.
George E. Pataki, immigrants, and African-Americans and whether the jurors were hockey fans.


A Museum With a Private Viewpoint
One of the stranger art institutions to come along in some time is a small exhibition space overlooking midtown Fifth Avenue that calls itself the Dahesh Museum.
It shows European academic art from the 18th through the 20th century, and claims to be the only American museum dedicated to this recondite material, of which it has a sizable permanent collection.
Most of the artists included in the inaugural show -- Luc-Olivier Merson, Henry-Pierre Picou and Ernest Auguste Gendron, among them -- are, indeed, now virtually unknown.


Burlington Northern Inc.(BNI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Region News Briefs; Police Officer Shot After Bank Robbery
A Suffolk County police officer was shot in the leg after a robbery today at a NatWest Bank branch office in South Huntington.
The police said Officer Lawrence Marcheschi, 29, and a second officer pulled up to the bank in a squad car as two suspects were fleeing.
The police said a suspect opened fire, striking Officer Marcheschi above the right knee.


Sports of The Times; When Coach Runs Off The Road
SO many nights seemed eternal, spilling into morning, a crucial turnover being replayed time after agonizing time.
So many miles were logged, some high school kid's monosyllabic responses dictating the mood of the long ride home.
Nick DelTufo, millions of dollars from the likes of Dan Issel, was saying that the lower end of the coaching food chain is no one's idea of a day at the market.
Coaching was even tougher for him.
Besides his full-time obsession, he had a 40-hour-a-week vocation.
No matter how late he stayed out, DelTufo was up at 6 A.M., even if he was so exhausted that he almost drove off the road on the way home.


Teledyne Inc.(TDY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yeltsin Declares Chechen War Over, and Ousts 4 Critics in Military
President Boris N. Yeltsin, trying to put one of the grimmest periods in recent Russian history behind him, said today that the war for Chechnya was effectively at an end.
He then dismissed the three most senior Defense Ministry officials who had been critical of the relentless war for the secessionist republic.
And in an attempt to prove that he was in control of the Presidency, which has appeared at times to be slipping from his grasp in the past month, Mr.
Yeltsin signed a decree transferring a fourth senior officer to duty in the army reserves.


An Elusive Juror Is Indicted
During jury selection in a case in Manhattan last August, a judge routinely asked a prospective juror if his name was Andrew Levinson.
Looking uncomfortable, the man who was carrying a jury notice that had Andrew Levinson's name on it said, well, no, he wasn't.
He was just sitting there in the jury box until Andrew Levinson came.


Magnetek Inc.(MAG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Young Got a 12-Hour Scare and Massage
Twelve hours before the game of his life, Steve Young could turn his neck only 10 degrees.
The San Francisco 49ers were about to play the Dallas Cowboys and, little did anyone know, backup quarterback Elvis Grbac almost took the field.
During a walk-through on Saturday, Young was tying his shoe when 270-pound Richard Dent trampled him chasing a pass.
Dent stabbed Young with his knee, and the 49ers quarterback spent the rest of the afternoon trying to roll his neck.


Kimberly-Clark Corp.(KMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Recalling the Somber Man Behind So Many Happy Songs
IRVING BERLIN  A Daughter's Memoir
Mary Ellin Barrett
Illustrated. 320 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.
Mary Ellin Barrett was 15 the night her father, Irving Berlin, savored what may have been the most exhilarating moment of his show business career.
It was the opening-night performance on Broadway, on July 4, 1942, of "This Is the Army," Berlin's patriotic revue kidding military life.
When the composer, who normally shunned the spotlight, appeared in the second act in soldier's garb to sing "Oh, How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning," he was greeted with a standing ovation that lasted 10 minutes.


Harris Corp.(HRS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Starks Finds His Mark 7 Months Too Late
John Starks never flinched.
The Knicks never trailed.
And after being haunted by memories of last year's N.B.A. finals for months, perhaps the Knicks and Starks can finally move on.
Returning to the site of their Game 7 nightmare, the Knicks made their biggest statement of the season with tonight's 93-77 victory over the Houston Rockets at the Summit.
And almost as if following a Hollywood script, Starks was the hero, leading the Knicks with 22 points and 7 assists on 9-for-17 shooting.
On the same floor on which Starks shot 2 for 18 in the decisive game of last season's championship series, Starks tonight was the best player.


At Home Abroad; 'We Are on Course'
"You have to remember," Roelf Meyer said: "Until just over a year ago we saw each other as enemies."
It was a polite understatement.
Mr.
Meyer is one of the minority National Party ministers in a Government dominated by the African National Congress.
For decades his party demonized the A.N.C. as Communist terrorists.
The A.N.C. and its people saw the National Party Government as the brutal administrators of apartheid.


Georgia Gulf Corp.(GGC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


This Time, Attacking Works for Mickelson
His arrival here was delayed when a snowstorm -- that's right, snow on the saguaro -- grounded his airplane in the tiny town of Eloy, Ariz., on Tuesday.
For Phil Mickelson, this was no big deal.
He has been grounded before.
It was only last March that he was flying down a hill on skis, slammed into a tree and broke his femur and his ankle.
That put him out of action for three months.
He still has a metal rod in his femur as a reminder.
So, when the low clouds and snowy weather forced him to land his single-engine Cessna 172 short of Tucson and the weather didn't clear, he turned around and flew it back to Phoenix.
No biggie.


Mr. Gingrich's Partial Disclosure
House Speaker Newt Gingrich recently pledged that his secretive political action committee, Gopac, would disclose all donations received after mid-November, though not most past donations.
But it is clear now that even this flawed gesture toward candor concealed some peculiar ideas of what full disclosure actually means.
This week Gopac made available a complete list of its recent donors.
So far so good.
The list shows that the foundation collected $236,000 from 243 people in the seven weeks following the G.O.P. triumph.
But instead of simply handing out the information, or even putting it on the Internet as the cyber-inclined Speaker has done to get out information about the House, Gopac devised some annoying if not insurmountable roadblocks to full coverage.


Vera Maxwell Is Dead at 93; Legendary Sportswear Designer
Vera Maxwell, one of a legendary group of American sportswear designers who came to prominence in the 1940's, died on Sunday in Rincon, P.R., at the home of her grandson, Douglas Maxwell.
She was 93 and died after a brief illness, said her daughter-in-law, Rhea Maxwell.


Ford's Move Raises Fears Of Slowdown
The Ford Motor Company said today that it would not make any of its Windstar mini-vans next week, citing a drop in dealers' orders.
The production cutback for the Windstar, which is less than a year old and has been one of Ford's most popular products, fanned fears among auto industry analysts that the market for new vehicles may be softening as interest rates climb.


A Showman in the Courtroom, for Whom Race Is a Defining Issue
Now, nearly 15 years later, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr. still remembers the hurt.
The man who in recent days has emerged as O. J. Simpson's lead defense lawyer was driving down Sunset Boulevard in his Rolls-Royce with two of his children in the back seat.
Suddenly, he saw police lights flashing in the rear-view mirror, and pulled over.
"Get out with your hands up," a police officer commanded over a bullhorn.


Inquiry Fails To Find Fault For Cut Cables
Port Authority officials said yesterday that they were unable to resolve a disagreement about the adequacy of warning markers above the buried electrical cables that were severed at Newark International Airport on Jan. 9, blacking out its three terminals and crippling airline operations for a day.
"We can't blame anyone at this point," William H. Goldstein, the agency's deputy executive director for capital programs, said after a weeklong preliminary inquiry into the accident and power failure.
"We have different stories. We couldn't come to any conclusion. I wish we had some evidence to back up one side or the other."


Corrections
Because of a production error, a passage in the continuation of an article yesterday about the soprano Ruth Ann Swenson appeared out of sequence.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


Ron Luciano, a Former Umpire In Big Leagues, a Suicide at 57
Ron Luciano, the former major league umpire who was found dead in the garage of his home in Endicott, N.Y., Wednesday afternoon, took his own life by means of carbon monoxide poisoning, the Broome County Coroner ruled after an autopsy yesterday.
Mr.
Luciano, known for his flamboyant style and later the author of a series of colorful reminiscences on the baseball world, was 57.


William Blair, 83, Reporter for Times On the Environment
William M. Blair, a longtime New York Times correspondent who specialized in agricultural and environmental issues, died on Jan. 13 in Martin Memorial Hospital in Stuart, Fla.
He was 83.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said a son, Jeffrey.


Corrections
An article yesterday about victims of the earthquake in Japan referred to the death of one foreigner incorrectly in some copies and misstated his citizenship.
The police in Kobe, Japan, say that the dead man, Nana Demasio, was found hanged and that they are treating the case as a suicide, not as a quake death.
Mr.
Demasio's family said in New York yesterday that although he had applied for American citizenship, he was still a Ghanaian citizen.


Alaska Dog Mushing Harms Animal Athletes
To the Editor:
It is understandable that Marylou Whitney would like to recapture the happy moments of her Alaska honeymoon in 1958 (Chronicle, Jan. 16).
It is unfortunate that she has chosen to support long-distance dog mushing, an activity that today results in an unacceptable levels of injury and death for dogs.


The Neediest Cases; Chasing Her Dream Through Education
On the Lower East Side of Manhattan, where generations of poor New Yorkers have struggled toward a better life, Verbet Silva lives out a modern-day version of the story.
She shares a home with her companion of 10 years, Tony, their three children, her two children from a previous relationship, and two of her brother's children.
The family lives in the Baruch Houses, a brown-brick apartment complex on Delancey Street with a close-up view of the Williamsburg Bridge.
They sleep two to a single bed and dine on rice and beans, and every day Ms.
Silva and Tony try to make something of themselves and motivate the children to do the same.
All the children know Ms.
Silva's creed by heart: "I can do anything I can put my mind to."


CHRONICLE
Creating a comfortable and esthetically pleasing environment for people who have AIDS can be a challenge, as 21 interior designers have learned in doing the rooms for a major renovation of Bread and Roses, an AIDS residence in Georgetown, Conn.
Yesterday, they gathered at the 100-year-old house in southwestern Connecticut for a brunch celebrating completion of the work.


'Opera Fanatic' Became a Political Casualty
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 10 news article on my dismissal as host of "Opera Fanatic" from WKCR-FM, the Columbia University radio station, presents the station's charges but ignores my rebuttal.


Dispute Leads to Deaths of 2 In Shooting at Brooklyn Club
Two people were shot to death and another seriously injured at a Brooklyn night club early yesterday morning, as hundreds of patrons scurried for cover, the police said.
The exact motive in the shooting was unclear, but the police said the incident apparently started as a minor dispute that reeled out of control.
Sgt.
John Clifford, a police spokesman, said the shooting did not appear to be drug related.


Whitman Gets National Role And Tax Test
Even as Christine Todd Whitman prepares to play her biggest role on the national stage -- this Tuesday she is to become the first governor picked by her party to rebut a Presidential State of the Union address -- at home she is facing the sternest test of her young administration as she unveils her second round of state income tax cuts on Saturday.
In announcing his choice of Mrs.
Whitman to deliver the party's reply to the President Tuesday night, Newt Gingrich, the House Speaker, told a luncheon audience at the Republican National Committee in Washington today that the New Jersey Governor had become an emblem for his party.
"We wanted to send a signal about what kind of team we are. We wanted to send a signal about how broad-based we are," the Speaker said.


CHECHEN PALACE, SYMBOL TO REBELS, FALLS TO RUSSIANS
After weeks of relentless bombing, shelling and rocket attacks, Russian troops finally smashed the symbol of Chechen resistance today and triumphantly hoisted a Russian flag over the collapsed hulk of the presidential palace in the heart of this besieged city.
Chechen fighters who fled the burning palace around 3 A.M. said they had evacuated the Russian prisoners they had been holding inside the building.
They vowed to carry on the fight elsewhere in the city and in the hills beyond.


Let's Hoist That Banner! Will Messier Join Party?
On his tours of National Hockey League arenas over the past 15 seasons, Mark Messier sometimes glances above him to study historic banners that hang from rafters.
"The Original Six have more," the Ranger team captain said, referring to the buildings that house the core group of teams that were in the league before the modern expansion era began in 1967.
"I like to look around the rinks."


Nurse Accuses Doctor in Death of Heiress
When Doris Duke, the billionaire tobacco heiress, died in 1993 at the age of 80, her doctor said the causes were the natural disasters of age.
Miss Duke had suffered a stroke a two months earlier and was bedridden.
Her lungs slowly filled with fluid.
Her heart finally failed.
But now a witness -- the private nurse who took care of Miss Duke in the last two months of her life -- has raised questions about just how natural those causes were, throwing a bizarre twist into an already tangled fight among the heirs to Miss Duke's $2.1 billion fortune.


Rabin Plans to Limit Building By Settlers on the West Bank
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin assured Yasir Arafat today that Israel would not approve new settlements in the West Bank and that construction in existing communities would be closely monitored.
With those assurances, Mr.
Rabin hoped to defuse a crisis that had jeopardized his negotiations with Mr.
Arafat on extending Palestinian self-rule beyond its current confines of the Gaza Strip and Jericho, on the Israeli-occupied West Bank.


Home Video
With shifting market trends to the left of them and potential technical breakthroughs to the right, video purveyors these days can only let developments fall where they may.
For instance, take the familiar question of selling cassettes to customers versus putting them out for rent.
Now that sales have become the fastest-growing part of the business, some video analysts express worries that people may tire of buying big titles by late this year or in 1996.
That could throw the emphasis back to rental.
Figures for the last quarter of 1994 indicate that rental activity is down, but some prophecies call for a rebound later this year.


New Democratic Chief Declares That Party Will Recoup
Despite the "death sentence" handed to the Democrats in the Nov. 8 election, Senator Christopher J. Dodd, the incoming leader of the Democratic National Committee, vowed today that his party would rise again and take on the Republicans.
"The wake is over," he declared.
But Mr.
Dodd, a Senator from Connecticut, lamented that Republicans were far more skilled at pressing their agenda and communicating with voters.


G.O.P.'s North Korea Strategy: Attack Accord, but Don't Kill It
Republicans in Congress showed their hand today on how they plan to deal with the Administration's agreement to defuse a nuclear crisis with North Korea: attack the agreement without seeking to overturn it.
In the first hearing on the agreement before this Congress, Republicans sought to put the Administration on the defensive by repeatedly attacking the accord for giving away too much to North Korea.


2 Godard Bookends: On Germany, on Himself
"Hey, you! Which way is the West?" calls out Lemmy Caution (Eddie Constantine), a terminally fatigued intelligence agent who is the central character in Jean-Luc Godard's "Germany Year 90 Nine Zero." Neither of the two travelers he questions -- the driver of a stalled car, and an armored spear-carrying horseman who suggests a 20th-century Don Quixote -- knows the answer.
The Berlin wall has come down and the old divisions of Europe have suddenly lost their meaning.
As Lemmy, toting a heavy black briefcase, trudges solemnly through post-cold war Germany in search of a woman from his past, he moves across a desolate winter landscape scarred by heavy industry.
Taking a rest, he sits glumly on a stack of discarded tires.
Eventually reaching Berlin, he finds the city tawdrily arrayed for Christmas.
Musing on "the assault made by money on spiritual strength," he envisions an eventual Armageddon-like "battle of money and blood."


Stocks, Following the Dollar, Fall on U.S. Trade Outlook
The stock market followed the dollar, which tumbled against the German mark, as the Government reported that the United States economy was headed toward the biggest annual trade deficit in seven years.
A big trade deficit leads to a glut of unwanted dollars in the international currency markets, thus depressing prices for both stocks and bonds, which are priced in dollars.


From Mac Users, Fury at Microsoft
Can great big software companies write truly great computer programs?
The question is being raised by users of Apple Macintosh computers, who are widely reviling and rejecting the newest version by the Microsoft Corporation of its word processing program, Word, for use on the Macintosh.
Microsoft, the world's largest software publisher, dominates the market for Macintosh software, including a 65 percent share of Macintosh word processing programs.


Restaurants
"New York State organic white fallow venison with puree of Carib potato, roasted wild chestnuts, sweet carrots, celery leaves, gooseberry juice and apple oil."
That is one of the nine entrees on the menu at American Renaissance.
Add a dozen appetizers and 10 desserts, throw in a long and excellent wine list, and you can easily see that there is a lot of reading before the eating begins.


Becton Dickinson &amp; Co.  (BDX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Region News Briefs; Man Says Virgin Mary Appears for a Last Time
Joseph Januszkiewicz, who once drew thousands to his property in rural Monmouth County, N.J., with his claims that the Virgin Mary appeared to him on the first Sunday of each month, now says she has made her final appearance to him, with her son, Jesus, at her side for the first time.
No one else has seen the apparitions, and the Diocese of Trenton concluded after investigation that "nothing miraculous" was happening at the Marlboro home, but many believed Mr.
Januszkiewicz, a retired draftsman.


Gathering Up the Rich Strands of the Brazilian Avant-Garde
To visit the varied exhibitions of "Art From Brazil in New York" (11 artists are on view now, with 5 more to come) is like walking through the looking glass into an alternate version of the art world.
The major developments of the last 30 years are all recognizable, but their arrangement has been altered, and their hidden faces turn out to look quite different from what one expected.
The stimulus for "Art From Brazil in New York" came from the Bienal Foundation of Sao Paulo, which last spring invited a group of American dealers and curators to visit "Bienal Brasil Seculo XX," a huge retrospective of 20th-century Brazilian art.
Mary Sabbatino, from the Galerie Lelong, and Lori Ledis and Robert Flam, from LedisFlam gallery, were particularly impressed with what they saw, and persuaded a group of other Manhattan galleries to join them in doing a group exhibition.


Uncovered Short Sales Decline at Two Exchanges
Short interest on the New York Stock Exchange fell in the latest month for only the second time in the last 13 months.
On the American Stock Exchange, short-selling activity declined for the third straight month.
The overall short position on the Big Board decreased 2 percent, to 1.81 billion shares, from the record level of 1.85 billion shares set the previous month.
Uncovered short sales dropped 4.6 percent on the American exchange to 95.86 million shares.
The statistics cover trades settled on Jan. 13, reflecting transactions through Jan. 6.


Region News Briefs; Man Says Virgin Mary Appears for a Last Time
Joseph Januszkiewicz, who once drew thousands to his property in rural Monmouth County, N.J., with his claims that the Virgin Mary appeared to him on the first Sunday of each month, now says she has made her final appearance to him, with her son, Jesus, at her side for the first time.
No one else has seen the apparitions, and the Diocese of Trenton concluded after investigation that "nothing miraculous" was happening at the Marlboro home, but many believed Mr.
Januszkiewicz, a retired draftsman.


Reopening Old Battles
A month ago the White House was celebrating the first anniversary of what it called one of its greatest legislative and foreign policy successes: the hard-fought passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement, which President Clinton argued would create tens of thousands of high-paying jobs for American workers producing exports for a vibrant Mexican economy.
Now, battling the new Congress over a plan to rescue Mexico from an economic disaster of that country's own making, Mr.
Clinton has been forced to confront the ugly truth that economic interdependence is a two-edged sword.
If the Mexican financial system is allowed to collapse, he said earlier this week in a speech with carefully calibrated warnings, the American economy may be taken down with it.


U.S. Indicts 3 In Parts Theft From I.B.M.
Three former I.B.M. employees and a Georgia businessman were arrested yesterday on Federal charges that they stole more than $20 million worth of mainframe computer parts from an I.B.M. plant in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., and sold them on the black market.
The 25-count indictment by a grand jury in White Plains outlined an elaborate scheme involving eight people in and outside the company.


House Committee Discusses Public Broadcasting Budget
With Democrats manipulating replicas of the Muppets and Republicans making an issue of the paychecks of Big Bird and Barney, a House Appropriations subcommittee began hearings today on whether to continue the Federal subsidy for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.
"The issue that brings us here today isn't the merits or demerits of public broadcasting," said Representative Robert L. Livingston, the Louisiana Republican who heads the House Appropriations Committee.
"The issue is that over the last 25 years we have accumulated a $5 trillion debt."


Caterpillar Financial Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


People
*
Robert Blinick was named to the new position of data base marketing director at Houston Effler Herstek Favat, Boston, and its agencies in New York and Venice, Calif.
Mr.
Blinick, who was previously managing director at Chiat/Day Direct, Los Angeles, will have offices in Boston and Venice.


Why Russia Worries About NATO Expansion; Its Time Has Passed
To the Editor:
Fred C. Ikle presents a strong case against expanding the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (Op-Ed, Jan. 11).
But his arguments for maintaining the alliance warrant scrutiny.


Whitman Loses Out to the New Star Trek
It was Kathryn (Call Me Captain) Janeway against Christine (Governor) Todd Whitman vying for prime time next Monday, and the commander of the Starship Voyager won out over the commander of New Jersey: Mrs.
Whitman's annual budget message would have to get out of Star Trek's way and move to an afternoon broadcast to get on the air.
Last year, WWOR-TV in Secaucus carried Mrs.
Whitman's message at 8 P.M., when the largest share of voters would be home.
This year, however, WWOR is part of the fledgling United Paramount Network, whose biggest programming asset is "Star Trek: Voyager," which is broadcast on Mondays at 8 P.M.


METRO DIGEST
COUNCIL DEFIES MAYOR ON POLICE MONITOR
Defying Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the City Council voted to create an independent agency to monitor the police and guard against corruption.
But Mr.
Giuliani said he would ignore the vote, forcing the Council to take him to court to establish the agency.
A1.
FRAUD PLEA MAY BE BARGAIN OF A LIFETIME
A year after he admitted bilking General Motors out of $436 million, John M. McNamara, a former Port Jefferson car dealer, was back in business.
He continued to live in a house with an indoor pool.
He has not spent a day in jail.
To Federal prosecutors, it was all part of a deal they struck in return for his cooperation.
A1.


Elie Wiesel Now Agrees to Take Part in the Auschwitz Rites
In the hope of stressing that the Jewish experience is central to the meaning of Auschwitz, the Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel said today that he would attend the 50th commemoration of the Nazi death camp's liberation next week.
"I think it is important to be there, to clarify what is important, to show the centrality of the Jewish experience," Mr.
Wiesel said.


Reynolds Metals Co.(RLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  RUSSIANS CLAIM VICTORY  After weeks of bombing, Russian troops smashed the symbol of Chechen resistance and hoisted a Russian flag over the collapsed hulk of the presidential palace in the heart rebel region's capital.
A1  JAPAN DEATH TOLL PASSES 4,000  The death toll from the huge earthquake that devastated Kobe passed 4,000 as 275,000 homeless people huddled in public buildings and other shelters, their shock giving way to discontent and even despair.
A1  QUAKE'S IMAGES HAUNT TOKYO  With Japan transfixed by the horrifying images of toppled buildings and raging fires in Kobe, the almost universal question in Tokyo is: What if it had happened here?
A12  PROTEST IN SOUTHERN MEXICO  Supporters of Mexico's governing party shut down offices and transportation in the state of Tabasco to protest an agreement to hold new state elections.
A3  Israel plans to limit building by settlers on the West Bank.
A2  Peru's President takes his wife's hunger strike in stride.
A3  Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel says he will attend Auschwitz rites.
A5  Rome Journal: Strife breaks out over 200,000 stray cats.
A4  National A14-26  NAFTA WARS, THE SEQUEL  The President's program to rescue Mexico's economy has reopened trade-agreement battles in a more isolationist Congress.
A1  CLINTON LOOKS TO SURVIVOR  Harold Ickes, the longest-serving deputy chief of staff in the Clinton White House, will be central to the next Presidential campaign.
A1  DEMOCRATS PLAY DEFENSE  The Senate's new minority in the blocked the Republicans on one of the first major procedural votes of the new Congress.
A1  BOOK DEALS AT 20 PACES  Speaker Newt Gingrich defended his book deal by attacking Vice President Al Gore's book on the environment.
A24  HEARINGS ON PBS CUTS  A House Appropriations subcommittee began hearings on whether to continue the Federal subsidy for public broadcasting.
A22  A VOW TO RALLY DEMOCRATS  Senator Christopher Dodd, the new Democratic Party leader, vowed that the Democrats would recover from the Nov. 8 elections.
A22  MARRIED BUT NOT IMMUNE  Puerto Rican women have one of the United States' highest rates of heterosexual H.I.V. transmission and pose a tough challenge.
A14  N.A.A.C.P.
SPLIT GOES TO COURT  Officials with the civil rights group asked a Federal court for an independent audit of the organization's finances in a move intended to weaken the board chairman.
A16  Law A27  People v.
Simpson: Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., for the defense.
Metro Digest B1  COUNCIL BACKS POLICE MONITOR  Defying Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the City Council voted yesterday to create an independent agency to monitor the police and guard against corruption.
A1  CAR DEALER'S CHANGING FORTUNES  Though he admitted bilking General Motors out of $436 million and faces hundreds of angry creditors, John McNamara has not spent a day in prison and continues to live comfortably on Long Island.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-30  An excursion to lower Manhattan.
C1  The Winter Antiques Show goes back to its roots.
C1  For Children C25  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  Film: "Murder in the First." C3  "Germany Year 90 Nine Zero." C8  "S.F.W." C8  "Strawberry and Chocolate." C14  "Bad Company." C21  Dance: At play with the past.
C1  Restaurants C22  Photography: Bikers and prisoners.
C24  Art: The Brazilian avant-garde.
C28  Art in Review C28  An unsung museum.
C27  Books: Irving Berlin biography, by his daughter.
C30  Television: Home Video D18  Sports B9-16  Baseball: Orioles owner refuses to field a replacement team.
B9  Basketball: This time, Starks leads Knicks over Rockets.
B9  Columns: Araton on coaching burnout.
B9  Hockey: Messier talks down to the wire.
B9  Track: Women pole vaulters.
B9  Obituaries B7-8  Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials  The ugly side of a tax cut.
Cataclysm in Kobe.
Gingrich's halfway measures.
Karl E. Meyer: Prussia.
Letters  Anthony Lewis: "We are on course."  A. M. Rosenthal: The nuclear smugglers.
Ronald I. McKinnon: Flood of dollars, sunken pesos.
Neediest Cases B2  Chronicle B7  Crossword C30


For Children
Eli Whitney Museum
915 Whitney Avenue (near Armory Street)  Hamden, Conn.  (203) 777-1833  Recommended for all ages
Way up in this New Haven suburb is a small sparkle of a museum housed in a former 19th-century factory.
You would never suspect it's where Eli Whitney made guns and his fortune (the cotton gin was his invention, but it didn't put him on any list of millionaires).
In 1984, the building was converted into a small, airy museum with an eye toward Whitney and inventions.


Unlikely Pals, Shaped by Cuban Political Struggle
"Strawberry and Chocolate" was shown as part of the 1994 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Caryn James's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 24.
The film opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema, Broadway at 63d Street.
The unlikely friendship between two men in Havana who couldn't be more different -- one a middle-aged, gay counterrevolutionary and the other a young, heterosexual Communist -- is the story of "Strawberry and Chocolate." But the film's most amazing aspect is that it is a breezy charmer about a relationship shaped by severe political struggle.


Study Cites Lapses in Gun Safety by Experts
Firearms training courses generally include lessons in the safe storage and handling of guns.
But a study by the Harvard School of Public Health has found that people with such training are more likely to keep a gun loaded and unlocked at home.
"This is a potentially dangerous practice," said David Hemenway, deputy director of the Injury Control Center at the school and supervisor of the study.


Why Russia Worries About NATO Expansion
To the Editor:
William Safire considers it hypocritical to include Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovakia in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization without the Baltics (column, Jan. 16).
He has no qualms in including the Baltics with Russia left out.
This unjustly condemns Russia as the heir of Soviet crimes and denies its legitimate security concerns.


Jefferies Group Inc.(JEFG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Auto Shares Decline On New Ford Moves
In a move likely to stoke fears that auto sales are flagging, the Ford Motor Company said today that it might close factories that make Windstar mini-vans and Escort small cars for longer than the one week it previously disclosed.
And after the New York Stock Exchange closed, the Chrysler Corporation announced that it was expanding rebates on the more expensive versions of its Neon subcompact cars, which have been selling poorly.


METRO DIGEST
WITH NO SNOW, SKI AREAS SUFFERING With a third of the ski season already over, the Ski Plattekill resort in the central Catskills has yet to open a single one of its 27 trails.
The reason is plain: it has barely snowed this winter, and whatever snow has fallen has been washed away by driving rains and unseasonably warm temperatures.
Across the Northeast, it has been a disastrous season for ski areas.
Page 1.
CENTRAL PARK TAX PLANS DIES QUICKLY Parks Commissioner Henry J. Stern thought he had a good idea: a special tax, just a little one, levied on residents near Central Park to pay for its upkeep.
Richard J. Schwartz, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's senior adviser, praised the idea.
Apparently, however, they had not contended with Mr.
Giuliani's aversion to the T-word: taxes.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  COUPLE FIGHT FOR THEIR CROCODILES It is a tale of broken-down doors, bottled-up grief, court-ordered visitation rights to a zoo and, now, as one lawyer put it, a "writ of habeas crockus." It began last October when Mike Gimbel returned to his loft in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, and found that his ersatz jungle of dangling plants, two iguanas, four turtles and six crocodiles had been torn asunder and that his animals had been hustled away by officers enforcing the health code.
Page 27.
OFFICIALS SAY JUDGE WAS PRESSED TO QUIT When Justice Ronald J. Aiello announced that he would give up his duties as the top administrator in charge of the major trial courts in Brooklyn and Staten Island, he said he wanted to explore other options.
But now, several judges and lawyers say they believe that he had been asked to resign by the state's top court administrator.
Page 27. 2 SLAIN IN SHOOTING AT BROOKLYN CLUB Two people were shot to death and another seriously injured at a Brooklyn night club as hundreds of patrons scurried for cover.
Page 28.
One of retailing's brightest stars, Crate &amp; Barrel, will open a housewares and furniture store on Madison Avenue.
Business Day, page 37.
REGION  THE WAY IT WAS AND COULD BE Atlantic City seems to be a place filled with yesterdays and tomorrows.
Rarely are thoughts as much about today as they are about how things once were or could be.
When Florence Valore Miller looks south from the new city Arts Center on Garden Pier, she sees the ghosts of the splendid old boardwalk hotels torn down to make room for the new generation of glass and concrete casinos.
Page 29.
SUSPECT IN RAIL DEATHS HELPS PICK JURORS At times appearing confused and disorganized, Colin Ferguson helped select four more jurors for his trial on charges of killing six passengers on a Long Island Rail Road train.
Page 29.
IN YONKERS, ALTERNATIVES TO WELFARE In a Yonkers neighborhood that was the focus of an angry desegregation battle, a Jewish-born Buddhist priest is building housing for the homeless, providing them with jobs and encouraging them to stay.
Page 29.
INSURER SEEKS INCREASE IN SOME RATES Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the financially troubled company that is New York State's largest health insurer, said that it was seeking rate increases averaging 21.4 percent for several types of policies.
Page 28.
Neediest Cases...26  About New York by David Gonzalez...27


Percy Knauth, 80, an Author And Foreign Correspondent
Percy Knauth, an author and former news correspondent, died on Sunday at Mystic Manor Convalescent Center in Mystic, Conn.
A resident of Stonington, Conn., he was 80.
He died after a lengthy illness, his family said.


Cyrix Fixes Its Chip; Shares Rise
Shares of the Cyrix Corporation jumped yesterday after the company said it had overcome manufacturing problems with its fastest computer chips, allowing it to sell more of them in the first half of this year than had been expected.
Cyrix told analysts in December that its 80-megahertz clone of the Intel Corporation's 486 chips was having yield problems, that is, failing to get an acceptable number of usable chips from each production run.
The company said it might have to completely redesign the part.
That would have pushed production off until the second half of the year.


Striking Auto-Parts Workers Tentatively Settle With G.M.
A three-day strike at a crucial General Motors Corporation parts complex was tentatively settled late this evening, but not before it had idled more than 32,000 workers in the company's assembly system and halted lines that make popular and profitable vehicles like the Chevrolet Suburban and the GMC Sierra pickup truck.
Officials of the United Automobile Workers union at the parts plant in Flint, Mich., said they would release no details of the agreement until a ratification vote of the local's 6,600 members scheduled for 1 P.M on Sunday.
But they said that before the vote they would put 300 people back to work to begin shipping parts to prevent more assembly plants from closing.
If the agreement is ratified, parts workers could be back at their posts as soon as Monday.


Industry Helps Schools Stock Science Labs
To the Editor:
You report Jan. 16 that essentials are now luxuries in New York City schools coping with budget cuts.


Pakistani Technology
To the Editor:
Re "Deferring Arms Curbs in South Asia" (editorial Jan. 13): Pakistan has not reneged on its pledge not to develop nuclear weapons.
It has acquired the technology to do so but has made a political decision not to cross the threshold.


Microsoft Settlement Challenged
Declaring that "I will not be played for a fool," a Federal judge grilled the Justice Department's top antitrust lawyer today and made it clear he had grave doubts about the department's antitrust settlement with the Microsoft Corporation.
In an often tense hearing that lasted nearly eight hours, Federal District Judge Stanley Sporkin displayed industry documents suggesting that Microsoft intentionally deceived its rivals about its plans to introduce a new product and demanded to know why the Justice Department had not addressed that issue and others in the proposed settlement.


U.S. Plans Meetings With Serbs, Angering the Bosnia Government
Secretary of State Warren Christopher has written to the Bosnian Government to explain that United States officials must now talk directly to the Bosnian Serbs despite a United Nations Security Council resolution barring contacts.
The letter, sent Thursday to President Alija Izetbegovic and made available to The New York Times, argues that the cease-fire signed at the beginning of this month has created "a possible opportunity to renew the negotiations" with the Serbs, "which we should not allow to pass by."


No Mention Of a Retreat By Gingrich
In a sweeping, partisan and sometimes defensive review of his first weeks as Speaker of the House, and center of the political universe, Newt Gingrich showed that he was unbowed by the debate swirling around his book-writing deal and he dismissed his Democratic opponents.
Let them nitpick and be vicious and negative, he told an appreciative audience of fellow Republicans.
"If we will just methodically keep moving forward, they can scream as the parade goes by," he said.


No-Holds-Barred Battle For Long-Distance Calls
The raucous long-distance industry has never seen anything quite like it.
Industry experts estimate that at least 25 million residential telephone customers switched carriers last year -- and in some cases switched again -- as consumers groped for the best deal on long-distance pricing.
If anything, the scramble has grown wilder, and more bewildering, in recent weeks.
Mud-wrestling for customers, AT&amp;T and MCI are calling each other liars in a war of television and newspaper ads in which each company ridicules the other's discount plans.
And Sprint has added to the confusion by overhauling its discount program in the name of simplicity.


DNA Test Reunites Salvadoran Mother and Child
In the first case of its kind to arise from the civil war in El Salvador, a mother and son were reunited yesterday after a DNA test identified him as the boy who was taken away from her by the Salvadoran Army nearly 13 years ago, when he was six months old.
Physicians for Human Rights, a Boston-based organization, announced the DNA match yesterday in the capital, San Salvador, and the boy and his mother met shortly afterward.


Sports of The Times; A Special Night for Loyal Fans
THERE was nothing, absolutely nothing, that could diminish the joy at Madison Square Garden last night.
Not the threat of winds.
Not heavy rains.
Not the repercussions of a 15-week hockey lockout that strained relationships between player and owner and, as usual, tested the faith of fans.


Renewal Begins
Kobe began trying to restore normalcywith a few stores open and food and water supplies improving.
But rain was predicted, causing concern for residents who are still sleeping outdoors.
Page 4.


Not Far From Tombstone, A Big Shootout Is Likely
Out here in the high desert, not far from the O.K.
Corral down the road in Tombstone, a major shootout is brewing after two rounds of the Northern Telecom Open.
Phil Mickelson, who added a round of 66 at Starr Pass to his opening 65 at Tucson National, is still high, wide and handsome in the saddle at 12 under par.
But there's a dust cloud on the horizon and the thunder of a herd beating at his back.


Observer; Bestrides Like a Colossus
Noot things to do:
1. Get the whole family together around the TV set and hiss Connie Chung.


Near Death at 13, Now Part of Rangers' Lore at 14
The newest alternate captain of the Rangers does not remember much of anything about June 14, the warm night the Stanley Cup came to visit Madison Square Garden.
"I was asleep most of the time," said Brian Bluver, a 14-year-old high school student from Oceanside, L.I.
Bluver was introduced to the sellout crowd at Madison Square Garden during the opening night ceremony last night.
He wore a blue Ranger jersey and a blue Ranger hat with a Stanley Cup lapel pin on its front.
He stood behind the Ranger bench, looked up through the darkness at the video board and relived the moments he had missed: The final face-off of Game 7 against Vancouver, the fireworks in the ceiling, the first moments of a celebration that continued through last night, and the defining sign that appeared in the stands:


TRANSACTIONS
Auto Racing  NEW HAMPSHIRE INTERNATIONAL SPEEDWAY -- Named Lorraine Faford director of public relations.
Baseball National League  LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Named Charles Thompson part-time scout.
Northern League  ST.
PAUL SAINTS -- Sold the contracts of Doug Kimbler, second baseman, and Joe Brownholtz, pitcher, to the Chicago Cubs and Greg D'Alexander, shortstop, to the Florida Marlins.
Texas-Louisiana League  CORPUS CHRISTI BARRACUDAS -- Sold the contract of Tony Mack, pitcher, to the California Angels.
Basketball National Basketball Association  BOSTON CELTICS -- Activated Acie Earl, forward, from the injured list.
Placed Derek Strong, forward, on the injured list.
CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Activated Michael Adams, guard, from the injured list.
Placed Tom Tolbert, forward, on the injured list.
LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Signed Danny Young, guard, to a 10-day contract.
UTAH JAZZ -- Signed Walter Bond, guard, to a second 10-day contract.
Atlantic Basketball Associtaion  TRENTON FLAMES -- Acquired Damon Lopez, center, from the Pottsville Stingers for future considerations.
SCRANTON-WILKES BARRE MINERS -- Signed Lambert Shell, forward.
Hockey International Hockey League  CLEVELAND LUMBERJACKS -- Realled Rich Parent, goaltender, from Muskegon of the Colonial Hockey League.
Colonial Hockey League  MUSKEGON FURY -- Signed Jason Gates, goaltender, to a one-year contract.
Soccer  U.S.
SOCCER FEDERATION -- Named Pam Perkins women's national team director.
College  DREW -- Named Karin Brower women's lacrosse coach and women's assistant field hockey coach.
LENOIR-RHYNE -- Announced the resignation of Tom Melville, men's soccer coach.
NEW YORK UNIVERSITY -- Announced the retirement of Dan Quilty, athletic director, effective Aug. 31.


Business Digest
Companies  The scramble for long-distance customers is growing wilder -- and more confusing for consumers.
AT&amp;T, MCI and Sprint have been promoting ever-more-generous discounts for people who make lots of calls.
But people who make few calls or those who make lots of calls but have not signed up for a discount plan are seeing their prices go up rather than down.  [ Page 1. ] Microsoft's antitrust settlement was questioned by a Federal judge who displayed documents suggesting that Microsoft had intentionally deceived its rivals.  [ 37. ] Crate and Barrel is making a move into Manhattan.
Crate and Barrel, the Chicago-based housewares and furniture chain, plans to open its store in March.
Its expansion is part of a recent movement of several big retailers into New York City even as the Northeast's economic recovery remains on shaky ground.  [ 37. ] Ford may close plants that make Windstar mini-vans for longer than the one week it had previously announced.
The planned production cutback drove down stocks of auto makers.  [ 37. ] Viacom reached an agreement to sell its cable systems for $2.3 billion to a group that is led by a black entrepreneur and includes a company partly owned by Tele-Communications.  [ 37. ] Trammell Crow is easing back into real estate development.
Housing starts slipped 1 percent in December, but still finishing 1994 with a 13 percent annual gain.  [ 37. ] International  World trade has been disrupted by the closing of Kobe's port as a result of the earthquake this week.
Kobe, Japan's largest container port, served as a hub for the movement of goods to other parts of East Asia, and its closing has had a domino effect.  [ 1. ] Mexico's financial markets continue to be racked by concerns that the United States will not pass an aid package.  [ 49. ] Markets  Stocks declined for the fourth consecutive session.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index fell 2.17 points.  [ 38. ] The dollar continued to slide against the German mark.
The Canadian dollar touched another nine-year low.  [ 47. ] Coffee prices tumbled on doubts that Brazil will join a quota plan.
Sugar prices recovered, while crude oil slipped.  [ 47. ] Treasury prices tumbled, dragged down by a weaker dollar and concerns over a new supply of securities.  [ 48. ] Your Money  Insider trading among family members is increasingly a target of the S.E.C.
Cases against people accused of using family ties to obtain secret corporate information and then profiting from that information in the stock market represented more than 10 percent of all the insider cases filed by the commission last year.  [ 35. ] Are foreign stock funds that hedge against currency swings a better investment than funds that do not?
While reducing the risk of volatility, hedges can be costly and they hurt the very diversification that makes foreign investing attractive.  [ 35. ] Finding earthquake insurance is a struggle for many California homeowners.
Some home insurers are quietly circumventing a law requiring them to offer earthquake coverage.  [ 36. ]


In Performance; JAZZ
Unaccompanied Improvisations Link Sections of a Suite Gary Bartz, saxophonist Sweet Basil


To Help a City in Crisis
Warnings of deep trouble for the New York City budget took on a sharper edge this week when the Standard &amp; Poor's rating agency put the city on a "credit watch." The trigger was Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's plan to pay $120 million of this year's debt service costs with newly borrowed money, in effect postponing the final payout to another day.
As a rule, borrowing just to get out of a tight budget squeeze is not a good idea; S.&amp;P. is properly concerned that the city not slip into bad habits.
However, borrowing seems justified this time.
The Mayor says he is doing it to avoid disruptive midterm cuts for schools -- commendable restraint on his part.
The school system has agreed to absorb deeper budget cuts next year.
Moreover, city officials say this borrowing will cost less in the long run than the debt it replaces, because it has a shorter term at lower interest.


CHRONICLE
Another member of the 90-something generation, GEORGE BURNS, marked a birthday yesterday: his 99th.
The comedian made his first public appearance in months in Los Angeles on Thursday for the dedication of a street named for his late wife and partner, Gracie Allen, The Associated Press reported.
Miss Allen died of a heart attack in 1964.
Gracie Allen Street intersects with George Burns Road at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, for which Mr.
Burns has been a fund-raiser.
It was his first public appearance since undergoing surgery to drain fluid from his brain after a fall in July.


Japanese-Owned Company Plays by U.S. Rules
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 14 article on Bridgestone-Firestone's dispute with the United Rubber Workers leaves unexplained why Secretary of Labor Robert Reich believes the Japanese-owned company is endangering Japanese-American relations when its actions parallel United States-owned Caterpillar's in its dispute with the United Automobile Workers.


Investigators of the Police


In Brooklyn, Fighting for Crocodiles
It is a tale of broken-down doors, bottled-up grief, court-ordered visitation rights to a zoo and, now, as one lawyer put it, a "writ of habeas crockus."
It began last October when Mike Gimbel returned to his fourth-floor loft in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, and found that his ersatz jungle of dangling plants, two iguanas, four turtles and six crocodiles had been torn asunder and that his animals had been lassoed and hustled away by officers enforcing the health code.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Repeat 100 Times: Miller From Downtown  Reggie Miller became the first National Basketball Association player to make 100 3-pointers in 6 consecutive seasons, scoring 15 points last night as Indiana defeated Atlanta, 99-89, in Indianapolis.
Miller hit his 100th 3-pointer of the season with 2 minutes 59 seconds left in the first quarter.
Dan Majerle of Phoenix is the only other player with at least 100 3-pointers this season. (AP) Jazz 95, Cavaliers 84: Karl Malone scored 28 points and surpassed the 20,000-point mark for his career as Utah won its eighth straight game, beating visiting Cleveland.
Malone, a 10-year veteran, is the 19th player in N.B.A. history to score 20,000 points.
Terrell Brandon's 24 points led the Cavaliers. (AP) Magic 112, Nuggets 108: At Denver, Anfernee Hardaway scored 6 of his 27 points in overtime and Orlando held off Denver.
Robinson just missed his 15th career triple-double with 26 points, 11 rebounds and 9 assists. (AP) Lakers 120, Celtics 11: At Boston, Nick Van Exel scored 29 points and made a desperation 3-pointer at the buzzer to give Los Angeles the victory over Boston and spoil the last chant of "Beat L.A." at Boston Garden. (AP) Bullets 102, 76ers 98: Scott Skiles scored 9 of his 28 points in the final four minutes and Washington handed visiting Philadelphia another close defeat.
Dana Barros's 25 points led the Sixers. (AP) Bulls 93, Timberwolves 86: B. J. Armstrong scored 22 points as Chicago defeated Minnesota to snap a four-game losing streak.
Chicago is 12-0 against Minnesota since the Timberwolves joined the N.B.A. in 1989. (AP) Trail Blazers 108, Clippers 97: At Los Angeles, Clyde Drexler's 28 points led shorthanded Portland.
The Blazers had only nine players in uniform as Harvey Grant, James Edwards and Jerome Kersey served one-game suspensions stemming from a fight in Sacramento on Tuesday night. (AP) GOLF Johnson Leads LPGA Event by Two Shots  The LPGA veteran Chris Johnson shot a four-under-par 68 yesterday to take a two-shot lead over Meg Mallon and Cathy Johnston-Forbes after the opening round of the $450,000 HealthSouth Inaugural in Orlando, Fla. (AP) YACHT RACING America
Again Jumps Gun in Cup Trials  An overzealous America  team yesterday caused a pre-start foul for the second time in the defenders' trials.
Young America, sailed by the PACT 95 team, won the race by 2 seconds.
In both fouling incidents, the America
all-female team was penalized for tacking too close to Young America.
In the challengers' series, Black Magic 2, the New Zealand boat sailed by Russell Coutts, raised its record to 5-0, defeating Nippon 94, by 1 minute.
NZL-39, the New Zealand yacht sailed by Chris Dickson, beat France 2 by 1:32, and One Australia beat Rioja de Espana by 1:25.
SKIING Street Loses Race by Infinitesimal Margin  Michaela Gerg-Leitner of Germany spoiled the script for Picabo Street yesterday.
Street, who came out of Sun Valley, Idaho, to thrill Americans with a silver medal last year in the downhill at the Lillehammer Olympics in Norway, held the lead in Cortina d'Ampezzo, Italy, until Gerg-Leitner beat her by two-hundredths of second in the downhill. (AP) SPEED SKATING Blair Glides to Victory in 500-Meter Race  The five-time Olympic champion Bonnie Blair won a 500-meter race yesterday in Davos, Switzerland, to open three days of World Cup racing.
Blair finished in 39.71 seconds. (AP)


Rodman Benched for Missing Practice
Spurs forward DENNIS RODMAN was benched for last night's game in Miami against the Heat Heat after missing morning practice.
Rodman, who has already missed half of the team's 34 games because of suspensions and a paid leave of absence, did not attend a shoot-around.
"Consider it disciplinary action," San Antonio Coach BOB HILL said. (AP)


From Bach to His Son to City Ballet
Complexity and simplicity go hand in hand in "Two- and Three-Part Inventions," a ballet of extraordinary purity that Jerome Robbins fashioned out of some of Bach's piano studies.
The New York City Ballet danced the work for the first time on Thursday night at the New York State Theater, but the world premiere was given by advanced students of the company school, the School of American Ballet, last June.


Police Officer Is Held In a Theft in Queens
A Queens police officer has been arrested and charged with stealing $200 from an abandoned van during a sting operation that was part of an investigation into suspected rogue officers working in the 109th Precinct, law-enforcement officials said.


Bridge
Sixty years ago there was a young actress in New York City named Ann Gallagher.
She liked to play bridge, and became famous for her treatment of a two-way finesse for a queen.
When her first finesse succeeded, she repeated it in the opposite direction, giggling a little and announcing: "Now I'll find out if I'm really lucky."
The Ann Gallagher finesse ceased to be just comical two decades later when the diagramed deal surfaced, vindicating her weird concept of a both-ways finesse.
South lands in four hearts and the spade king is led to dummy's ace.
South's best play is to lead a low trump and finesse the jack, hoping to lose to the queen quickly and stay in control.


In Performance; JAZZ
A Percussionist's Palette, From Plink to Rumble  Gerry Hemingway Merkin Concert Hall


Can Henning Bring Magic Back to Burbs?
Lorne Henning has been there before.
Nearly a decade ago, during his first stint as a head coach in the National Hockey League, Henning guided the Minnesota North Stars to a 23-point improvement over the previous season and finished third in the balloting for coach of the year.
But the next season, his team struggled, and he was replaced two games before the season ended.


Date and McNeil Are Upset
A distinctly unsummerlike wind blew in from the South Pole this morning to wreak havoc on the nonfeature matches assigned to the outer courts, where two seeded women, Kimiko Date and Lori McNeil, were beaten in the third round.
And the No. 3 seed, Jana Novotna, came uncomfortably close to being upset by Lisa Raymond of Philadelphia.
Japan's top player, the seventh-seeded Date, committed an uncharacteristic 64 unforced errors and fell, 3-6, 6-3, 6-3, to the 26th-ranked Naoko Sawamatsu, who is from Kobe, Japan.
Sawamatsu's family home in Kobe was destroyed by Tuesday morning's earthquake, and although her relatives escaped injury, her best friend is missing and presumed dead.


Back to the Rink


Pope, in Sri Lanka, Seeks To Soothe Buddhist Critics
Guarded by security arrangements that included gunboats bobbing in the Indian Ocean surf, Pope John Paul II sought tonight to smooth a dispute with Buddhist monks that could disrupt his brief stay here in the final hours of a tour of Asia and the Pacific.
The Pope arrived in Sri Lanka today from Australia, with his aides registering greater concern than usual about his safety in this predominantly Buddhist country where monks have expressed outrage at his references to their faith as a kind of atheism.


Osaka Shelters Victims and Fears Similar Fate
Sitting alone and afraid on a couch in the marbled lobby of an Osaka hotel, Takeo Hashimoto explained that his life had been reduced to the three small shopping bags that he clutched to his chest.
They were stuffed with soot-tainted towels and clothes, all that could be salvaged from 75 years of life in a place "that now resembles hell."
Mr.
Hashimoto, squinting from fatigue, his skin ashen from days without sleep, arrived in Osaka just before dawn this morning after the nightlong journey from Kobe, the western Japanese city that was devastated in the huge earthquake this week.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-6  WORLD TRADE DISRUPTED
The closing of the port of Kobe after the earthquake this week has disrupted world trade in a domino effect, with some American companies worried about keeping their assembly lines going. 1


Sanctions on Iraq Take Toll on Children
To the Editor:
Re "Too Soon to Lift Iraq Sanctions" (editorial, Jan. 14): A United Nations Children's Fund official, as quoted in Newsday and elsewhere, estimated last December that 500,000 children younger than 5 have died in Iraq as a result of sanctions imposed by the Security Council in August 1990.
He warned that 1.5 million more children "could die if sanctions continue."


Teacher Held in Rape
A Bronx high school teacher was arrested yesterday on charges that he raped a 14-year-old student, the police said.
The teacher, Hector Santana, who works at the Health Opportunity High School in the Bronx, had sex with the student once in October and once in November, the police said.


Pearl Wong, 86, Restaurant Owner In Mid-Manhattan
Pearl Wong, who with her husband, James, operated Pearl's Chinese Restaurant in mid-Manhattan, serving Cantonese fare to the famous and not-so-famous for 18 years until her retirement in 1985, died on Wednesday in her home in Manhattan.
She was 86.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said her sister, Emily Fong, also of Manhattan.


69 Democrats Ready to Back Budgeting Bill
Democrats said today that 69 of them in the House would support a balanced-budget amendment when it came to a vote next week, all but assuring that the measure will pass a chamber of Congress for only the second time in seven tries.
Representative Charles W. Stenholm, Democrat of Texas, said the Democrats had lined up behind his version of the amendment, which requires a balanced budget no sooner than the year 2002 and prohibits tax increases without the approval of a majority of all the 435 members of the House and the 100 senators.


CHRONICLE
The library and archives of the writer Graham Greene, who died in 1991 at the age of 86, have been bought for an undisclosed sum by the John J. Burns Library of Rare Books and Special Collections at Boston College.
Included are 3,000 books and 60,000 documents that shed light on everything from Greene's friendships to his interests in Latin American guerrillas and his religious faith as a convert to Catholicism.
The books contain numerous annotations, ranging from 2,500 words on Chekhov to a single exclamation point, said Dr.
ROBERT O'NEILL, the director of the library.


Aid Doubts Strain Mexican Markets
As the Clinton Administration and Congress bickered in Washington over an aid package to Mexico, the lack of an agreement and investor doubts continued to strain Mexico's volatile financial markets.
Today marked one month to the day since the Mexican Government set off the current economic crisis by devaluing the peso.
The Mexican stock exchange reversed its losses earlier this morning to close slightly higher, but the modest rally failed to compensate for three consecutive declines earlier this week, when the market index dropped more than 190 points.


Judge Faced Pressure To Resign, Officials Say
When Justice Ronald J. Aiello announced last October that he would give up his duties as the top administrator in charge of the major trial courts in Brooklyn and Staten Island, he said he wanted to explore other options.
But now, three weeks after the resignation took effect, several judges and lawyers in Brooklyn say they believe that Justice Aiello was asked to resign from his supervisory post by the state's top court administrator, Judge E. Leo Milonas.


Edwin Rothschild, A.C.L.U. Leader, 84
Edwin A. Rothschild, who was the president of the American Civil Liberties Union of Illinois in 1977 when its defense of the right of the American Nazi Party to march in Skokie, Ill., touched off angry demonstrations, died on Jan. 10 at his home in Chicago.
He was 84.
The cause was complications from a gastrointestinal illness, said his son, Michael, of San Diego.


G.O.P. Affirms Plan to Stop Money for Unwed Mothers
Congress heard widely differing opinions today about whether welfare payments encourage unmarried teen-agers to have babies, and whether Republican proposals to curtail such assistance would reverse the rise in births outside marriage.
Despite the conflicting testimony, Republican members of the House Ways and Means Committee affirmed their desire to pass legislation cutting off cash assistance to unmarried women under 18 whose children are born out of wedlock.


Retailer From Chicago Places Big Manhattan Bet
Fresh out of Northwestern University in 1960 with a degree in business administration, Gordon Segal took a job at the Four Seasons restaurant in Manhattan.
"I ran out of money before I got promoted," said Mr.
Segal, who gave up after six months.
"I went home and said, 'I'm not ready for this.' "


The Bull Market for Junk Bonds Is Fading
After their collapse in 1989 and 1990, junk bonds have been great investments.
The riskier the bonds, the better.
The funds listed here took on higher-than-average credit risk or owned debt on which the issuer had already defaulted -- good choices during recovering economies.
When times are good, corporations sell more goods and are thus able to pay the interest on their debt or perhaps pay off their debt entirely.


Developments in Congress
HOUSE Democrats announced that enough of them, 69, would support a bare-bones version of a balanced-budget amendment to guarantee its passage by the House next week.
The announcement seemed to doom a version backed many House Republicans that would require a three-fifths vote in Congress for any tax increases.


Agassi Chills Canadian And Gains 4th Round
Andre Agassi, in his pirate's bandana and skateboarder's skivvies, complained about the chill on the stadium court today but did not let it stop him from knocking Canada's Greg Rusedski from contention at the Australian Open.
Agassi largely ignored the 103d-ranked Rusedski's cannon serve, the swiftest of the event, except when using it to fuel his equally turbo-charged returns, in a 6-2, 6-4, 6-2 victory.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLTEL CORP., Little Rock, Ark., will change the name of its data processing unit from Systematics Information Services Inc. to Alltel Information Services Inc.
CRESTAR FINANCIAL CORP., Richmond, said it had bought Independent Bank and Jefferson Savings and Loan for a total of $34.5 million.


Fairness Can Return to New York Taxi System
To the Editor:
It's good news that New York City plans to return regulation of the taxi industry to the Police Department after the disastrous 20-year experiment with the Taxi and Limousine Commission.
The Police Department's Hack Bureau regulated the industry for 40 years, beginning in the early 1930's, and did its job wisely and well.
Riders enjoyed good service, and drivers enjoyed fair working conditions.


John C. White, 70, Chairman Of Democrats in Carter's Term
John C. White, a Texas sharecropper's son who became Democratic national chairman under President Jimmy Carter, died here today at Georgetown University Hospital, where he had been under treatment for a heart ailment.
He was 70 and lived in Washington.
Mr.
White had a successful career in state politics before he was drawn to Washington, and along the way he won the friendship of powerful older Texas Democrats such as Senator Lyndon B. Johnson and Representative Sam Rayburn, the longtime Speaker of the House.


Yes, Talk to the Bosnian Serbs
The Clinton Administration is right to pursue direct talks with the Bosnian Serbs, even though the Bosnian Government objects and a Security Council resolution prohibits it.
Last summer the U.S. and other big powers handed the Bosnian Government and the Bosnian Serbs what they called a take-it-or-leave-it peace map dividing Bosnia into almost equal ethnic zones.
The Bosnian Government, swallowing its principles about maintaining a multiethnic state, accepted the map.
The Serbs, already holding far more territory than the map provided, rejected it.
At that point the major powers had promised to pressure the Bosnian Serbs into agreement, refusing all direct negotiation with them until they accepted the map.


The Lawyers
Robert L. Shapiro, whose leadership of the Simpson legal team made him the most famous lawyer in America, is discovering that celebrity is a double-edged sword.
Second of three profiles.
Page 10.


Justices to Hear Appeal by Quayle's Accuser
The Supreme Court announced today that it would hear an appeal by a former Federal prison inmate who says he was placed in a special detention cell just before the 1988 Presidential election to keep him from going public with a claim that years earlier he had sold marijuana to Dan Quayle, then the Republican Vice-Presidential candidate.
The former inmate, Brett Kimberlin, has sued J. Michael Quinlan, who was then the director of the Federal Bureau of Prisons, and Loye Miller, a Justice Department official, for violating his constitutional right to free speech.
A Federal appellate court here dismissed the lawsuit in October 1993 on the ground that it presented no direct evidence of constitutional wrongdoing but relied "only on inference and weak circumstantial evidence."


In Performance; DANCE
Choreography In Service Of a Larger Purpose  Kevin Wynn Collection Bessie Schonberg Theater


Kay Aldridge, 77, Actress Until 1945
Kay Aldridge Tucker, an actress and model who was one of the most photographed women in the country in the 1930's, died on Jan. 12 at Penobscot Bay Medical Center in Rockport, Me.
She was 77 and lived in Camden, Me.
The cause was a heart attack, said Lester Glassner, a friend.


Guesswork Beats the Farmer's Almanac
To the Editor:
A Jan. 15 front-page article states that the 1995 Old Farmer's Almanac has created so-far-unrealized expectations of a severe winter among Northeasterners.
It may interest some readers to know that when it comes to predicting winter's severity, the venerable Farmer's Almanac is frequently off the mark.


The Met Offers a New 'Boccanegra'
On paper, the Metropolitan Opera seemed to have a sure-fire hit with "Simon Boccanegra," which received its first performance on Thursday night.
With a star-heavy cast, including Placido Domingo, Kiri Te Kanawa and Vladimir Chernov, and a new production by the house's current favorites -- Giancarlo del Monaco and Michael Scott (who were also responsible for the "Madama Butterfly" this season) -- how could it go wrong?
But wrong it went, at least in its debut.
And the only thing that kept the performance -- with its stilted staging and often wan singing -- from exceptional dullness was Verdi's astonishing opera.


Hedging Currencies: Has Its Time Come?
MANY investors in foreign-stock funds know little about protecting their portfolios from currency swings, often called hedging.
But as 1995 unfolds, they may be compelled to pay attention.
"For 10 years nonhedgers gained as the dollar declined," said Malcolm Tulloch, an equity strategist at G. T. Global funds in San Francisco.
The dollar bought 263 yen in early 1985 and now buys just under 100.
For an unhedged American investor, this means $2.63 now for every $1 invested then in Japan, even if the stock price has not changed.


Vikings Hire Sherman, Former Jets' Aide
The Minnesota Vikings have hired the former Jets' offensive coordinator RAY SHERMAN to be their quarterback coach.
Before joining the Jets last season, Sherman, 43, spent two seasons as receiver coach and a year as running back coach with the San Francisco 49ers. (AP)


Fee-Only Planners: No Strings, but They're Not All Equal
Five years ago, financial advisers who charged fees instead of commissions were nearly impossible to find -- especially outside urban areas.
The shortage did not last long.
In just two years, their number has doubled, according to Cerulli Associates, a Boston consulting firm for the financial services industry.
Gathering information from trade groups and Federal regulators, Cerulli counted 5,500 individuals who fit the description of fee-only planners in 1994, up from 2,700 in 1992.
The amount of money they managed rose to $900 million from $500 million.


Chamber of Commerce Endorses Mandates Bill
To the Editor:
In "What's the Rush on Mandates?" (editorial, Jan. 18), you write that the United States Chamber of Commerce has complained that unfunded mandates legislation, under which obligations cannot be imposed on local and state governments without the Federal money to pay for them, "would severely skew the marketplace." This totally misrepresents our position.


Abortion Clinics Fortify Defenses
Abortion clinics nationwide are strengthening their security measures, even as some leaders in the abortion rights movement say the Justice Department has not moved fast enough to protect clinics from an increased threat by anti-abortion protesters.
"We are in a desperate, emergency situation," said Eleanor Smeal, the president of the Feminist Majority Foundation, a women's advocacy group.


Back to Reality in the East


Seton Hall Reconsidering an Applicant
Seton Hall plans to review the application of a high school basketball player who signed a letter of intent and later pleaded guilty to a sexual abuse charge.
Chancellor THOMAS R. PETERSON yesterday said that he planned to meet with Coach GEORGE BLANEY on Monday to review RICHIE PARKER's application.
Parker, a guard at Manhattan Center for Science and Mathematics, signed a letter of intent Nov. 14.
He was recruited despite being under indictment on a first degree sodomy charge.
In a plea bargain last week, Parker pleaded guilty to first degree sexual abuse and will be sentenced to five years' probation, said a spokesman for the Manhattan District Attorney's office. (AP)


Simpson Judge Permits Evidence on Racial Bias of Detective
In a victory for lawyers defending O.J.
Simpson against murder charges, the judge in the case today approved their request that the jury should be allowed to hear a racial epithet used by a crucial witness in the case.
At issue are the prosecution's efforts to block defense lawyers from questioning a Los Angeles police detective, Mark Fuhrman, about his racial views, particularly about whether he ever uttered the word "nigger."


Corrections
A biographical sketch yesterday about F. Lee Bailey, a member of the O. J. Simpson defense team, misstated the year he faced a drunken-driving charge.
It was 1982, not 1992.
Because of an editing error, a sketch of Alan M. Dershowitz, another member of the defense team, misstated the title of his recent novel.
It is "The Advocate's Devil," not "The Devil's Advocate."


Answers Needed on Mr. Schembri
Whatever happened to the investigation into the behavior of Anthony Schembri?
Last November Mr.
Schembri, New York City's Commissioner of Correction, reportedly drove to Rye, where he served for years as Police Commissioner, to get his hair cut on government time.
He also reportedly gave a paid speech in Atlantic City on government time.
It was further alleged that he charged the city for his drivers' overtime and tolls when they ran personal errands on his behalf.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani ordered an inquiry by the Department of Investigation.
That inquiry was also to address the question of whether Mr.
Schembri had actually moved his residence to the city from his home in Bedford, as required by law.


An Old Boss Dies and Five Dreams Die With Him
WHEN Rafael Morales and his four brothers got beat out of a parking place, they got steamed.
Then they got a lawyer.


Composer Week Means 2 Works in a Program
There is something disingenuous about the Composer Week the New York Philharmonic has made a part of its season for three years.
It is not as though the orchestra uses these weeks to present thorough (or even glancing) surveys of their honorees' work.
Nor does being the focus of Composer Week necessarily involve a commission.
There are no exhibits, related programming, special publications or anything to make the audience feel that the orchestra is doing anything special.
True, there are pre-concert interviews.
But those are pretty standard these days.
This year the focus is on William Bolcom, a prolific composer whose works offer both whimsical touches and emotional depth.
But the program, which Leonard Slatkin conducted on Thursday evening (and which is to be repeated tonight) offered only two brief works, roughly half an hour of music on the second half of a program that also included Ernst Toch's charmingly inconsequential "Pinocchio" Overture and a vivid account of Stravinsky's "Petrouchka."


Knicks Finish With Flourish To Hold Off Mavericks
The Knicks played too well to let two players beat them.
Withstanding an offensive onslaught by Jimmy Jackson (31 points) and Jamal Mashburn (28 points), the Knicks (23-13) won their sixth consecutive road game by holding off the Dallas Mavericks tonight, 106-93, at Reunion Arena.
New York has won 11 of its last 12 games, and this victory was an impressive one, coming just one night after the Knicks' emotional victory in Houston.


Finding Best Deal Among Long-Distance Calling Plans
Every long-distance carrier says it can save you money.
But each is likely to argue that its rivals are snowing you.
Can a sane person find truth?
Maybe.
A good place to start is with a rough idea of what long-distance carriers actually charge for each minute of calling, after accounting for the most common discounts.


Messier: Deal Is Imminent
Mark Messier still doesn't have a new contract, but he was a full participant in the Stanley Cup banner-raising ceremony and the season's opening game.
"I really feel the deal is imminent," said Messier, who entered the negotiations yesterday.
"The issue of the contract is pretty well over except for the final handshake. I'm sure the Rangers will announce -- hopefully, in the next few days -- a press conference."


In Performance; DANCE
A Modern Reworking Of a Classic Ballet  Donald Byrd/The Group Joyce Theater


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about William M. Blair, a longtime correspondent for The New York Times who died on Jan. 13, misstated the hometown of his surviving daughter Christopher Jo.
She lives in Aurora, Ohio, not Aurora, Ill.


In Baseball, No Games, But the Game Is Expanding
Acting uncharacteristically but with necessity, baseball's expansion committee unanimously recommended today that the major leagues expand by four teams, two in "an expeditious manner" and two "in a reasonable amount of time thereafter."
The owners are expected to act so expeditiously that they will very likely approve the initial stage of the two-tiered expansion by mid-February.
They may even award the first two franchises by then; if not, by the end of the month at the latest.


Russians Taste No Victory, As Chechens Try to Regroup
Warning Chechens to surrender "or be destroyed without mercy," Russian forces pressed deeper into rebel-held sections of this city today as secessionist fighters regrouped in its southern stretches.
A thick blanket of snow covering the bombed-out city muffled all but the pounding of artillery and the Russian warnings, which were broadcast by loudspeakers mounted on helicopters.


Slowly, Kobe Begins to Pick Itself Up
Bottles of shampoo and liquid soap lay jumbled on the shelves and strewn across the floor at Masaru Shiraishi's drug store here, leaving almost no room for customers to walk.
The place looked like it had been hit by an earthquake, which, of course, it had.
But on a street in which many of the homes and small shops lay in ruins and those still standing were boarded up, Mr.
Shiraishi's drug store became the first establishment to reopen for business.
And the disorder did not discourage customers, who picked their way past the fallen bottles to buy cough medicine, toilet paper, disposable diapers and the other necessities of routine life that have been neglected during these non-routine times.


Shelter From the Storm


No Headline
"Winter's just not here yet." -- LASZLO VAJTAY, the unhappy owner of a ski resort in the Catskills.  [ 1:3. ]


Lord Cowdray, 84, Developer Of the Pearson Conglomerate
Lord Cowdray, who controlled one of Britain's largest fortunes as chairman of the S. Pearson &amp; Son conglomerate, died Thursday at King Edward VI Hospital in Midhurst, Sussex.
He was 84.
He lived on a 17,000-acre estate at Midhurst and a 60,000-acre tract in the Scottish region of Grampian, formerly known as Aberdeenshire.


Senate Republicans Seek an Investigation of the Commerce Secretary's Former Partner
Senate Republicans today asked the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to open a fraud investigation of a former business partner of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown over a $23 million loss at a failed savings and loan.
Senator Lauch Faircloth, a North Carolina Republican on the Senate Banking Committee, asked the F.D.I.C. this afternoon to investigate whether money was "drained fraudulently or recklessly" from Corridor Broadcasting, a company run by the former partner, Nolanda Hill.
Mr.
Faircloth had asked the F.D.I.C. last Wednesday to review whether it could collect any money from Ms.
Hill to cover the $23 million loss to taxpayers.


CHRONICLE
If a violinist has good hands and a sharp mind, age is irrelevant, in the view of JOSEPH FUCHS.
He should know: at 94, he is still performing and teaching.
And on Wednesday evening, the Juilliard School celebrated his forthcoming 95th birthday (on April 26) with a concert.
Dozens of Mr.
Fuchs's present and former students assembled to play or listen.
Mr.
Fuchs, who started studying at the school in 1907, still teaches there three times a week.


Japanese-Owned Company Plays by U.S. Rules; Selling Our Cars There
To the Editor:
Thomas L. Friedman in "Japan Fatigue" (column, Jan. 11) unfortunately echoes the Ford Motor Company's economically indefensible argument that its 1 percent share of Japan's car market proves that market is somehow "managed." By that token so too is the United States car market.


Police Officer in Queens Arrested on Theft Charge
A Queens police officer has been arrested and charged with stealing $200 from an abandoned van during a police sting that was part of a broader investigation into suspected rogue officers working in the 109th Precinct, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
One official said that the arrest of the officer, John Pylyp, 36, could be followed by several more arrests in the precinct over the next several months.


Dow Off 12.78 on View That Rates Will Climb
The stock market declined yesterday, with signs abounding that last week's upward momentum had been turned around.
The Dow Jones industrial average lost 12.78 points to close at 3,869.43.
The market was weighed down by inflation concerns prompted by a report showing a brisk pace in housing starts and by a surge in the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index.
The reports solidified the case for the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates, which could slow the economy as well as raise corporate borrowing costs.
In addition, a weak dollar, sharply lower bond prices and a slew of bad corporate news helped to push stock prices downward.


Brisk Pace In Building Of Homes
Despite a yearlong progression of higher interest rates, builders broke ground on new homes at a brisk clip last month to finish 1994 with a 13 percent annual gain and the highest output in six years, the Commerce Department reported today.
Including an upward revision for November, recent construction activity has held up better than expected.
Many analysts said this strength further solidified the case for the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates again later this month to try to restrain economic growth and keep inflation in check.


Trial Lawyer Now Forced to Fight His Fame While Battling for His Client
Polly Bergen, the actress, will never forget the night not long ago when she, the writer Judith Krantz and a few friends walked into Pinot Bistro, a stylish restaurant a stone's throw from many movie studios, with Robert L. Shapiro.
"I've gone to places with Cary Grant, Fred Astaire and Clark Gable, and I've never seen what happened happen," she recalled.
"The room literally stopped. It was absolutely extraordinary. In this town everyone is used to celebrities and is much more blase, but you absolutely knew that every eye was staring at him."


54 Years and 103 Days, but Well Worth the Wait
Better late than never.
They raised the big, blue banner last night at Madison Square Garden in honor of the Rangers' Stanley Cup championship, their first since 1940.
The Rangers celebrated it more than seven months after it was clinched last June.
The ceremony lasted more than half an hour before the season's delayed opening game and was enjoyed by a capacity crowd of 18,200.
The fans stood on their feet and cheered, loudly and repeatedly, throughout the emotional affair.


Nets Show Maturity, But Fall To Veteran
Maturity and experience, two key components needed to win down the stretch in the National Basketball Association, seemed to be part of the Nets' makeup tonight.
They played with poise, precision and drive.
Until a 41-year-old man with a wealth of the same qualities ruined everything for them.


The Overworked I.N.S.
Lennox Medina, originally from Trinidad, remained in the U.S. illegally for nearly 20 years.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service caught up with him when he served time in New York City's Rikers Island jail for criminal possession of a weapon in 1993.
The I.N.S. ordered his deportation; but the agency had no place to detain Mr.
Medina, so it released him on a $10,000 bond.
When he failed to surrender for deportation, the I.N.S. did not pursue him.
Two modern-day bounty hunters working for the bondsman brought him in.
This surprising story recounted in The Times last week demonstrates the enormous task facing the I.N.S.
The agency is charged with finding illegal immigrants, who have become a favorite target of angry voters.
There may be four million illegal immigrants altogether.
Of that number, the agency has managed to target only 472,000 for deportation.
Many of those have simply overstayed their visas, but 96,000 have committed crimes.


Ski Areas Suffer From an Endless Summer
A sign posted at the Ski Plattekill resort here warns against packing the cozy, wood-paneled cafeteria beyond its capacity of 242 people.
That has hardly been a problem this winter.
With a third of the ski season already over, this resort in the central Catskills has yet to open a single one of its 27 trails.
The reason is plain: it has barely snowed this winter, and whatever snow has fallen has been washed away by driving rains and unseasonably warm temperatures.
When Laszlo Vajtay, the owner of Ski Plattekill, looks out at his mountain, all he sees is brown grass.


Berliner Follows a Path All His Own in Beethoven
Those of us who keep tabs on promising young conductors have someone new to watch.
Christian Thielemann, a 35-year-old conductor from Berlin, has already made an impressive showing at the Metropolitan Opera, where his performances of "Der Rosenkavalier" and "Arabella" have shown him to be an accomplished Straussian.
He gave a fuller account of himself at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday evening, when he conducted the Philhadelphia Orchestra in a brilliantly manipulated account of the Beethoven Fifth Symphony and in works by Mozart and Hans Pfitzner.
Mr.
Thielemann's technique is energetic, showy and at times a little quirky.
Often he looms over the violins, listening intently and alternating coaxing gestures with quick, furious hand movements, as if he were trying to erase a wrong note on a sheet of score paper.
Given the slightest musical provocation, he dances from the left side of the podium to the right and back again, throwing cues along the way and swooping down on one unsuspecting section or another.


Viacom to Sell Its Cable Systems for $2.3 Billion
Viacom Inc. reached a definitive agreement yesterday to sell its cable television systems for approximately $2.3 billion to an investment group that is led by a black entrepreneur and includes a company partly owned by Tele-Communications Inc.
The two sides said Viacom would receive $1.6 billion to $1.7 billion in cash for the cable systems, which have 1.1 million subscribers.
The longer the deal takes to close, the more cash Viacom receives.
Viacom will also get a one-year secured note for $600 million, the companies said yesterday.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a proposal to close some city-run day care centers in New York misidentified the author of a book being read by a girl in one center.
The book, "Are You My Mother?," was by P. D. Eastman, not Dr.
Seuss.


The Way It Was and Could Be
In Louis Malle's 1980 film "Atlantic City," an aging numbers runner played by Burt Lancaster rues the passing of the heyday of this old resort city when hoodlum chic and a special pop spirit called "floy-floy" reigned.
Even the natural wonder of the sea, he lamented, had eroded with time.
"The Atlantic Ocean was something then," he said.


Mullin and Seikaly Join Warrior Injury List
Golden State has lost two more key players.
Before losing their 14th straight road game Thursday night, the 11-24 Warriors placed the five-time All-Star forward CHRIS MULLIN on the injured list with a sprained left ankle.
Yesterday, center RONY SEIKALY had his right ankle placed in a cast for two weeks. (AP)


Ad Misstates Views Of Heart Association
To the Editor:
The American Heart Association is dismayed by the use of its name in a Jan. 12 advertisement by the Washington Legal Foundation.
The advertisement essentially accuses the Food and Drug Administration of killing thousands of Americans because of delays in the approval process for drugs and medical devices.
Comparing the F.D.A. to murderers and drunken drivers, as the ad does, is irresponsible and incorrect.


Japanese Gather for News of Quake; At Bookstore in Rockefeller Center, Lists of Victims Are Posted
Asami Sakamoto stood in the lobby of Kinokuniya Book Store in Manhattan, her nose inches away from sheets of white paper posted on a glass wall.
Among the thousands of Japanese names, packed single-spaced onto eight pages, she searched for those of old friends in Kobe.
Like Ms.
Sakamoto, many of New York's Japanese residents have traveled every day since Tuesday to this Rockefeller Center bookstore.
With telephone lines still down in Kobe, they have no option but to make personal visits to these ever-lengthening lists of those who died in Monday's earthquake.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.38
5.44
2.91
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.68
2.94
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.20
6.16
3.10
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.80
7.73
5.68
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.88
7.82
6.27
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.77
8.70
7.22
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.77
6.74
5.51
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Danger of Spilling Company Secrets
The Securities and Exchange Commission has a word for business executives tempted to share boardroom secrets at the family dinner table: don't.
If someone uses those nuggets of information to buy and sell stocks, it becomes insider trading, and it can be costly.


Arkansas Officials Given Probation
The athletic training director, DEAN WEBER, and the head trainer, DAVID ENGLAND, at the University of Arkansas were sentenced to fines, community service and two years' probation yesterday for keeping poor records of federally controlled pain-killing drugs.
The Drug Enforcement Administration said the university could account for only 332 of 10,059 doses in a 15-month period. (AP)


Van Drivers Protest in Brooklyn


Prices of Treasuries Fall On a Light-Volume Day
Prices of Treasury securities dropped sharply yesterday as investors became increasingly concerned about the dollar and Congressional approval of the Mexican aid package.
Traders are beginning to grow wary that if the dollar remains weak there is the possibility that investor demand for coming supplies of new Treasury securities will evaporate and cause prices to fall.


World News Briefs; Israeli Premier Criticized For Promise to Arafat
Israel's Labor-led Government was battered today by a dispute over whether its freshly affirmed ban on new settlements in the West Bank includes Jewish towns that ring Jerusalem.
If it does, settler representatives warned, they will consider it "a virtual declaration of war" and step up their protests to bring down the Government, which they have long considered hostile.


Experts See Greater Chances Of a Big Quake in California
Seismologists said yesterday that Southern California stood an 86 percent chance of an earthquake of magnitude 7 or larger by the year 2024.
A quake of that magnitude is capable of causing widespread property damage and loss of life.
Six years ago, scientists said the region stood a 60 percent chance of having an earthquake of that magnitude by the year 2018.


Trammell Crow Returning to Office Development
James D. Carreker, who took over as chief executive of the Trammell CrowCompany in August, said today that the company was cautiously resuming real estate development.
The Crow Company, the nation's largest real estate developer until the industry crashed in the 1980's, survived by becoming the largest real estate manager, collecting rents and sweeping floors.


Teaching Money Basics to Children
Alan and Linda Fingerman of Little Neck, L.I., want their children, Stacey, 9, and Kenneth, 7, to get in the habit of saving money.
When they discovered the Bank for Kids program of the Republic National Bank of New York, they encouraged their children to sign up.
After the children made initial deposits of moeny saved from birthday gifts and other sources, the parents began to give them a weekly allowance in exchange for doing certain chores.
Following the guidelines of the book "Money Doesn't Grow on Trees," by Neal Godfrey, the parents told the children to put 36 percent of their weekly income into the bank for long-term goals and to pay 15 percent to the family as a "tax," or money to be used by the whole family.
In this case, it was earmarked for the purchase of a family car.
The children could spend the remainder as they chose.
Besides making it easy for children to save, the Republic Bank program makes saving fun, Mr.
Fingerman said, with regular newsletters, performances and contests.


Central Park Plan Dies as Fast As Mayor Says 'No New Taxes'
On Thursday, Parks Commissioner Henry J. Stern thought he had a good idea: a special tax, just a little one, levied on residents near Central Park to pay for its upkeep.
He announced the proposal to park lovers gathered to celebrate the 61st anniversary of Robert Moses' appointment as the city's first Parks Commissioner.
Richard J. Schwartz, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's senior adviser, praised the idea.
"In all likelihood, it's something we'll be supporting," he said.
"It's part of re-inventing government."


U.S. Eases Trade Limits on North Korea for First Time Since 1950
For the first time since imposing an embargo against North Korea in 1950, the United States eased trade restrictions today, announcing that it would allow direct telephone calls between the two nations and permit travelers to use credit cards there.
The announcement came as the Administration, under heavy attack from Republicans for its nuclear agreement with North Korea, is moving carefully to improve relations with the North in the hope of building trust and insuring that North Korea continues to fulfill its promise to freeze its nuclear program.


Christopher Outlines Foreign Policy Goals for the U.S.
Fearing a rising tide of isolationism in Congress and the country, Secretary of State Warren Christopher used a wide-ranging policy address today to insist that the United States remain deeply engaged in world affairs to safeguard security and promote democracy.
In his speech, at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, Mr.
Christopher said that with the cold war over and democracy and free markets expanding rapidly in much of the world, the United States has an unusual opportunity to help shape the world consistent with its interests and values.


Seer Green Journal; Anglican Reformation: Vicar as Working Mother
Perhaps not since 1534, when King Henry VIII split it off from the Church of Rome, has the Church of England suffered such a shock to tradition as it did when women were ordained as priests for the first time last spring.
More than 200 Anglican priests protested by quitting their jobs.
Hundreds more refused to work with women priests, or with the bishops who ordained them, or in churches where women had presided.
Some enraged Anglicans converted to Roman Catholicism.


KOBE EARTHQUAKE DISRUPTS THE FLOW OF GLOBAL TRADE
The flow of world trade has been disrupted and slowed with the closing of the port of Kobe, which before the earthquake on Tuesday was not only the largest container port in Japan but also a hub for the movement of goods to other parts of the Far East.
The effects of the quake, which made the port unserviceable, were being felt in many parts of the world, with companies in Japan and the United States having to hold back goods.


World News Briefs; U.N. Presses Germany To Supply Peacekeepers
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said today that he supports Germany's effort to become a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council.
His support was not enough, however, to persuade the German Government to approve fuller German participation in United Nations peacekeeping operation.


Salisbury Papers Donated
The Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Columbia University has received the papers of Harrison E. Salisbury, the Pultizer Prize-winning former foreign correspondent and assistant managing editor of The New York Times, the university announced yesterday.
Mr.
Salisbury, who also wrote 29 books, died at the age of 84 in 1993.
The library is processing the papers, which were left to Columbia in Mr.
Salisbury's will.
Eventually, the papers will be available to scholars and researchers.
The papers include manuscripts, notes, correspondence and photographs from Mr.
Salisbury's assignments over decades in such places as the former Soviet Union, China and Vietnam.


INSIDE
Amendment Gains Backing
Democrats will support their own version of a balanced-budget amendment, insuring the second passage of such a measure by a Congressional chamber in seven tries.
Page 9.
Accusations in Duke's Death
As a legal fight rages over Doris Duke's estate, a nurse has charged in court papers that Miss Duke's doctor deliberately gave the heiress a lethal dose of morphine.
Page 25.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Has the U.S. Got a Horse for You: Mexico
IT'S the sort of deal Michael Milken would understand.
Take a wobbling borrower -- Mexico, in this case -- that needs to sell or shore up a tower of investments, maybe $40 billion worth, and agree to guarantee them.
In return, pocket gazillions in fees.
If everything goes right.
That the United States is now looking like Mexico's junk-bond financier, under arrangements being hashed out last week, reflects the nation's huge stake south of the border.
Banks, corporations and mutual funds, and their ma-and-pa investors, sent tens of billions to Mexico, and the United States has to bail them out.
Mexican debt, which flirted with investment-grade ratings last year, now looks about as solid as the bonds pumped out by many a tottering savings and loan.


Daryl Chapin, 88, A Co-Developer Of Solar Energy Cell
Daryl M. Chapin, a scientist who helped invent a device for converting sunlight into electricity, died in his sleep on Thursday at his home in Naples, Fla.
He was 88.
His daughter, Audrey Svennsen, said that he had had a weak heart, but that the cause of death was not known.
On Thursday afternoon, she said, he worked with a friend on a new board game for the blind.


Who's on First? In '95, It Could Be Anybody
Andre Scott's mother came with him from nearby Tampa "because I'm his mom and I've been with him ever since he's been playing baseball."
Tom O'Brien drove here from the University of Alabama with his girlfriend and two of her college friends at Mississippi State University.
Phil Slaney and his girlfriend, Michelle Sullivan, drove 1,500 miles from Toronto even though he knew he was three years above the age limit of 25.


Dee-cline Dee-fense
"O, MY OFFENSE IS RANK," THE KING says in "Hamlet"; that rank, from the Old English ranc, meaning "strong," meant that his crime stank to heaven, and had nothing to do with the Middle French word renc, meaning "row, order," from which we get military rank.
The word offense in that sentence is usually pronounced of-FENCE, as in "Don't take of-FENCE," but the noun is often pronounced OFF-ence, especially when used in contrast to its opposite, "OFF-ense is the best DEE-fense" (first promulgated in this century as "offensive is the best defensive" by Ernst August Lehman in his 1927 book, "Zeppelins").
For most of this century, that was the only time defense was pronounced with the accent on the first syllable.
In all other cases, defense was invariably accented on the fense.
Try it: the Pentagon houses the de-FENSE department; in the O. J. Simpson trial, it's Robert Shapiro for the de-FENSE.


LIVES WELL LIVED
I read and reread your criteria for "Lives Well Lived" but still don't understand why Tip O'Neill ended up as a blurb sandwiched between the inventors of the Bic pen and that annoying anti-shoplifting device.
I know it's tough to select subjects for such a sweeping theme, but Tip deserved a page.
KATHRYN BONN New York


In Hollywood, the Play's the Thing (Again)
SO WHEN DID THE MOVIES start going to the theater again?
Back in the days when films were learning to talk, Broadway and Hollywood maintained a frosty marriage of convenience.
The movies had big bucks and a cultural inferiority complex; the theater had tony scripts, writers who understood dialogue and actors who didn't need elocution lessons.
So the studios imported New York talent wholesale and did perverse, sanitizing things to plays like "Strange Interlude" (1932) and "Design for Living" (1933).
It became increasingly clear, though, that the two art forms spoke different languages.
And while Hollywood continued to buy up Broadway's hits, commercial (never mind artistic) success on stage was no guarantee of similar results on film. (Think of much of Neil Simon; think, with a shudder, of "A Chorus Line," which Richard Attenborough turned into a film in 1985.)


Daughter of Malcolm X: Dreams Turned to Dust
After leading a life shaded by tragedy and personal turmoil, Qubilah Bahiyah Shabazz told friends last September that she had decided to leave New York City and her $60-a-week room in a crumbling apartment and move to Minnesota.
She told them that she was going to be married there, get a well-paying job and get her son the medical care he needed.
But things did not work out as planned.
The 34-year-old daughter of Malcolm X did not land a secure job.
Her 10-year-old son was placed in a children's shelter, said a person familiar with her situation in Minneapolis.


The Birthday Boom
JEREMY COHEN is 5 years old.
Already his mother, Hannah, is suffering from birthday-party fatigue.
"This year, my son wants a limousine to pick him up for his birthday," said Ms.
Cohen, watching a roomful of children, her son among them, celebrating a pre-schooler's birthday by running, climbing, sliding and eating slices of ice-cream cake at Wondercamp, one of the latest additions to the Manhattan juvenile party scene.
"Last year, we had his party at Chuck E. Cheese in Paramus. He just loved it. I was very stressed out. I couldn't speak afterward for three months."


The Old Left
As the Grand Old Party prepared to take over Congress last year, Pete Seeger, 75 -- banjo player, folk singer and so far left politically he has probably never been called a liberal -- was honored for his singing and songwriting.
He received a Kennedy Center Honors Award to add to his National Medal of Arts.
Q: How have your politics changed?


CLINTON WILL SEEK SPENDING TO CURB ALIENS, AIDES SAY
Balancing new political realities with old political commitments, President Clinton will soon propose a major increase in the budget for enforcing immigration laws and labor standards, Administration officials said today.
He is also believed to be leaning in favor of a proposal to increase the minimum wage.
Republicans in Congress are likely to propose even bigger increases in spending for immigration enforcement, especially for expansion of the Border Patrol.
But the Republicans are divided over plans to increase inspections of factories and other work sites.


OUTERWEAR
Acrylic ski overalls: Form-fitting and conveniently boot cut, they are the lastest vogue in the wind-chill battle.
They can also be cut off to make hot pants (above), for warm days and hotter nights. (Rachel Cobb for The New York Times)


A Debate Over Punitive Damages
To the Editor:
Why should a plaintiff, presumably a victim, be allowed to "punish" an offender?
This practice smacks of economic vigilantism.
By all means, let a deserving plaintiff be made whole, but penalizing a defendant for reckless behavior is normally the province of the state.
Punitive awards should be treated like a fine.
If not directed to the public coffers, then the levy should be earmarked for the area involved, e.g. a highway safety fund if the defendant happens to be an auto manufacturer.
ROBERT J. VOLTILE  Wilton, Conn., Dec. 25


Word for Word / In the House; How the Record Tells the Truth Now
"CONGRESSIONAL RECORD" was a venerated Capitol Hill oxymoron, like "public-interest group," until this month.
Lawmakers were able to review their exchanges in cold, crisp type, then embellish and chisel before the Record, daily journal of Congress's oratory, went to press.
The printed record of House debate bore about as much resemblance to the real thing as Earl Scheib did to DaVinci.
Then the new Republican House enacted a rule limiting revisions in the Record to corrections of grammar, typographical errors and other nits.
Words count, Speaker Newt Gingrich said, and the Record would no longer rewrite the truth.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the Family Publishing Group misspelled the surname of one co-publisher.
She is Susan Ross Benamram, not Banamram.


Couch Tornadoes
Already tired of that dump-truck-and-bulldozer video you ordered from late-night TV?
Maybe it's time to move on to an even more frightening phenomenon: the tornado.
"We sell mostly to people who love the weather," says Tom Grazulis, the creator of "Tornado Video Classics," I and II, which he markets out of his home in St.
Johnsbury, Vt.; (802) 748-2505.
"Frustrated meteorologists, 13-year-old up-and-coming scientists and people who've experienced a tornado themselves." Grazulis assembled his 110 twisters from TV coverage, researchers and the growing pack of amateurs who hunt funnels with videocams and then swap tapes as fervently as Deadheads trade concert recordings.
"You'll see merging tornadoes, tornado families, a cockpit view of rockets being fired at tornadoes . . . multiple-vortex tornadoes . . . and waterspouts," boasts an ad for "Classics I." Funnelers still sit in awe of the so-called underpass clip on that tape.
"A news crew shot it from an underpass, and you can see a Ford Aerostar van caught in the tornado," Grazulis says.
"It gives a tremendous phyeww as it goes by."


Plow in One Hand, Six-Shooter in the Other
THE FRONTIER IN AMERICAN CULTURE By Richard White and Patricia Nelson Limerick.
Edited by James R. Grossman.
Illustrated. 116 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Cloth, $ 30.
Paper, $ 15.


The Executive Computer; Bringing Point-and-Click Ease to Corporate Computing
FOR all the buzz about client-server systems in the computer trade media, one would imagine there to be at least a handful, if not dozens, of companies battling for a share of this market.
In fact there is only one independent, publicly held software company that derives its revenues solely from client-server applications: Peoplesoft Inc.
This is not to say that Peoplesoft has no competitors.
It has many, and many of them much bigger than Peoplesoft, which expects to report sales of more than $100 million for 1994 when it releases its annual figures.


On Sunday; If You Love It, Leave It To Posterity
WHEN prompted, E. V. Thaw can imagine a burning building with his extraordinary personal collection of five centuries of master drawings trapped inside.
In this collector's nightmare, he instinctively senses a certain order in which he himself rescues each of the 250 precious works on paper from the impertinent flames.
" 'The Descent From the Cross' of Rembrandt and the one of Rubens, two great drawings of the 17th century that are absolute favorites," he begins, hardly upset at the fantasy chance to hurriedly collect anew a unique set of the masterworks of draftsmanship, from Mantegna to Matisse, that took him more than 40 years to possess in the first place.


Balancing the Budget Isn't Like Your Checkbook; Loopholes for the Few
To the Editor:
The Newt Gingrich rule requiring a 60 percent majority vote of Congress to raise taxes contains an enormous gift to special interests.
Under the new Congressional rule, only a majority is needed to create a tax loophole for a wealthy contributor, but it will take a supermajority to close the same tax loophole.


Correction
A brief article on Dec. 11 with the Your Own Account column, about states' taxing the pensions of people who retire to other states, described Minnesota's law incompletely.
For nonresidents, Minnesota taxes payments from nonqualified plans, but it does not tax payments from qualified plans -- those that meet Internal Revenue Service rules and other Federal guidelines -- including 401(k) plans.
A reader's letter dated Dec. 15 pointed out the error; this correction was delayed for checking with a tax expert.


World Markets; Once Again, Gold Lures Investors
THE economist John Maynard Keynes was fascinated by the legend of King Midas, whose greed was such that everything he touched turned into gold, leaving him rich but starving.
The tale, Keynes thought, was a profound warning that mankind's instinctive desire to hoard wealth leads to impoverishment, not riches.
This insight contributed to his central belief that governments could and should spend their way out of recessions.


LIVES WELL LIVED
I don't know what you're going to do for an encore, but your first issue of the year, "Lives Well Lived" (Jan. 1), was a "keeper." Focusing on the generally quiet celebrities who gave more than many of the bombastic, headline-grabbers brought me up short as to the genuine meaning of fame.


City Center: A Bargain
To the Editor:
In his article "Dancing Precariously on the Bottom Line"  [ Jan. 1 ] , Peter Passell notes that City Center "requires dance troupes to bear the entire financial risk of an engagement" and compares City Center to the nonprofit Joyce Theater.
These statements do no justice to City Center or the troupes that perform here.


Man Arrested After Wild Ride From Triborough to Kennedy
A truck driver went on a wild ride through two boroughs Friday night, smashing his 18-wheel vehicle into 15 cars and slightly injuring two people, the police said.
The driver's journey ended when the rig crashed into a tree at Kennedy International Airport and he attacked a worker in a cargo terminal, officials said.
The police said that the driver, Irving L. Surdam 3d, of Winsted, Conn., told them after his arrest that he was on amphetamines during the ride.
He was being tested for drugs, but no results were available, the police said.


Physicians Setting Up 2 H.M.O.'s
WITH health maintenance organizations and other managed-care groups taking over an ever larger share of the health care market, thousands of physicians across the state have signed up for two new doctor-owned H.M.O.'s.
And largely in response to physicians' complaints, the State Department of Health has undertaken a major revision of the regulations governing H.M.O.'s.
Under the managed-care system, some insurance companies and other owners of H.M.O.'s form separate corporations and subsidiaries to monitor the performance of participating physicians and other providers of health care.
Others contract for the service with independent managed-care companies.


Jan. 15-21: Home to Rome; A Tiring Journey Affirms Pope's Belief in Revival
When Pope John Paul II flew home this weekend from an 11-day odyssey through Asia and the Pacific, he had covered some 20,000 miles, visited four countries and elevated three venerated Catholics from the past to the status of the blessed.
But the high point was a World Youth Day mass in Manila that attracted a multitude whose size the Vatican estimated at 4 million.
Even by papal standards, it was a vast assembly -- the biggest, the Vatican said, the Pope had ever seen.
More important than the numbers, though, was the remarkable boost it gave the Pope and his belief that, in a world that has broken free of moral moorings, there is a profound yearning, particularly among the young, for firm guidelines and spiritual renewal.
The Pope visited the Philippines, Papua New Guinea, Australia and Sri Lanka, crisscrossing a region that embraces some of the least Christianized places on Earth.
Often he seemed tired and frail, walking slowly with the help of his silver-topped cane after hip-replacement surgery last year.
At age 74, though, he seemed to draw a different kind of strength, reinforcing the sense that, after the fall of communism, he has defined a new crusade: to nurture a moral revival up to and into Christianity's third millenium.
ALAN COWELL


From Cheese to Apples, With Great Style
ANY doubts about Greenwich as a premier restaurant town can be dispelled quickly by a visit to 64 Greenwich Ave., and the new restaurant of that name that has superseded Lotus East.
What 64 Greenwich Avenue offers is a sophisticated ambiance, welcoming and polished service (not always a matched set) and food that is both stylish and diner-friendly.
Let's start with the look.
At the entry, chairs and a couch face each other over a coffee table, where bar patrons can nibble crackers and cheese before dinner.
There are three dining rooms: one with a wood-burning fireplace, one with lace curtains and one up a spiral staircase in an L-shape room with bright red sponged walls and white trim.
Small banquettes provide a sense of intimacy.


It Was a Night to Bring Back The Gilded Era of Ladies Mile
A party at ABC Carpet and Home, on Broadway near 19th Street in the heart of the famous old shopping district, Jan. 16.


Chancellor's Visit To Purchase College Tests the Future
BARELY two months into his job, Thomas A. Bartlett, the new Chancellor of the State University of New York, visited Purchase College recently and shared his thoughts on the future of public higher education in an era of uncertain prospects for political and financial support.
Dr.
Bartlett, 64, said that he faced a challenge that is exciting and compelling, but acknowledged that the huge university's days of unlimited expansion and little public scrutiny were over.


LIVES WELL LIVED
I found it ironic that you chose to run Jim Carroll's sentimental tribute to Kurt Cobain so near the one written by Michael Norman, on Lewis B. Puller Jr.
Carroll writes of the burden of Cobain's "genius," of the "guitar claws," the "teeth of Lucifer," the "buzzing-eyed insects" that he apparently thought haunted Cobain.
To be placed so near the Puller testimonial exposes Carroll's piece for what it is -- a monument to self-destructive excess.


Ignorance Is . . .
To the Editor:
Caryn James's essay on the dumbing down of American films  [ "At the Cineplex It's Dumb, Dumber, Dumbest," Jan. 8 ]  was right on target.
Is it going too far to take her thesis a step further, linking the current demonization of intelligence to the attack from the right on public radio and television as "tools of an intellectual elite"?
After all, an educated person might be able to add and subtract, thereby noting that tax breaks for the wealthy and a balanced budget amendment simply don't add up.
SUSAN JHIRAD  Medford, Mass.


POSTINGS: Porcelain Medallions for Cultural Significance; Buildings That Made New York New York
If the New York Landmarks Preservation Foundation has its way, a porcelain medallion will be placed at 81-10 35th Avenue in Jackson Heights, Queens, recording the fact that its architect was also the inventor of Scrabble.
The 1953 tan brick and limestone Educational Building was an addition to the Community United Methodist Church, where Alfred M. Butts began testing versions of the game on parishioners during the Depression.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  RESILIENCE IN JAPAN  In Kobe, Japan, after a disastrous earthquake and enormous suffering, people have gone to work organizing temporary shelter and are showing strong resilience.  1  EASING PAIN IN KOBE  In makeshift shelters around the earthquake-stricken city of Kobe, Japan, people have come together in shelters and are providing comfort for one another as well.  10


Alternatives To Laser Surgery
On the article ("A Little Laser Help, a Lot More Sleep," Jan. 1), it is unfortunate that it was not emphasized that there are no studies available to show when laser surgery will work and how long any improvements will last.


Hijacking on the Infobahn
MASTERS OF DECEPTION The Gang That Ruled Cyberspace.
By Michelle Slatalla and Joshua Quittner. 225 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $23.


Victory for Claremont: Bus Shift to Broadway
Along elegant Claremont Avenue, tempers have been flaring since May, when a revised route for the M60 bus from La Guardia Airport was rerouted.
Now, transit officials and Community Board 9 have agreed on a new path that will move the route from Claremont Avenue to Broadway.
The new route needs to be approved by the Transit Authority's directors (a routine matter).
But because of union rules for bus drivers, the change will not take place until June at the earliest, which some residents say is not soon enough.


Blessed Are the Sharp of Tongue
THE FLORENCE KING READER By Florence King. 417 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $23.95.


State Found Responsible For Shooting By an Officer
As James Wyatt and Gerard Plunkett told it, their lives changed forever one night nearly nine years ago, when a man shot and seriously wounded them after a traffic dispute.
He turned out to be an off-duty New York State correction officer.
As the officer, Kenneth Robinson, told it, his life was in danger when he fired at Mr.
Wyatt and Mr.
Plunkett, who were hurling punches and racial slurs at him.
Mr.
Wyatt and Mr.
Plunkett are white, and Mr.
Robinson is black.


Relief Station
At the Nishinomiya train station, the last functioning stop on the wrecked rail line to Kobe, friends and relatives arrive from other parts to Japan to bring relief supplies to survivors of the earthquake.
Page 10. (Associated Press)


Airport Vans
To the Editor: The Practical Traveler column on car rentals ("Airports Merge Car Rental Vans," Dec. 25), does not mention two large advantages of the common airport-operated vans.


Jan. 15-21: In Grozny's Rubble; Seizing a Chechen Symbol, Russians Claim Victory, But the War Goes On
It took six weeks, the lives of thousands of young Russian and Chechen soldiers and civilians, and the nearly complete devastation of a major city, but Russian forces managed to seize the deserted, smoldering ruins of Grozny's presidential palace on Friday.
It was a symbolic prize that meant little after the carnage that preceded it.
The war will continue, because in the end, said one Chechen commander as he retreated to new ground from which to assault his enemy, "It was just a building."
It was, of course, more than that, especially for the Kremlin.
President Boris N. Yeltsin, desperately seeking a respite from his deadly misadventure, immediately declared victory.
His aides were more honest, saying the war could drag on for years, as other Chechen-Russian conflicts have, from mountain redoubts surrounding Grozny.
Whatever its future course, the war has already badly shaken the leaders of Russia, particularly Mr.
Yeltsin.
The financial, human and political costs will be hard to assess.
By sending 40,000 soldiers to the seccessionist republic last month in what the Kremlin clearly though would be a bold, quick manuever, it has sacrificed many young lives, shown the army to be incomparably inept, set democratic allies in Russia against the leadership, strained ties with the West and dealt a punishing blow to economic reform.
MICHAEL SPECTER


Charities Squeezed as Demand Grows While Private and Government Aid Drops
As government budget cuts threaten soup kitchens, homeless shelters and day-care centers, New York City's poor are depending more than ever on private charities.
But after a spate of generosity during the holiday season, contributions to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund have dwindled to a five-year low.
If donations stop, the seven charities aided by the campaign might have to reduce or even eliminate programs for the city's poorest residents.
Facing severe cuts in government financing, these agencies will depend on private contributions to fulfill the most basic of needs.


Taxi! Taxi!
To the Editor:
In her review of Kate Grenville's "Albion's Story" (Dec. 11), Wendy Lesser suggests that the author has revisited "fictional characters" from her 1986 book, "Lilian's Story," and that there was "not much unexhausted material there."


Journal; Send In the Clowns
In December 1993, according to dozens of witnesses, Colin Ferguson killed 6 people and wounded 19 others in a shooting spree on the Long Island Rail Road.
Yet only 13 months later Mr.
Ferguson seems more like a clown than a killer.
It's a sick farce that's playing out in a Mineola courtroom -- far sicker than "Arsenic and Old Lace" -- but it's comic all the same.
Having rejected sane advice that he let professional lawyers mount an insanity defense on his behalf, Mr.
Ferguson is not only serving as his own defense counsel but trying to prove his innocence.


A Beloved Armchair Far From Its Home
SYDNEY LEWIS STILL MISSES the starkly elegant armchair by the Scottish architect Charles Rennie Mackintosh that was, for a decade, the first thing he and his wife, Frances, saw on waking in the bedroom of their Richmond home.
Mr.
Lewis describes the 1904 masterpiece as "an imposing presence," its soaring back of tapering slats inset with glowing mauve glass ovals.
The chair has been gone since 1985, when the Lewises changed the furnishings in their house, emptying most rooms, and donated their collection of decorative arts of the late 19th century and early 20th to the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts.
The couple, who are the founders of the Best Products Company in Richmond, one of the nation's largest catalogue showroom retailers, have since filled the rooms again with an impressive assortment of more modern furnishings.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tues.
Treasury statement, Dec., $ bils.
-37.5
-2.0
Wed.
Existing-home sales, Dec., mils., ann. rate
3.81
3.70
Thur.
Durable-goods orders, Dec., pct. chg.
3.4
0.2
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
323
330
Fri.
G.D.P., 4th qtr., percent change
4.0
4.5
This Week's Developments
Tues.
Clinton to give State of the Union address
*4*Two-year Treasury note auction
Wed.
Five-year note auction
*4*Greenspan to testify to Senate Finance Committee


Here Come the Many-Hued Camellias
THE camellias are in bloom.
Indoors, of course.
Every year about this time, these glorious plants burst their buds and the display will continue for many weeks in glorious shades.
One is pink, then there is a red one with ruffled petals and a reluctant, show-off white.
Never mind the frozen scene outside; here is beauty.


Wall Street; Psst! Wanna Buy an Airport?
IT HAS become politically fashionable to talk about selling off public assets to raise revenues and avoid tax increases.
In the New York region, this privatization campaign has been aimed at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which operates three airports, the World Trade Center, two Hudson River tunnels, the George Washington Bridge, Manhattan's famed bus terminal, and a regional port facility.
There is no law that says political rhetoric must be grounded in financial reality. (If there were, the current season could be considered a crime wave.) But absent from the rhetoric so far is one small fact: The Port Authority owes more than $5.2 billion to public bondholders, whose money built and maintains those assets and who have a substantial stake in what happens to them.


Keeping News Close to Home
Bronx residents searching for news about their borough have a place to turn.
Bronxnet, the borough's new cable television station, is one of a growing number of stations that concentrate exclusively on New York City news, including New York 1 and Crosswalks, the municipal channel.
Bronxnet recently expanded its locally produced news program to a half-hour a day.
The program, "BXNY," is repeated several times daily.
Its executive director, James Carney, said it tries to focus its reporting more locally than New York 1.
A companion show, "Bronxtalk," features interviews with prominent people in the borough.
Mr.
Carney said he plans to expand "BXNY" to two hours a day and to develop more shows pertaining to the borough.


Sampras Survives to Play One More Day
Displaying grace and gumption under pressure, Pete Sampras, the Australian Open's defending champion, recovered from a disastrous start against Sweden's Magnus Larsson and moved into this slam's quarterfinal round today, courtesy a dramatic 4-6, 6-7 (4-7), 7-5, 6-4, 6-4 comeback.
The rally by the initially listless, but increasingly, incited Sampras marked just the second time in his storied Grand Slam career that the world's No. 1 player summoned sufficient resilience to recover from a two-sets-to-none deficit.
Sampras, who played again today without the courtside support of his hospitalized coach, Tim Gullikson, last accomplished a comeback of this magnitude at the 1991 French Open, where his victim was Thomas Muster.


UConn Disciplines Coach for Remarks
The Connecticut women's basketball coach, GENO AURIEMMA, and the university are keeping mum about disciplinary measures he drew for remarks after Wednesday's game at Boston College.
On Friday, after the university sanctions were handed down, Auriemma said he's ready to put the incident behind him.
"What I want to do is go on and just coach my team on Sunday and continue to coach them the rest of the season," he said.


In the Region/Connecticut; New London Building on Its Maritime Reputation
ALMOST $150 million worth of construction is planned in southern New London County in an effort that those involved say could establish the region as the national center for marine science and maritime history.
A cornerstone will be the $18.5 million OceanQuest science center on a 24-acre waterfront parcel in New London.
Students at the center, which will be modeled after Space Camp in Huntsville, Ala., will enroll in week-long courses that will include time in submarine simulators and remote-operated submersible vehicles.


POSTINGS: DeWolfe Companies Buys Westledge Realty; Broker Acquired In Connecticut
The DeWolfe Companies, a Boston-based group known for its aggressive acquisition of New England real estate companies, is moving into Connecticut with its purchase of the Avon-based Westledge Realty chain.
The company's chairman says he plans to acquire other offices within the state, including in Fairfield County.
Richard B. DeWolfe, chairman and chief executive of DeWolfe, says his Dec. 27 purchase of the Westledge chain, with 235 agents in 12 offices scattered throughout the Hartford area down to the shoreline east of New Haven, marks the "gateway" to other mergers in Connecticut.
"It'd be foolish of me to say we're in negotiations or not in negotiations," Mr.
DeWolfe said, "but we're planning on going toe-to-toe for the Fairfield market and we're talking with some companies there about mergers."
Within the last five years, Connecticut has seen several mergers, echoing a national trend toward consolidation.
Prudential came to Connecticut in 1989, when the company bought Merrill Lynch Real Estate.
Coldwell Banker bought Schlott in 1991, and last summer William Raveis bought Duus Realty in Washington, Conn.
The DeWolfe Companies bought the Westledge chain from Northeast Savings Bank, which had taken it over in 1991.
Mr.
DeWolfe said that at the bank's request, he would not disclose the price.
With the Westledge acquisition the company now has 58 offices and 1,500 employees.


Abortion Rights Are Called Threatened by Violence
With the 22d anniversary of the Supreme Court's Roe v.
Wade decision falling three weeks after two people were shot to death at suburban abortion clinics, advocates of abortion rights were preparing to mark the occasion with warnings that increased violence is threatening women's access to abortion.
At the same time they said they were worried that the new Republican Congress, with more abortion opponents, might try to reverse gains made in the courts over the last two decades.


Old Ways, New Ways: Bangladeshis Clash Over Cultures
At 18, Omar Faroque, a Bangladeshi immigrant raised in the United States, prefers tapes of Ice Cube and Tupac Shakur to Islamic teachings; hip-hop haircuts with shaved sides, high tops and baggy jeans to tupi, skullcap and punjabi, the traditional garb of Muslim men.
He admits he loathes the conservative Muslims who he says resent him and his friends for trying to feel more a part of America.


Ideas &amp; Trends: Shedding Olympic Sports; Less Is More, More or Less
IF cutting the Federal budget looks difficult, just take a glance at the latest attempts to trim down the Summer Olympics.
In the early 1990's the International Olympic Committee adopted a new buzzword -- "downsizing." The Summer Olympics had become big and bloated -- too many sports, too many athletes.


Mostly Maestro


Ex-Foe Helps St. Bart's With Its Landmark
Through the 1980's they fought bitterly over the fate of the landmark St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church complex on Park Avenue.
Now they are working together to repair and preserve the very same buildings.
Putting aside past differences, the church is cooperating with the New York Landmarks Conservancy, a nonprofit organization.
In the 1980's the conservancy joined the coalition that opposed the church's plan to demolish its Community House and build a 59-story office tower to finance church programs.


In Trade Woes, An Echo of Reagan Era
ONE of the biggest economic surprises in 1994 was the trade deficit.
It was supposed to narrow last year.
Europe was recovering from its recession, and American industry was lean and mean after waves of cutbacks.
But it didn't happen.
Trade deficits are back to the horrible levels of the 1980's, when an overvalued dollar devastated American industry.
To be sure, exports did rise to record levels, but imports went up even more.
The trade deficit for 1994, including services as well as goods, will be more than $100 billion, more than twice the 1992 level.


Casual, With an Extremely Long Menu
IS this really the North Fork?
If restaurants were movies Cafe Mediterranean would be Manhattan comes to Mattituck.
This adventuresome newcomer looks ordinary.
Nestled in the Mattituck Shopping Plaza, it resembles a casual storefront cafe.
The neon window sign proclaiming fresh pasta reinforces that image.
Inside, most diners will be surprised to find an antique carved-wood bar, white tablecloths and fresh flowers.
Walk to the rear of the restaurant, take a sharp right turn, and there is a large carpeted dining room graced with an antique sideboard and original art.


Now Hear This
A comedy routine a couple of decades ago featured the nightmare version of the unintelligible pilot's announcement on an airplane.
"Yersgglip frzzmalin everywhmso bruup glip OR YOU WILL DIE." New York subway riders identified with that.
They still do.
Garbled announcements about stalled trains or fires in the tunnel can lead to cold dinners, bungled job interviews, broken romances and resolutions to move to Phoenix.
New Yorkers have a right to ask why, in an age of cellular wizardry, the subway speakers sound like something picked up at a war surplus sale.
The answers are nearly as bewildering as the garbled bulletins themselves.
They include ancient wiring, water damage to speakers, weird acoustics in the stations and mumbling by the subway staff.


No Headline
"We're in pain, of course, but to cheer ourselves up we get together and laugh from the bottom of our hearts. At any moment, we're scared. But at least this way, if there's another earthquake and I'm killed, I won't die alone." KUNIMASA NAKATA, sitting around a campfire in Kobe, Japan.  [ 8:1 ]


Peace: Unimaginable or Unstoppable?
BEYOND THE PROMISED LAND Jews and Arabs on the Hard Road to a New Israel.
By Glenn Frankel. 416 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.


As Chechens Take to Hills, Clans Gird for a Long Fight
The craggy mountains and jagged peaks of Chechnya, deep in the Caucasus, are famous only for war.
This ramshackle village of 6,000, for example, was once the mountain fortress of the revered 19th-century Chechen warrior Imam Shamil.
Until his capture in 1859 led them to surrender, fierce local clansmen hid in ravines near here and ambushed Russian cavalry and cannons with daggers and stones.


The Nation: O. J. Simpson and Susan Smith; Two Crimes, Two Punishments
ON different sides of the country, in different worlds of power and influence, Susan V. Smith and O. J. Simpson are accused of murder by unspeakable means.
The difference is in the price the criminal-justice system will exact if they are convicted, in a nation where the application of the death penalty is inconsistent.
In Union, S.C., prosecutors say Mrs.
Smith, 23, a woman once unknown outside the little mill town where she was born, drowned her two young sons in a dark lake and lied to the outside world for nine days in October, claiming a young black man stole her babies as she stood screaming at the side of the road.
She made about $17,000 a year, worked as a secretary in a textile mill and drove a Mazda.
Prosecutors want her to die in the electric chair.


Bonner's Star Isn't Always Under a Bushel
The Knicks had just captured their 11th victory in the last 12 games, beating the Dallas Mavericks, 106-93.
Reporters were gathered around Pat Riley, Patrick Ewing, John Starks and Derek Harper.
Meanwhile, Anthony Bonner dressed quietly in front of his locker Friday night, drawing little attention, but not the least bit bothered.
Bonner is often overlooked, but among his teammates and coaches his work is appreciated.
It is no coincidence that the Knicks are 9-1 since Bonner returned to action after the death of his father last month.
It is no coincidence that the Knicks won 15 consecutive games last season when Bonner was the starting small forward.


15 Minutes


Public Enemy No. 1: The Modern-Day Player
Like many baseball people, I woke up Christmas morning to find "the" gift, the entire Ken Burns collection, all 900,000 hours of footage, plus the handsomely packaged coffee-table companion book.
Those of us who love baseball owe a great debt of gratitude to Burns and his associates.
For while the sport experiences severe labor pains, his loving and evocative journey through the kinder and gentler history of our national pastime has pretty much been the only substantial nourishment for those of us who are starved for the game.


Anne E. Jureller, Carl Alexander
Anne Elizabeth Jureller, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul Jureller of Williamsville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Carl Alexander, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jules Alexander of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Patrick Powers, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the nondenominational ceremony in the Knowles Memorial Chapel at Rollins College in Winter Park, Fla.
Mrs.
Alexander, 28, graduated from Rollins, where she is the career placement coordinator for the graduate studies department.
The bride's father is an oral surgeon in private practice in Buffalo.
He is also an assistant professor of oral and maxillofacial surgery in the School of Dental Medicine at the State University at Buffalo.
Her mother, Rosalind Jureller, is a kindergarten teacher at the Heim Elementary School in Williamsville.


Virtual Downtown
DOWNTOWN, it has been said, is a state of mind, an attitude and a style that are not specific to one club or restaurant, but something free-floating that is found wherever people with a certain youthful insouciance and cultural fluency gather.
Now, downtown has been definitively cut free of its geographic moorings.
Cyberspace is blooming with on-line hangouts in which people, wearing virtual black, log on to discuss topics ranging from the grim novels of William Vollman to sexuality, all with a sensibility that is lower Manhattan.


Sound Bytes; Dedicated to the 'Smart' Life
HE was already a Silicon Valley legend back when there were more prune yards than silicon plants in the valley.
In 1969, M. Kenneth Oshman and three associates founded a telephone switch maker, the ROLM Corporation -- his surname stands for the "O" in ROLM -- which he ran until it was sold to I.B.M. in 1984.
Today, he is chairman and chief executive of the Echelon Corporation, a privately held maker of control network technology used to automate industrial tasks and add computer intelligence to various sorts of machines and appliances.


Deer Problem Defies Easy Solutions
AN increasing number of white-tailed deer is causing wildlife and local officials to grapple with the controversial issue to kill or not to kill.
The standard deer control in New York is sport hunting.
But on Long Island many deer are in preserves surrounded by residential areas like North Haven in the Hamptons or Islip on Suffolk's South Shore or in public recreational areas.


LIVES WELL LIVED
From Bill Russell to Michael Jordan, the one continuous fixture in the N.B.A. was Earl Strom.
Although he never scored a point or set any records, he was there.
He dignified the game with his honesty and intensity.
A life well lived.
JAY S. GOODGOLD Chicago


Echoes of Piaf
To the Editor: Frederick Turner's "The Echoes of Piaf in Paris" (Dec. 11) took me back 21 years to my first pilgrimage to the Pere Lachaise Cemetery and Piaf's grave.
In addition to the fresh flowers and the memorial pictures, what surprised me most was the gold inscription on the side of the black marble: Madame LAMBOUKAS  dite EDITH PIAF  1915-1963 Inscribed right beside are the words:


Gardening Is So Much More Than, Well, Plants
PENELOPE HOBHOUSE arrived in New York City on Friday in a cold drizzle that felt like England.
She'd been lecturing on garden design in Milwaukee (where everyone is using native plants!) and was on her way to the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx, but made a little stopover in the Palm Court at the Plaza Hotel.
"I'll have the scrambled eggs with bacon," she said to the waiter.
"That sounds good, doesn't it? The bacon in this country is so much better. Really crisp."


Adam B. Dancy, Lisa A. Benjamin
Lisa Ann Benjamin, a daughter of Joy and Samuel Benjamin of East Hills, L.I., is to be married today to Adam Benjamin Dancy, the son of Nicholas Dancy of Brookville, L.I., and the late Miriam Dancy.
Rabbi Lee Friedlander is to perform the ceremony at the English Speaking Union in New York.
The bride, 40, will be known as Lisa Benjamin-Dancy.
She graduated from Syracuse University and received her master's degree in social work from Hunter College.
She is a social worker in the employee assistance program at American Express in New York.
Her father is a manufacturer's representative for children's wear in Boston.
Her mother is a sales associate at Sterling Properties, a real estate agency in Roslyn, L.I.


Orphan Cans Are Piling Up in Limbo
"This is the valley of cans," says Guy Polhemus as he wends a path through mounds of empty aluminum soda and beer cans that have piled up for years in a dimly lighted warehouse on West 52d Street near 11th Avenue.
The cans -- 400,000 at last count -- represent about $20,000 in nickels paid out to the homeless and other poor people who brought them to We Can, the nonprofit redemption center Mr.
Polhemus founded in 1987.
They also represent money that We Can has been unable to reclaim from some beverage distributors who balk at taking back their empties.


At a Station Near Kobe, Trains Run, So Do Tears
Every 10 minutes, like clockwork, another drama filled with anguish and pathos and the sweetness of a lovers' reunion is played out in this shattered Japanese city, because every 10 minutes another train pulls into the station.
Until last week Nishinomiya was just one stop among many on the route of dozens of trains that connected the western port city of Kobe to most of the rest of Japan.
But after Kobe and its rail lines were ravaged in a huge earthquake that left more than 4,900 people dead, Nishinomiya became the last stop on the line.


To Jump, Perhaps to Soar, Over the Bar
As a deejay, Bill Alan McClain has worked his share of weddings, anniversaries and picnics.
Pole-vault summits are different.
The music is less important than the volume.
"They like it loud," McClain said Friday night as he set up a pair of speakers at the Reno Livestock Events Center.
"No Tony Bennett on this circuit."


Couple Gets Jump at Meet
The first American meet of the 1995 Mobil indoor track and field Grand Prix produced plenty of excellent performances as 1992 Olympic finalists and 1996 Olympic hopefuls opened their seasons today at the Commonwealth Invitational.
Susan Tiedtke Greene of Germany, eighth at Barcelona in the women's long jump, won the event here with a leap of 21 feet 10 inches.
Her husband, Joe Greene, third in the 1992 men's Olympic long jump, jumped 27 1/4 to beat the 26-6 1/2 of fellow American Roland McGhee.


The Nation; Timber! A New Idea Is Crashing.
FOR a nation sharply divided about how to save rare species like the spotted owl, the California gnatcatcher and the Florida panther, the idea of ecosystem management seemed just the thing.
Rather than letting the life or death of a single species determine the fate of proposed dams and timber projects, this new philosophy of land management was designed to protect broad natural habitats, including the species within them, while still leaving room for humans to exploit the land.
Ecosystems, unlike species on the brink of extinction, are elastic enough to take some abuse by humans; they can be preserved without getting in the way of progress.
So, in this era of public ambivalence about nature's neediest cases, the idea of ecosystem management seemed to have a bright political future.
It offered something for everyone -- liberals and conservatives, conservationists and industrialists.
Over the last two years, the Clinton Administration has embraced the concept of ecosystem management.
In 1993 the Interior Department set up the National Biological Survey, a group of 1,700 scientists and natural resource specialists, charged with the task of making this concept work.
The survey had scarcely begun when the Republicans came to town.
The problem then became how to sell the Republicans on an environmental novelty that nobody could easily explain.
Now that problem looks more intractable than ever.
An ecosystem is an area -- usually a distinct landscape like Appalachia or a watershed like the Chesapeake Bay -- in which plant and animal communities live in complex relationships with one other and with the region's soil, water, air and climate.
The trouble is, ecosystems, like cuisines, are inherently hard to define.
"To some degree, an ecosystem is in the eye of the beholder," Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt once testified in Congress.
Ecosystem management is even harder to define.
It's a slippery concept, calling for extraordinary cooperation among various uncoordinated bureaucracies and competing interest groups.
A Congressional Research Service report on ecosystem management stated drily that "there is not enough agreement on the meaning of the concept to hinder its popularity."
Apparently, though, there is enough agreement to kill the concept altogether.
When the Republicans swept in, they quickly began devising a budgetary death for ecosystem management.
This month, at the first budget hearing called by the new Republican majority on the House Appropriations Committee's subcommittee dealing with natural resource issues, star witnesses from conservative think tanks (including the conservative Heritage Foundation, the libertarian Cato Institute and the pro-business Citizens for a Sound Economy) advised the House to abolish the National Biological Survey, whose very existence was never explicitly authorized by Congress.
Already the biological survey is under assault.
The House Republicans' "contract" of high priority legislation envisions practically eliminating the scientific budget of the Interior Department -- a cutback that the new Republican chairman of the House Budget Committee, John R. Kasich of Ohio, wholeheartedly favors.
But even while the National Biological Survey is threatened, the Clinton Administration's senior environmental officials are trying to save it.
Their first small step in its defense was to rename the scientific agency the National Biological Service, which they hope will sound more appealing.
Ultimately, they want to persuade lawmakers that ecosystem management is not a radical concept but an idea that all ideologies can embrace.
"This approach, whether you call it ecosystem management or not, is the most significant contribution that this Administration has made to environmental policy," said George Frampton, the assistant secretary of Interior.
"Trying to involve as many stakeholders as possible in our decisions, trying to meld good science with practical solutions, those are all things that the Republican center of power in Congress ought to support, even more than liberal Democrats."
Three recent examples show what ecosystem management has accomplished under the Clinton Administration:
*A Federal judge in Seattle has approved the Administration's plan for the old-growth forests of the Pacific Northwest.
The plan allows for logging to resume at a low enough level that it does not disturb the endangered spotted owl's habitat or the streams that shelter salmon and hundreds of other species.
*The State of California has reached an agreement with Federal water and wildlife agencies for managing the San Francisco Bay and its neighboring tributaries and deltas.
According to that agreement, water would be allocated to agricultural and urban users in such a way that the spawning grounds of local fish would be protected.
*In southern Florida, the Corps of Engineers has begun planning for the rehabilitation of the Everglades, an unfathomably complex ecosystem that in the past 50 years humans have altered almost beyond recognition.
Still, the prospect for ecosystem management looks grim.
Ecosystem management works best when artificial boundaries like state lines or property fences or bureaucratic turf do not matter.
But in a world where boundaries do matter, the idea of ecosystem management, like the Endangered Species Act itself, collides again and again with the interests of private property owners -- and that is exactly what has bothered the conservatives about environmentalism all along.


LIVES WELL LIVED
Your mean-spirited homily on Nixon was out of place in your presentation of "lives worth celebration." If you couldn't say something decent, you shouldn't have said anything.
AGNES W. GNAEDINGER Highland Park, Ill.


Q. &amp; A.
When a Burglar Breaks In Q I recently moved into a studio apartment with an outside terrace.
Two weeks after I moved in, burglars broke in and took everything.
I had not yet purchased renter's insurance for my new address.


Mayhem in Munich
THE FEAST OF FOOLS By John David Morley. 443 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press. $23.95.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
In Beer vs. Bologna, Bologna's the Champ
In the battle of Boar's Head bologna versus Boar's Head beer, the bologna has triumphed.


Wall Street; A $3.7 Billion Profit Still Can't Buy a Good Week
CHRYSLER's shares ended the week on a sour note, even though the auto maker reported a record $3.7 billion profit for 1994 early in the week.
"The spectacular earnings were expected," said Jack V. Kirnan, an analyst at Salomon Brothers.
But after Chrysler fell 10.9 percent in the week, he noted that investors were more concerned about whether higher interest rates would hurt car sales and signs that demand for mini-vans may have peaked.


Dining in Paris
To the Editor: I recently returned from a trip to Paris and wanted to let you know that I followed up on an Oct. 30 Travel Advisory item about a one-day bicycle tour of Paris offered by Three Ducks Youth Hostel.
The seven hours spent on a bike made for the best event of my vacation.
Our group of four was guided by a very knowledgeable, friendly Canadian named Sy.
We didn't miss one point of interest.
In fact, getting to and from each site by anything other than a bike would have probably tripled the time required to see everything.
We broke for lunch at a neighborhood restaurant, which allowed us to get to know each other.


Jan. 15-21: Born to Die?; A Surrogate Contract Ends In Father Killing Son
Child abuse is always horrifying.
But the death Tuesday of a five-week old baby -- beaten into a coma by his father, a single man who had paid $30,000 for an Indiana waitress to be inseminated with his sperm -- was especially bitter, prompting many people to inveigh against a system that allowed a man to contract for someone to bear his child, only to kill it.
The baby, Jonathan Alan, was born Dec. 8 to Phyllis Ann Huddleston, who handed him over to his father, James Alan Austin, the following day, under a deal arranged by the Infertility Center of America in Indianapolis.
Mr.
Austin, 26, was charged with homicide Wednesday in Northampton County Court in Pennsylvania.
Most surrogacy centers work only with married couples.
But while the women applying to act as surrogate mothers are usually investigated, few centers screen the couple or individual that will raise the baby.
"With adoptions, we require home studies, but with surrogates, there's usually the biological connection to the father, so we don't." said Lori Andrews, a Chicago law professor.
"Surrogacy outcomes are usually happy. But some people say we should license all parents, who do a lot more damage than drivers or beauticians or others we license." TAMAR LEWIN


For Dialysis Patients
Travelers who require hemodialysis can add the Caribbean island of Aruba to the list of places they can safely visit.
Earlier this month, Aruba's first private dialysis clinic geared to visitors opened in a villa overlooking the ocean.
Equipped with Fresenius 2008H machines, the clinic's eight units each offers TV, VCR and telephone.
Coffee, juices and snacks are available, and companions can keep patients company during treatment.
Reservations are required three months in advance, along with data on frequency and type of dialysis.
Treatments cost $315, in addition to a $60 doctor's fee.
Information: 2978-20840.


Facing a Bad End


Sports of The Times; '1940' Is A Cheerful Omen Now
ALMOST as if it were an apparition, the Stanley Cup, glistening through puffs of smoke turned blue and green by laser lights, had descended slowly from the scoreboard above the ice.
The banner had been raised, then Mark Messier and several other Rangers had skated around holding the cup aloft for the roaring fans.
But now, as Friday night's celebration and ceremony ended, Messier, holding the cup as tenderly as if it were an infant, carefully placed it on the small table at center ice and then two Hockey Hall of Fame caretakers, wearing white gloves, carried it through the gate in the boards across from the Ranger bench.


The Return of the Subway Token Dance
A decade ago, George Fasel, a Bankers Trust vice president, discovered a quirky truism about New York City's subway fare: the cost of a ride roughly parallels the price of a slice of pizza.
In the Brooklyn neighborhood that is home to Jay Walder, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's executive director, pizza now sells for $1.50 a slice.
Whether that means the fare is about to rise is arguable, although virtually everyone involved agrees that the current $1.25 will not last much longer because of growing costs and shrinking city, state and Federal subsidies.


Keeping Watch
What to buy: video games or multimedia PC?
Where is the future of the infobahn: home shopping channel or America Online?
In the battle for the hearts and bucks of the American family, the TV and the PC are locked in a battle that has now spilled over into the world of wristwatches.
Casio has come out with a watch (near right) called the Wrist Remote that functions as a control for the TV and VCR, so you don't have to worry about finding that silly "Star Trek" phaser-thing in the couch cushions when it's time to rewind the tornado video.


Building Equality, Brick by Brick
Urban League party at the Plaza, Jan. 15.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
GUITARS AND PAPER
Two events, one music, the other art, are scheduled at Westchester Community College in Valhalla next weekend.
On Friday at 8 P.M. the Vic Juris Trio will kick off the college's Guitar Great Series of three concerts with an evening of unique jazz.
Mr.
Juris has infused his arrangements with blues, swing, and bebop, drawing on his background, which included working with Dizzy Gillespie, Phil Woods, Mel Torme, Sarah Vaughan, Nancy Wilson and others.
Influences picked up while performing in Japan, Germany and other parts of the world are also evident in his style.
The remaining two internationally known guitarists will be Manuel Barrueco on March 10 and Sharon Isbin on May 6.


LIVES WELL LIVED
Despite Jim Carroll's attempt to romanticize his troubled existence, Kurt Cobain was, ultimately, nothing more than a drug addict who ended his own life in a selfish and cowardly manner.
Musical accomplishments notwithstanding, Cobain's life was not one well lived.
JOHN A. BUTCHKO Trumbull, Conn.


Role Reversal
To the Editor:
Matt Zoller Seitz's essay "The Show Must Go On, but You Can Be Replaced"  [ Jan. 1 ]  is based on the premise that sitcoms do away with a character "only when the actor playing the role dies, moves into a spinoff series or drug-rehab program, or leaves the show to take a stab at movies." But in the case of the role of Jerry in "The Larry Sanders Show," "the Darwinian ruthlessness of the modern workplace . . . virtually demanded such an outcome."


Buddhists Boycott Pope's Talks
Buddhist leaders, offended by Pope John Paul II's criticism of their beliefs, boycotted a meeting with the Pope today, offering a setback for both papal diplomacy and dialogue between faiths.
The 74-year-old Pope arrived here Friday on the last stage of a grueling, 20,800-mile voyage through Asia and the Pacific, the 63d of his papacy.
He was to meet Buddhist leaders today, along with six Hindu and six Muslim figures, for an interreligious dialogue before flying back to Rome.


A Grade School Gets a Real Science Lab
A NOT so small miracle took place at a small Catholic elementary school in Hawthorne when the new Life and Physical Science Laboratory was officially opened in June.
Behind the opening is the story of how Turner Corporation, one of the largest construction companies in the country, helped a small elementary school realize its dream of providing a science laboratory for students who were previously being taught science from a rolling cart.


LIVES WELL LIVED
Thank you for including Kurt Cobain in "Lives Well Lived." But I was troubled that you felt compelled to preface Cobain's belonging as one of the "choices that need explanation." A shame, since it was an otherwise appropriate and stirring remembrance by a soul survivor, Jim Carroll.
RENE A. CATINDIG New York


Russian Tourist Office Set Up in New York
Citing an increased interest among Americans in travel to Russia, the Russian Government has recently established a national tourist office in New York, its first in the United States.
The once centralized tourist administration of the Soviet Union, which included Intourist, the agency that handled most aspects of international tourism, has dispersed into about 7,500 tour operators since the dissolution of the Soviet Union.


For Black Prosecutor, There Is No Allure in the Simpson Case
When Christopher Darden looks at the defense table these days, he sees more than a defendant.
He sees his high school hero, the man whose number he had hoped to wear on his football jersey but never could because, among black children in O. J. Simpson's home turf of Northern California, the competition for "32" was so stiff.
"It's weird to look over at the table and see the hostility," Mr.
Darden said.
"I don't blame him for being unfriendly. I suppose I would be, too, if I were in his position. But there's nothing personal about this. I feel that no matter what happens, I'm going to walk out of here knowing, one, I was fair; two, I was good, and three, that whatever the decision is, it won't be mine."


WHITMAN OUTLINES A SKETCHY BUDGET
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman today outlined a proposed state budget that promises a third income tax cut -- just how much the Governor will reveal Monday in her formal budget address -- and includes $160 million in new revenue from a flurry of taxes and fees that would reach all the way down to the pennies people save with supermarket coupons.
The proposed $15.9 billion budget to run New Jersey for 12 months starting in July contains some good news for urban schools and state colleges, which would get small increases in aid, but not enough to cover the rate of inflation.
There is less good news for municipalities, which will get no increases in state help.
And the news is clearly bad for the state's 65,000 employees; about 3,000 of them will be cut from the payroll over 18 months through layoffs, privatization and attrition.


Jan. 15-21: Not-so-Strange Bedfellows; Christian Right Embraces Republican 'Contract'
There have long been signs that the Christian Coalition would cast its lot with the Republican Party.
One such sign emerged when the group opposed President Clinton's budget plan, another when the coalition attacked his health care proposal.
But last week there was no doubt.
Ralph Reed, executive director of the coalition, the country's largest group of religious conservatives, publicly embraced House Speaker Newt Gingrich's political manifesto, the "Contract With America."
Mr.
Reed and members of the colation's state chapters met with Mr.
Gingrich at the Capitol.
T coalition launched what Mr.
Reed said was a campaign putting more than $1 million into backing the contract.
The first goal: the balanced budget amendment.
The alliance with Republicans is not surprising given that Republicans in Congress are much more powerful these days and ideologically closer to the coalition.
And by campaigning for issues beyond its traditional purview of school prayer and abortion, the coalition is seeking to win respect as an organization that is broad in scope.
But the Interfaith Alliance, an ecumenical group that bills itself as nonpartisan but has received donations from the Democratic Party, criticized Mr.
Reed as "promoting a very partisan political agenda while hiding behind a religious claim." RICHARD L. BERKE


The World; Homo Artisticus
TO be alive and fully human must have been a zesty experience in Ice Age Europe some 20,000 years ago.
The Neanderthals, whoever exactly they were, had passed from the scene, replaced by Homo sapiens sapiens, the doubly wise human.
These modern humans, resourceful hunters in a chilled world, seemed to celebrate their emergence with a drum roll of better tools and body decorations and, most wondrous of all, with trumpets of art.
For more than a century, amateur explorers and archeologists have slowly revealed the visions these creative people painted on the walls of caves, mainly in Spain and France.
But the colorful bison and horses of Lascaux and Altamira, the Louvre and Prado of Stone Age art, now have the company of an even more varied and sensational parade of prehistoric animal images.


U.N. Commander Set to Leave Bosnia, After a Year of Triumph and Disaster
The commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia departs from Sarajevo on Monday, leaving behind an isolated city that is shivering cold but safer than when he arrived, and a Bosnian Government that despises him.
Mercurial, sharp-tongued and relentlessly assertive, the commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose of Britain, is not a man to leave people indifferent.
His one-year assignment here has been a roller coaster, lurching between triumph and disaster.


The Skyline That Dreams Are Made Of


Balancing the Budget Isn't Like Your Checkbook; Not Veto-Proof
To the Editor:
In your report on imminent passage of a balanced budget amendment, you assert, as an aside, that the proposed amendment is exempt from a Presidential veto (news article, Jan. 17).
That hackneyed truism might not be true.


Investors Must Be Patient With Mexico
To the Editor:
"Peso's Woes: A Very Familiar Diminuendo" (Market Watch, Dec. 25) points out that the peso's devaluation should not have come as a shock to experienced international investors, and indeed, Mexico is an emerging market in which large corrections are more commonplace.
For many thousands of less experienced investors, however, the impact was more unsettling.


Balancing the Budget Isn't Like Your Checkbook; Minimum Wage
To the Editor:
The implication that nearly all recent research shows little job loss from a minimum wage increase (Business Day, Jan. 12) is incorrect.
The tide of evidence runs against an increase.
In the most recent study of all retail sectors (not just the narrow fast-food sector you report), Lowell Taylor of Carnegie Mellon University measured significant job loss in California after that state raised its minimum wage in 1988.


A Debate Over Punitive Damages
To the Editor:
In "Stop the Misuse of Punitive Awards" (Viewpoints, Dec. 25), Richard A. Booth decries the $5 billion punitive award that an Alaska jury assessed against Exxon for its 1989 oil spill in Prince William Sound.
Exxon clearly deserves this verdict for its arrogant and irresponsible corporate behavior.


The Nation; Informers: A Tale in Itself
EVEN Louis Farrakhan didn't believe it.
When the authorities charged a daughter of Malcolm X with trying to hire an F.B.I. informant to kill him, the putative target dismissed it as just another Government plot to discredit black people.
His skepticism was widely shared, particularly among blacks.
True, as a child Qubilah Shabazz, the accused woman, saw her father shot down, and many of his supporters have blamed Minister Farrakhan.
But the skepticism is rooted in the history of the F.B.I. and its use of informers in black and radical groups.


Funeral for a Slain Doctor


Straight Shooters
Trying to understand, Texas style.
From letters to the editors of The Dallas Morning News and The Fort Worth Star-Telegram.
"Let's see if we have this straight." -- On abortion, The Morning News, June 6, 1994.


Black Stereotypes: Reflections of Ozzie and Harriet
THE LITTLE BOOKLET THAT accompanies the Whitney Museum's current exhibition, "Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art," comes down hard on popular culture, which these days means mainly television, for its stereotypes of black men.
Although the museum apologia is not a reading treat, with its mix of socio-pop and gallery-pap, an alliance of the obvious and the dubious, one point is indisputable: the mass media thrive on stereotypes; no minority has been spared, black men least of all.
What the writer of the booklet, which reminds us of the once common depiction of blacks "as slaves, brutes or minstrel performers," fails to note is that for a generation or more, television stereotypes have been of a conspicuously different nature.
For many a season, high-rated series have featured likable black families, with a father present and other members going to school or to work.


PEOPLE V. SIMPSON
The Lawyers
Marcia Clark, the leader of the team prosecuting O. J. Simpson, is a figure millions recognize and feel they have come to know since she became involved in the case.
Last of three profiles.
Page 16.


Livery Cab Driver Is Killed in Brooklyn
A livery cab driver was shot to death in Brooklyn yesterday in what appears to have been a robbery, the police said.
The driver, Shiva Ranjitsingh, 22, was found slumped behind the driver's seat of his gray 1989 Dodge at 7:50 A.M. in front of 2857 West 23d Street in Coney Island.


Hans P. Nordheimer, Trade Executive, 88
Hans P. Nordheimer, a retired international trade executive, died on Thursday at the Redwood Terrace convalescent center in Escondido, Calif.
Mr.
Nordheimer, who was 88, lived in San Diego County.
He was a longtime vice president of H. A. Astlett &amp; Company of New York and later was president of Fastnet Inc., a former American subsidiary of the leading gold producer Consolidated Goldfields Ltd. of London.


SUNDAY, JANUARY 22, 1995
Rejoice, photo editors everywhere: Another unessential animal picture has strayed into print.
These are the facts: A man named Dwane Folsom rescues a 9-month-old black mongrel, half golden retriever and half Lab, from a pound in Boynton Beach, Fla.
He names the dog Shadow.
Folsom, an accomplished scuba diver who often explores the waters off Grand Cayman Island, likes to share his adventures with his pets.
So he experiments with diving outfits suitable for a dog.
His final design consists of a lead-weighted jacket and a helmet that allows Shadow to use air from Folsom's tank.
Thus fitted, Shadow and master dive happily ever after (usually at about 13 feet).
Next: A picture of a trotting stingray.


The Day a Dream From Springs Crashed
IN the annals of ballooning the ill-fated flight of the Free Life from a pasture in Springs in 1970 may be little more than a footnote.
In East End lore it is remembered as an extraordinary event, a defining moment among those who shared it and a source of remorse for those who might easily have been there but missed it.
As the anniversary of the launching, on Sept. 20, approaches, a new book that reconstructs the story of the Free Life may refocus attention on the failed attempt by three young people to be the first to cross the Atlantic in a balloon.
The book, "The Free Life: The Spirit of Courage, Folly and Obsession," written by Anthony Smith, a British scientist, writer, adventurer and balloonist, is just out from the Pushcart Press in Wainscott.
The press gave the book its Editors' Book Award for unrecognized works.


One Final College Showcase for McNair
Several players in today's Senior Bowl said they were told this: The Hula Bowl is for vacation, the Senior Bowl is for hard work and for improving your position in the National Football League draft.
You work during the week of practice.
You work during the game.
You are always on display.


Distilling That Perfect Islander Image; If It's Not a Lighthouse, a Lexus or a Bloomie's Bag, What Is It?
Last spring, a group of hockey team executives, image makers and design consultants gathered in an office next to the rink in the Nassau Coliseum to ponder one of the sport's seemingly unanswerable questions:
What, exactly, is an Islander?


Journalism 101
THOSE UNUSUAL NOISES IN medialand are the cries of serious journalists flagellating serious journalists about their loss of "objectivity" and "values." Adam Gopnik in The New Yorker pines for the good old days when reporters were, he thinks, rewarded for their access to power instead of aggressions against it and when they abetted governance by hiding the warts of the mighty instead of wallowing in their deceptions and blemishes.
Harvard's Nieman Reports features alarms that serious news organizations are embracing "the values of entertainment -- urgency, brevity, celebrity, action and conflict" and "if needed for extra spice," making the news "opinionated."
With so many vulgarians dancing on public stages in the garb of journalism, you'd think that editors and reporters in the truth-seeking minority would hang together and defend themselves and their honest strivings.
But they've been shaken, I think, by the loss of distinctions, particularly in television, where the vulgar and the sublime appear in quick rotation inside the same picture frame.
One moment, Tom Brokaw is dutifully presenting the legislative ambitions of Bob Dole and Newt Gingrich.
Next moment, John McLaughlin is shouting about the politicians' sincerity on a scale of 1 to 10 and Jay Leno is inserting their names in his sex jokes.


High Price of a 'Victory'
The way the Government treated it, the raising of the Russian flag over the blackened hulk of the presidential palace in the rebel Chechen capital was akin to the Soviet flag going up over Hitler's Reichstag, an image graven in every Russian heart as the moment Nazism was finally beaten.
"At 15:35 on the 19th of January, the soldiers of the 276th Motorized Infantry Regiment, commanded by Col. Sergei Bunin, hoisted the flag of the Russian Federation over the presidential palace in Grozny," intoned Krasnya Zvezda, the army newspaper.


Last Shot by Syracuse Keeps the Streak Alive
Syracuse 60, Providence 59
Michael Lloyd hit a 23-footer with 2.2 seconds left to give Syracuse a 60-59 victory yesterday over Providence, extending the No. 6 Orangemen's winning streak to 14 games.


Meme's the Word
Meme.
Pronounced meem.
Think of it as a thought virus or the cultural equivalent of a gene, a phrase, a way of thinking.
For instance, the habit of saying "Yo," as in "Yo, Dad, where's my allowance?" might be thought of as an extremely successful, although trivial, meme.
The idea of racism would be a more powerful and malevolent meme, while the idea of individual freedom would be a powerful and good meme.
One meme that is starting to catch on is the very word "meme."
The best source seems to be "The Selfish Gene," by Richard Dawkins, a 1976 book that argued that an organism was just a gene's way of making more genes.
Religion was an immensely forceful meme in Dawkins's view.
Daniel Dennett, who picked up the word in his book "Consciousness Explained," sees human consciousness as a collection of memes.


The World; Democracy in India: Now You See It . . .
RON BROWN, President Clinton's Secretary of Commerce, arrived here last week to promote new business deals and drove straight to the black marble platform beside the Yamuna River where Mohandas K. Gandhi was cremated -- a familiar ritual for Westerners trying to signal how much India and the Western democracies share.
There is, indeed, much on paper to celebrate (forgetting, for a moment, that the two countries have frequently been on opposite sides of great issues, not least during the cold war), and there is even more incentive now that economic reforms have opened India to Western investment.
India does have parliamentary government and a Constitution replete with democratic guarantees.
It has never been ruled by the military.
It has a proudly independent judiciary.
Its press is as varied and contentious as any in the world.


LIVES WELL LIVED
You indicated that Casper the Friendly Ghost was the creation of Alfred Harvey.
Casper began as the brainchild of the cartoonist Joe Oriolo and the writer Seymour V. Reit, and appeared in a series of animated theatrical shorts produced by Paramount at their Famous Studios in New York starting in 1945.
Harvey Comics acquired the rights to Casper and other Famous Studios' characters in the mid-50's; they released the shorts to television and put Casper in their line of comic books.
HOWARD BECKERMAN Flushing, Queens


A Journey to Macedonia Takes a Director to Sundance
Milcho Manchevski has been tired lately.
Happy, yes.
"But so tired it's sort of wearing off on the happiness," he said wistfully from the apartment in Skopje, Macedonia, where he grew up.
That was a month ago.
Last week, sitting in the bar of the Rihga Royal Hotel in New York, a discreet gold stud in each ear, Mr.
Manchevski was, if anything, more exhausted.
The director, who is 35, had a lot to feel tired about.
Not long ago he was leading a busy but manageable life as a New York-based director of music videos and commercials.
Then he made his first feature film, "Before the Rain."


50 Years Later, a Dresden Landmark Is Rebuilt
Almost 50 years after Allied bombers devastated Dresden in February 1945, the city will again display one of its gems of Saxon Baroque architecture -- the rebuilt Taschenbergpalais.
Only 18 months ago birch trees were still growing among the palace's few remaining, smoke-stained walls.
But on Jan. 2 the Grand Hotel Taschenbergpalais Kempinski Dresden opened on the site.
The ornate palace was built in the early 18th century by Augustus the Strong, Elector of Saxony, as a residence for his mistress, Anna Constantia von Cosel.
The court architect Matthaus Daniel Poppelmann, who also built the famous Dresden Zwinger complex, completed the building in 1711.
It later became one of the residences of the Saxon royal family.
The hotel is in the heart of Dresden, surrounded by landmarks such as the Residenz Castle, the Church of the Cross, the Zwinger museums and art galleries, as well as the Semper Opera House.
It has 213 guest rooms, including 25 suites, in a modern style with clean lines, contrasting with the building's elaborate, classical exterior.
Until March 31 the hotel is offering an introductory rate of $155 a night for both single and double rooms.
After the official grand opening on March 31, rates will range from $220 to $270 for a single, and from $250 to $300 for a double room.
More information: Am Taschenberg, 01067 Dresden, Germany.
Reservations: (49 351) 4912 606 or (49 351) 4912 616, fax.


Notes As a Road Ends
FOR more than a decade I have kept watch over the ebb and flow of the real estate market as it related to home ownership.
I have witnessed the rise and fall of values, seen all types of homes roar into fashion only to sink, like a fad, just as it seemed they had nowhere to go but up.
Even mortgage loans -- once plain and simple -- have undergone a metamorphosis, being reborn as a dizzy array of "products" that are infinitely more complex and literally more variable than most of us can cope with.


Kymm Bradley, Timothy Horan
Kymm M. Bradley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Bradley of Brant Beach, N.J., and Timothy J. Horan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Timothy Horan of Haworth, N.J., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
John Frambes performed the ceremony at Holy Family Roman Catholic Church in Union Beach, N.J.
Mrs.
Horan, 27, graduated from Stockton State College.
She is studying for a master's degree in speech pathology at City University of New York.
Her father retired as a senior quality-assurance engineer for Rockwell International, the aerospace company, in Anaheim, Calif.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Cloture: Vote to limit debate on a bill that would make it more difficult for Congress to impose new mandates on state and local governments if it did not provide money enabling them to comply.
Failed, with 54 in favor and 44 opposed (6 votes short of the 60 needed), Jan. 19.


For the Mane, Of Course
TRIGGER, WHO DOES YOUR HAIR?
For a silkier, thicker mane, men and women are lathering up with shampoo and conditioner designed for coarse equine hair.
The leading brand, Mane 'n Tail, once available only in horse specialty and feed shops, now sells 95 percent of its product to tail-deprived humans.
Four factories work double shifts to fill orders, and annual sales reached $60 million last year (up from $500,000 in 1989).
A PHENOMENON IS SIRED: Barely four years ago, Roger Dunavant, the president of Straight Arrow in Bethlehem, Pa., the maker of Mane 'n Tail, handed out samples to horse folk; they told him what a nice job the concoction did on their hair.
Soon after, a market study found that 10 of 12 buyers were not using it on their ponies.
A LEGAL HORSE RACE: To protect its good mane, Mr.
Dunavant has sued 12 companies and accused them of misappropriating the Mane 'n Tail moniker.
IT ISN'T PRELL, BUT . . .: John Fish, Kmart's hair-care buyer, said customers had requested Mane 'n Tail before he stocked the shelves of the chain's 2,350 stores with it.
"We tested it in our quality assurance department and the information was that it was safe for humans," he said.
"It doesn't sell like Pantene Pro-V or Suave, but it sells very well." A local price comparison found a 32-ounce bottle of Mane 'n Tail selling for $5.99, or about 19 cents an ounce; a 13-ounce bottle of Pantene for $3.19, or 25 cents an ounce, and a 15-ounce bottle of Suave, 99 cents, or 6 cents an ounce.
CELEBRITY NEIGH-SAYER: On the "Late Show With David Letterman," Terry Bradshaw, Fox's football commentator, confided that the equine rinse had grown hair atop his bare dome, a renaissance thus far undetectable to the TV-watching eye.
Mr.
Dunavant said he couldn't make such a claim, "or the F.D.A. will force me to do a $50 million study." But he added, "I haven't lost any hair since I started using it." I'VE GOT THE MOUSSE . . .: Now there are Mane 'n Tail hair spray, perm enhancer, mousse and detangler (all for humans only), as well as The Hoofmaker, a skin moisturizer that doubles as a fingernail strengthener.
What's next, Secretariat lip gloss?
RICHARD SANDOMIR


The Homeless Share Campsites and Consolation
After darkness fell on the schoolyard, a dozen survivors warmed their fingers over a bonfire fed by pieces of collapsed houses.
Pitched tents competed for space with stockpiles of blankets, tangerine crates and unwieldy stacks of debris.
"It reminds me of the time after the war," said Masakazu Koga, 55, throwing a kitchen cabinet door on the fire.
"Everything is a wreck, and I don't see how we're going to rebuild it all. But the earthquake also drew us together. I've seen generosity in people that I thought had disappeared from Japan."


2002 Should Be Salt Lake City's Year
With the persistence of a marathon runner and the hard luck of Dan Jansen, Salt Lake City has attempted for three decades to become a host city for the Winter Olympics.
After 29 years of futile bidding, however, Salt Lake may at last find itself, like Jansen, with an Olympic medal draped around its neck.
This picturesque headquarters of state government, the Mormon religion and Alpine tourism, ringed by the snowy peaks of the Wasatch Range, is among the favorites of nine cities worldwide bidding on the 2002 Winter Games.


30 Years of Volcanoes and Animals (Including Us)
IN THE BEGINNING IS THE voiceover -- omniscient, beneficent, paternal -- talking about the creation of the continents and the stirrings of earthly life.
Drums beat in the background; a chorus chimes in.
And life, mostly mammalian, begins trotting gloriously across the television screen: elephants, zebras, sled dogs, impalas, ostriches, bears snacking on fish, chimps reaching out to the primatologist Jane Goodall, Americans ascending Mount Everest.
On Wednesday, NBC will televise "30 Years of National Geographic Specials," a two-hour presentation of greatest hits culled from 114 past programs.
By the time the closing credits roll, 32 animals will have been eaten, 11 will have fought, 10 will have romped, 6 will have courted, a handful will have mated, few will have slept, and not one will have appeared to be more threatening than threatened.
And the paragon of animals will have fallen.


Kathryn V. Mohn, Thomas Wooters
Kathryn Valentine Mohn, the group controller at Silverplatter Information Inc., an electronic information service in Norwood, Mass., was married yesterday to Thomas Arthur Wooters, a partner in the Boston law firm of Peabody &amp; Arnold.
The Rev.
T.
Guthrie Speers, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the King's Chapel in Boston.
Mrs.
Wooters graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received a master's degree in accounting from Northeastern University.
She is a daughter of the late George V. Mohn and Mrs.
Wilson M. Brazer of New Canaan, Conn., and is a stepdaughter of Mr.
Brazer.
The bride's father was the president of Automated Engineering Laboratories in Norwalk, Conn.
Her stepfather retired as a vice president of the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company in New York.


Black Market Moves Goods (And Itself)
A panther-lean man stood on Second Avenue, a ninja mask covering his face, a painting lodged securely under his arm.
Maybe it was the mask, but no one approached him.
Four yards away, another man in a tenement doorway had better luck.
Three people inspected the pair of women's pumps he pulled from a duffel bag.
One placed a fist in his hand and walked off with the shoes.


Jan. 15-21; Lightning's Upward Spire
It came, quite literally, as a bolt out of the blue.
Scientists thought they understood lightning until they stumbled upon a whole new class of the displays that flash upward from thunderheads to heights as great as 60 miles above the earth, their wispy tendrils playing along the fringes of outer space.
The bizarre flashes are visually stunning, their bodies pink, blood red and dark blue, their tendrils red, bluish and purple.
Scientists, led by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, are now scurrying around the globe to study the phenomenon and its implications.
The high-altitude flashes, they say, might affect the ozone layer in unknown ways and present dangers to spy planes arcing unusually high through the sky or space shuttles streaking toward earth for a landing.


BEST SELLERS: January 22, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
47
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
1
31
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
3
1
KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The police detective Alex Cross pursues a serial killer and the kidnapper of his niece.
4
14
2
SELF-DEFENSE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware undertakes to discover whether a woman's fear that she is being stalked by a killer is imagined or real.
5
5
8
WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World War II America.
6
6
128
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
7
3
21
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
8
1
EYES OF A CHILD, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $24.) The apparent suicide of a San Francisco man leads to courtroom encounters.
9
4
14
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work in their small Maine town.
10*
7
11
THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote themselves to solving crimes.
11
12
16
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
12
8
9
DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful Government agency.
13
11
26
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's visit to a small town changes many lives.
14
9
16
TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching Hour" and "Lasher."
15
13
18
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
12
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of belief, suffering and hope.
2
5
15
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
3
2
16
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
4
3
20
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
5
4
57
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
6
7
8
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
7
6
17
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.
8*
8
12
THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence affect American life.
9
11
46
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
10
13
4
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters of varied callings and backgrounds, reported in words and pictures.
11
12
14
NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World War II.
12
10
15
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the country singer.
13
2
PALE BLUE DOT, by Carl Sagan. (Random House, $35.) The astronomer's vision of the future role of human beings in the universe.
14
9
19
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the present.
15
1
LONG WALK TO FREEDOM, by Nelson Mandela. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The autobiography of the first freely elected President of South Africa.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
39
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
87
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
3
4
ILLUMINATA, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $20.) A celebration of the power of prayers, with examples of those fitting a variety of situations.
4
1
FOOD, by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Information about recipes, nutrition and diets.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 7, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) ALLAH O AKBAR: A Journey Through Militant Islam, by Abbas. (Phaidon/Chronicle, $60.) A broad and gloomy photographic examination of 29 countries by an Iranian-born photojournalist whose subjects seem rarely to take any time out from the utmost rigors of the faith.
EAST, WEST: Stories, by Salman Rushdie. (Pantheon, $21.) Nine stories by the fugitive author of "The Satanic Verses," some boisterous, some provocative, all taking some advantage of Mr.
Rushdie's difficult dual heritage.
FELICIA'S JOURNEY, by William Trevor. (Viking, $21.95.) Mr.
Trevor's latest novel concerns an unmarried, pregnant, vulnerable Irish girl, wandering England's industrial Midlands until she encounters an awesomely predatory Englishman whose monstrosity is all the scarier for remaining long undefined.
THE HOLLOW YEARS: France in the 1930s, by Eugen Weber. (Norton, $25.) The author, a historian devoted to France, rises from immersion in the documents, bearing this scintillating, entertaining account of an unworthy but fascinating period in French life.
IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War, by Tobias Wolff. (Knopf, $23.) The follow-up volume to Mr.
Wolff's memoir "This Boy's Life" is a series of small, elegant, personal sketches of his year in Vietnam.
AN INTIMATE HISTORY OF HUMANITY, by Theodore Zeldin. (HarperCollins, $25.) Not history so much as informed rumination by an Oxford social historian who talks to many people (mostly Frenchwomen) about the fundamentals of human experience -- hope, despair, love, etc. -- and thinks that hope still has a chance.
THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG, by J.M.
Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.
NELSON: A Personal History, by Christopher Hibbert. (Addison-Wesley, $30.) A biography that visits many familiar scenes but brings clarity, reliability, convincing judgments and enthusiasm to Horatio Nelson, a unique British hero whose defects could never tarnish his glory.
NIGHT: Night Life, Night Language, Sleep, and Dreams, by A. Alvarez. (Norton, $23.) Personal and literary explorations of the less visible (and therefore more conjectural) half of life by a gifted critic and acutely intuitive memoirist.
ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON: A Biography, by Frank McLynn. (Random House, $30.) A thoroughly detailed life, taking the most recent scholarship into account, of the great Scottish writer of English prose who died at 44 in 1894.
SHAKER BUILT: The Form and Function of Shaker Architecture, by Paul Rocheleau and June Sprigg, edited and designed by David Larkin. (David Larkin/Monacelli Press/Penguin, $50.) Sumptuous color photographs of Shaker buildings, taken with care and devotion.


Mutual Funds; When the Title Doesn't Tell the Story
WHAT'S in a mutual fund's name?
Sometimes not enough, Alan Wildstein, a Connecticut investor, found.
Mr.
Wildstein bought shares in the Warburg, Pincus Growth and Income Fund on March 29.
"I was looking for a fund that balanced the risks of a growth fund with the comparative safety of an income fund."


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
ALAN PATON  A Biography. By Peter F. Alexander. Oxford University, $35.


Mid-Winter Calls For Low-Fat Ideas
MID-WINTER is time for comfort food.
Meat loaf and mashed potatoes.
Chocolate pudding.
Macaroni and cheese.
A hot fudge sundae.
Chicken soup.
If holiday partying a few weeks back (coupled with cold weather that inhibits outdoor exercise) has taken its toll on the waistline, some of these favorites, but not necessarily all of them, should be put on hold.


Ms. O'Brien and Mr. McGrath 3d
Elizabeth Ann O'Brien, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James P. O'Brien of White Plains, was married yesterday to Christopher C. McGrath 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
McGrath Jr. of Albany.
The Rev.
Kevin W. Irwin performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y.
The bride, 28, is a graduate of the College of the Holy Cross, as is the bridegroom.
She is the human resources administrator at Booz, Allen &amp; Hamilton Inc., a management consulting company in New York.
Her father retired as a mathematics teacher at Edgemont High School in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Her mother, Maureen O'Brien, who is also retired, was a special education teacher in the Scarsdale public schools.


Q and A
V-E Day in London
Q.
What special events will take place in London this May to celebrate the 50th anniversary of V-E Day? -- William J. Stone, Mount Pleasant, S.C.


Pataki Hiring Is Criticized As Cronyism
At a news conference the morning after his election victory, George E. Pataki promised to purge state government of "Mario Cuomo's political cronies." But three weeks into his administration, the Republican Governor is facing increasing criticism that he is simply replacing Mr.
Cuomo's "cronies" with those of his own.
While Mr.
Pataki has won high marks for some appointments, particularly that of the budget director, Patricia A. Woodworth, he also has been assailed for hiring a number of people with questionable qualifications for their new jobs.


Some Co-ops Still Struggle With Default
LIKE thousands of New Yorkers eager to join the real estate gold rush in the mid-1980's, Eric Marcus bought an apartment in a newly converted co-op building.
And like many New Yorkers in the mid-1990's, Mr.
Marcus has seen his investment collapse.
His co-op, the Lincoln Spencer on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, is in foreclosure; his equity, about $ 25,000, is in danger; his 350-square-foot studio, bought for $ 65,000, is unsalable.


Jan. 15-21; Her Son, the Governor


Mr. Quayle's Accuser Gets His Day
When Brett Kimberlin, a criminal doing serious prison time in Oklahoma, claimed that he had once sold marijuana to Dan Quayle, the 1988 election was days away.
After learning that the Bush-Quayle campaign was alarmed, the Bureau of Prisons canceled the prisoner's previously arranged news conference and twice put him in "administrative detention." Officials said it was for his personal safety because he feared other prisoners.
Suspicious Government behavior?
The Justice Department found no conspiracy to silence the inmate and the U.S.
Court of Appeals in Washington dismissed his lawsuit, saying it was based on "weak circumstantial evidence." That absurd appraisal, and the unfairly rigid burden of proof it imposed, is now under Supreme Court scrutiny.
On Friday the justices said Mr.
Kimberlin at last will have a day in court -- the Supreme Court, no less.


A Prophet of Financial Doom Who Was Right
MEXICO'S surprise devaluation of the peso last Dec. 20 was not altogether a surprise.
Around Washington, economists who were watching Mexico had been warning that such a step was all but inevitable -- sometime.
One prominent advocate of devaluation said, the day it was announced, that it was time for the "smart money" to move into Mexico.
But what the economists failed to anticipate was the financial explosion that followed: a free fall of the currency; a mass exodus by investors from markets as far-flung as Buenos Aires, Bangkok and New Delhi, and a very dark cloud over the previously bright prospects of a half-dozen Latin American countries.
Referring last week to the biggest financial meltdown in recent memory, Stanley Fischer, the deputy managing director of the International Monetary Fund, admitted to a crowd of 150 economists who wanted to know what had gone wrong: "Everybody underestimated the reaction of the capital markets."


Handoff to Salaam? Not in the Hula Bowl
RASHAAN SALAAM will only be a spectator and a cheerleader at the Hula Bowl.
The Heisman Trophy winner from Colorado said yesterday in Honolulu that it was in his "best interest" not to play and risk injury.
In a statement, the record-setting running back said: "It came down to the risk factor involved. I don't have anything left to prove."


Look Who's Talking, Microphones
CONSIDER THIS PARADOX: With the help of sound technology, the theater is fast approaching the day when a Broadway show will be a nearly perfect, if artificial, representation of a live performance.
Don't underestimate science.
To see "Show Boat," at least to the extent that you can recognize the actors and monitor their performances, you have to sit in the orchestra of the huge Gershwin Theater, where the 1927 classic is now in its big, splashy, comfortable Harold Prince revival.
Yet if you want to hear the great Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein 2d score, you can't do better than to sit in the Gershwin's rear mezzanine, four rows from the back of the house, as I did the other night.


An Unhappy Lot Of Plaintiffs
WITHOUT any recent effort on their part, the airlines have just raised their hostility rating with travelers.
The anger flows from passengers who in 1993 filed claims seeking a share of the $400 million settlement with the airlines that were accused of "fare-signaling," or price-fixing.
Late last month and into the New Year, the 4.2 million claimants who were part of the class-action lawsuit got their coupons, and many were not happy at all.
The hostility is mostly directed at the airlines, but those who called and wrote this department have enough distaste to go around: It extends to the Federal Court, the lawyers and the System.
In most instances, the complainers realize, if vaguely, that they received what they had been told they would get.
But they are pained that the coupons are useful as payment only for a small portion of each ticket they buy, at best 10 percent.
They are also angry about the validity period -- four years for six airlines and three for one -- and the blackout periods when the coupons may not be used.


Indian Snowstorm Survivors Criticize Rescue Operation
Indian officials opened an inquiry today into the circumstances that led to dozens of travelers' freezing to death after scores of vehicles were buried by snowstorms on a mountain highway in Kashmir.
As rescue operations continued, officials gave conflicting casualty figures.


Some Co-ops Still Struggle With Default
LIKE thousands of New Yorkers eager to join the real estate gold rush in the mid-1980's, Eric Marcus bought an apartment in a newly converted co-op building.
And like many New Yorkers in the mid-1990's, Mr.
Marcus has seen his investment collapse.
His co-op, the Lincoln Spencer on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, is in foreclosure; his equity, about $ 25,000, is in danger; his 350-square-foot studio, bought for $ 65,000, is unsalable.


Literary Fashions
To the Editor:
The reviews of "The Letters of Robert Louis Stevenson" and Frank McLynn's biography of Stevenson (Dec. 25) underplayed why his books have lasted.
Caryn James, writing about Louisa May Alcott in the same issue ("Amy Had Golden Curls; Jo Had a Rat. Who Would You Rather Be?"), came closer to explaining the continuing popularity of "Little Women." People continue to read these books because of their characters -- Long John Silver, Alan Breck, Jo, Amy and the rest of them -- and the stories they tell.


Seductive, and Sometimes as Remote as a Mayan Dialect
ROBERT NATKIN'S canvases are easy on the eye but far from easy to interpret.
Still, with imagery as mute as it is seductive, it could hardly have been otherwise.
The track record of this painter, whose umpteenth exhibition is on view at the Mattatuck Museum in Waterbury, begins in Chicago, where he was born in 1930 and where, in 1958, he had his first exhibition.
After that came a sequence of Manhattan shows, followed by numerous appearances in other American cities as well as abroad.


The Fight for Digital TV's Future
IT was billed as a demonstration of high-definition television, a chance for Government officials to glimpse a nearly completed system designed to broadcast panoramic pictures at least as crisp and sharp as movies in a theater.
After eight years of struggle, a consortium of seven corporate and research powerhouses from the United States and Europe -- including AT&amp;T, M.I.T. and Philips, and known as "the Grand Alliance" -- finally seemed close to finishing a system that would usher in a new generation of television.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
GOWANUS 50 Choreographers With Much to Celebrate
The Brooklyn Dance Consortium, a network of 50 independent Brooklyn choreographers, has joined the Gowanus Arts Exchange, a nonprofit community arts group.
It means they will now have professional space in which to practice and perform.
To celebrate, there will be a three-day musical celebration, including dances set to live jazz, classical music and rock (above, Randolyn Zinn in "Frank Frank").
There will also be poetry reading.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE BEGINNING OF THE JOURNEY: The Marriage of Diana and Lionel Trilling By Diana Trilling.
Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $13.95.
Married in 1929, the Trillings were at the center of New York's intellectual life in an era when the city fancied itself the center of the world.
Covering the years until 1950, this is an "extraordinary" memoir, Ann Hulbert said here in 1993.
She said Mrs.
Trilling "has miraculously discovered a morally dignified yet also ruthlessly honest style of self-exposure."  A FROLIC OF HIS OWN


Appeal Grows Urgent
As government budget cuts loom, New York's poor are depending more than ever on private charities.
But after a spate of holiday generosity, contributions to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund have dwindled to a five-year low.
The Neediest Cases, page 27.


The Goal in New Jersey: Start at the Beginning and Go a Long Way
One goal.
That's all that separated the Devils from the Stanley Cup finals last season, and one goal is all that the Devils are focused on this season: making it to the Stanley Cup finals.
There is no reason to question the aura of high expectations around Byrne Meadowlands Arena in Jacques Lemaire's second season as coach.
What the Devils do for an encore following the most successful season in their history will depend primarily on how Lemaire and his assistants find the players to fill the gap left by the departure of Bernie Nicholls.


Foreign Affairs; Poison Pill
If you were making a movie of the Clinton Administration's policy toward North Korea, you could entitle it: "Dr. Kevorkian Does Diplomacy." Because what the Administration seems to be trying to pull off through its nuclear accord with Kim Il Sung &amp; Sons is the assisted suicide of North Korea.
The Administration seems to believe that by filling North Korea's veins with Western investments, credit cards and diplomatic contacts, in return for a halt to Pyongyang's nuclear program, it can slowly undermine North Korea's airtight totalitarian regime so that one day it collapses softly into the lap of South Korea.
But while the Clinton team thinks it is administering an assisted suicide, North Korea (and the Republican opponents of this deal) thinks Washington is administering life support, which would actually prolong the Hermit Kingdom.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
20 INNOVATIVE YEARS
The Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford is celebrating the 20th anniversary of Matrix, its innovative program of rapidly changing exhibitions of unusual art, lectures and performances.
Matrix, the model for more than 50 similar programs at art institutions around the country, has presented the works of artists like Sol LeWitt, Romare Bearden, William Wegman, Robert Mapplethorpe, Hans Haacke, Keith Haring, Annette Lemieux, Andy Warhol, Carrie Mae Weems and Duane Hanson.
Anniversary events begin today, with the opening of an exhibition of paintings by Sylvia Plimack Mangold, which will remain through April 2.
Ms.
Mangold will give a talk about her work during a reception starting at 2 P.M.


Profile; For U.S., He's Behind All the America's Cup Hopes
ANY way you look at it, Eric Goetz can't lose.
There are three syndicates vying for the right to represent the United States in defense of the America's Cup, sailing's most prestigious prize, and Mr.
Goetz (pronounced gertz) built the multimillion-dollar boats for all of them.
Mr.
Goetz's sweep of boat-building honors for this classy but cutthroat competition is akin to having the same trainer handle three horses in the Kentucky Derby.
This is, after all, a sport in which technology has become a critical factor, with each syndicate spending as much as $35 million for a chance to defend the cup.
And the three defense syndicates -- the America
Foundation, Team Dennis Conner and PACT 95 -- as well as most of the seven international challengers, go to extraordinary lengths to keep the design secrets of these Formula One race cars of the seas under wraps.


Mid-Winter Calls For Low-Fat Ideas
MID-WINTER is time for comfort food.
Meat loaf and mashed potatoes.
Chocolate pudding.
Macaroni and cheese.
A hot fudge sundae.
Chicken soup.
If holiday partying a few weeks back (coupled with cold weather that inhibits outdoor exercise) has taken its toll on the waistline, some of these favorites, but not necessarily all of them, should be put on hold.


On This Campus, the Lessons Are Extracurricular
Higher Learning Omar Epps, Kristy Swanson, Michael Rapaport,  Ice Cube, Jennifer Connelly, Laurence  Fishburne Directed by John Singleton R 127 minutes


Sicily Tour
To the Editor: During our trip to Taormina, Sicily, in May and June, my husband and I took a train and bus tour to Mount Etna on Sicilian Airbus Travel.
When we paid the 110,000 lire, about $75, for the two of us, we were told the tour guide spoke English and German.
However, when 90 percent of the tour was given in German, we returned to complain.
The company apologized and offered us a free tour with another guide.
Again, we arose at dawn to be at the bus stop at 7 A.M.
When the bus arrived, we were told that because of a mix-up there was no space for us since we had "free tickets." It was very humiliating in front of everyone.
The company could have called us, but never did.


Old and New, Blended, in Black Pop
ON THEIR NEW ALBUMS, Chante Moore and Tony Terry prove they are singers whose musical styles elegantly unite the classic and the contemporary in black pop.
Ms.
Moore's "Love Supreme" and Mr.
Terry's "Heart of a Man" explore the pleasures and thwarted ambitions of romance.
Each artist evokes love's vibrant hues, its gritty and graceful textures, by subtly threading old-school passion through updated rhythms.
The results are not only musically compelling, but they perhaps unintentionally illumine charged debates about the role of sex in black music.


Plow in One Hand, Six-Shooter in the Other
THE FRONTIER IN AMERICAN CULTURE By Richard White and Patricia Nelson Limerick.
Edited by James R. Grossman.
Illustrated. 116 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Cloth, $ 30.
Paper, $ 15.


Isles' Debut A Success On Palffy's 2 Goals
In the runway outside the Islanders' locker room before the season-opener here at Nassau Coliseum tonight, General Manager Don Maloney was talking about ending Florida goaltender Mark Fitzpatrick's run of success against the Islanders.
Maloney could just as well have been talking about two streaks: Fitzpatrick's 3-0 lifetime record against the Islanders or the second-year Panthers' 5-0 career series advantage between the two teams.


Graphic Student Protests: 'We Are Not Hoodlums'
To the Editor:
As a senior at Graphic Communication Arts, I did not recognize the description of me and my classmates in the Jan. 8 article "Keeping Control of the Surge After School."


Hall Nearly Knocks Out No. 2 UConn
What seemed impossible when the season began in November almost became a shocking reality tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Seton Hall, picked during a preseason poll by the Big East coaches to finish as the conference doormat, nearly stomped all over the unbeaten and second-ranked Connecticut Huskies.
It took a 3-point play on a two-handed dunk and free throw by Ray Allen with 24.6 seconds remaining for the Huskies to outlast the determined Pirates, 86-81, and remain the only unbeaten team in Division 1.


Wanted: A Kinder, Gentler Cop
IN MACARTHUR PARK, AT THE edge of downtown Los Angeles, it's 8:15 on a Friday night and a man is dying.
Middle-aged, black, wearing white sneakers and a white T-shirt, he lies beneath a eucalyptus tree that stinks as though a hundred horses urinated against it.
He has been shot in the arm and left eye.
His right eye is open, and there's very little blood.
"Melon shot," says Officer Kessler, meaning the bullet entered the skull and didn't leave.
"This guy pulled a knife. Two guys dumped him." Like most shootings, it was over in seconds.


Urban Intruder: The Houseguest Peril
WE broke the no-houseguests rule the other day.
My husband did it because the guest in question was an ex-wife.
With her new husband, to be exact.
And the child they had acquired through a surrogate-mother arrangement with the ex-wife's best friend.
To be exact.


LIVES WELL LIVED
Presumably, a life well lived is a life worth emulating.
Which part of Richard Nixon's life should we emulate?
The deceitful, suspicious, vindictive part?
The law-breaking, Constitution-trashing part?
Or the part that, 20 years ago, caused Americans to mistrust their Government so profoundly that we have yet to recover?
That part?
JULIE M. ELLIS Vineyard Haven, Mass.


Habitats/The Alfred; 61st St. Penthouse With Six Terraces
THE space is so yawning and so glassy now that it is hard to imagine that by this spring, it will become an apartment for one man.
Flooded with light and surrounded by six terraces, the 6,700-square-foot penthouse atop the Alfred, a 1988 condominium building on West 61st Street between Columbus and Amsterdam Avenues, near Lincoln Center, seems more like a gutted-out site for suites of offices, each to have its own spectacular view of Manhattan.


Manager's Profile
Anthony Orphanos Fund: Warburg, Pincus Growth and Income; $665 million in assets.
Manager since 1992. (Sponsor: Warburg, Pincus Counsellors, New York.)


IN SHORT: FICTION
THOSE THAT MATTERED  By Barbara Angle. Crown, $22.


Mid-Winter Calls For Low-Fat Ideas
MID-WINTER is time for comfort food.
Meat loaf and mashed potatoes.
Chocolate pudding.
Macaroni and cheese.
A hot fudge sundae.
Chicken soup.
If holiday partying a few weeks back (coupled with cold weather that inhibits outdoor exercise) has taken its toll on the waistline, some of these favorites, but not necessarily all of them, should be put on hold.


Region News Briefs; 3 Youths Await Report On Sentencing in Killing
Three youths who took part in the 1992 strangling of a Clifton youth will have to wait another month to find out whether the plea bargain they worked out with prosecutors will be honored.
A family court judge ordered another round of reports from the boys' Passaic County probation officers at a hearing today.


Here Come the Many-Hued Camellias
THE camellias are in bloom.
Indoors, of course.
Every year about this time, these glorious plants burst their buds and the display will continue for many weeks in glorious shades.
One is pink, then there is a red one with ruffled petals and a reluctant, show-off white.
Never mind the frozen scene outside; here is beauty.


Others Don't Follow The Curious Example Blue Jays Have Set
The Toronto Blue Jays did not gain a horde of fans in major league front offices when they relieved Manager Cito Gaston and his coaches of their duties in replacement baseball this year.
Nor did they figure to attract many followers, if any.
"I have not heard of anyone else doing it," said Sal Bando, the Milwaukee Brewers' general manager.
"Not everyone marches to the same tune as the Toronto Blue Jays."


Pamela J. Zieky, David P. Messing
Pamela Jill Zieky, a daughter of Calvin Zieky of West Hartford, Conn., and Elaine Aidinoff Zieky of Farmington, Conn., was married last evening to David Philip Messing, the son of Donald A. Messing of New City, N.Y., and Rhoda Winthrop Messing of Somers, N.Y.
Rabbi David Greenberg officiated at the Doral Arrowwood in Rye Brook, N.Y.
The bride, 27, is a lawyer in New York.
She graduated from Duke University, as did the bridegroom.
She received her law degree from the University of Connecticut.
Her father is a vice president of Natkin &amp; Company, a heating and ventilation contractor in Rocky Hill, Conn.
Her mother is a senior vice president of Underwriters Service Agency, an insurance brokerage in West Hartford, and is the president of the Hartford Life Underwriters Association.


LIVES WELL LIVED
By the standards set in your sensitive preface to "Lives Well Lived," Fred Lebow, creator of the New York City Marathon, merited, at the very least, an "also-ran."


The Murder Case of a Lifetime Gets a Murder Prosecutor of Distinction
Marcia Clark was working her favorite kind of case -- a grisly multiple homicide few were paying any attention to -- that June day when a police detective preparing a search warrant asked for her help.
The premises in question were at 360 North Rockingham Avenue, home of O. J. Simpson.
Ms.
Clark had seen Mr.
Simpson in a Hertz commercial or two, as well as in the "Naked Gun" movies, but had thought him unimportant, another fading celebrity in a town chock full of them.
When she went to his home, the press was there, but it had frequently been present at crime scenes she visited.
Quickly, she assumed, the reporters would move on to the next murder.


The World: Japan's Nature; A People Tremble in Harmony With the Land
Earth shakes, ground trembles.  With great weight of snow,  The tight rope snaps back.
-- Itto Nishimoto, haiku poet, 1907-1991
WITH its neon lights and heated toilet seats and cellular faxes, the great trading city of Kobe a week ago seemed a citadel of modernity and affluence and internationalism, an antipodean New York with more sushi.
Then the ground opened up Tuesday and unleashed an inferno that killed more than 4,000 people and returned part of western Japan to a primeval condition that would have been recognizable to the people who lived in Japan thousands of years ago.
The earthquake was a horrific reminder that prosperity and technology cannot insulate a country from its natural environment.
The familiar pattern of Japanese history -- development, disaster and reconstruction -- is now being repeated in Kobe and the surrounding cities as residents search the smoldering rubble for the bodies of their friends and try to rebuild homes and businesses that took a lifetime to create.


Dallas' Tarpley a No-Show Against Seattle
Dallas Mavericks forward ROY TARPLEY may be in trouble again with the team.
One night after he reportedly had a heated discussion with the player personnel director KEITH GRANT, Tarpley did not appear last night for the Mavericks' game against the visiting Seattle SuperSonics at Reunion Arena.
"He is excused by Keith Grant from attending the game," KEVIN SULLIVAN, a team spokesman, said.
"Roy was frustrated about his knee, about not playing, and was told to take the night off."


Novel Dishes
LE MADRI ** (212) 727-8022; 168 West 18th Street; $$$; all major credit cards


Ghosts Of Montero, By the Sea
THERE is definitive proof that secondhand smoke does not kill.
Well, it doesn't kill parrots.
If he could talk, Poncho, the green-feathered 20-year-old seafarer's friend who lives at the Montero Bar and Grill, could tell some stories to shiver the timbers.
From his perch behind delicate bars in the front window, he has watched his Atlantic Avenue habitat, on the last block before Piers 5, 6 and 7, all but disappear.
Still, the recollections of Poncho's owners, Joseph and Pilar Montero, who since 1947 have run the bar at 73 Atlantic Avenue, will have to suffice.
The parrot's not talking.


At Rock Auction, Chagrin Over a Sink
Lou Iacobelli is no acid rocker.
But there he was yesterday morning, sitting on the edge of his folding seat in the second row of the Guernsey's auction house sale of collectibles from "40 Years of Rock &amp; Roll," waiting expectantly through offerings of Elvis's original test pressings, Elvis lipstick and the Elvis library card, for bidding to begin on a bathroom sink.
Actually, it was John Lennon's bathroom sink from the venerated Dakota apartment building on Central Park West, but it had sat in Mr.
Iacobelli's basement since the remodeling job at the Lennon apartment in the mid-1970's.


Don't Forget Adult Day Care
The article ("Lonely, Restless and Facing Years of a Sad Disease," Jan. 1) on Alzheimer's disease failed to mention a viable alternative available to families who desire to care for their stricken relatives at home: adult day care.
Adult day care is a relatively new concept for the care of the frail or impaired elderly.
Its purpose is to offer an effective, low-cost alternative to premature placement in a nursing home.
It enables the chronically ill or Alzheimer's sufferers to continue living at home with their loved ones much longer.
It also offers family members respite from the 24-hour caregiving, enabling many to return to work.


Ideas &amp; Trends; The Chief Justice Has New Clothes
ON his way to the first session of the first Supreme Court, Justice William Cushing walked through the streets of lower Manhattan in the luxuriant wig he was accustomed to wearing as chief justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court.
His path to the Royal Exchange, where the Court was to sit on that February day in 1790, was not a peaceful one.
A crowd of 100 boys followed him, pointing, and a sailor stopped and exclaimed, "My eyes, what a wig!"
With that, according to one 19th-century account, Justice Cushing "went to his lodgings by the shortest route" and sent for his wigmaker, only later showing up at Court, the proper adjustments presumably having been made.


Business Diary: January 15-20
THE ECONOMY Once Again, the Fickle Market Loses Its Cool  Here we go again.
Just one short week ago, the official word was: a slowing economy, no Federal Reserve rate rise in the offing, everything cool for the foreseeable future.
The stock market loved all this, with the Dow industrials leaping nearly 50 points on Friday the 13th.
Things stayed cool for a few days, but then came news that the nation is headed for its biggest annual trade deficit in seven years, sending the dollar to a 10-year low against the German mark.
Also added to the mix were figures on things like industrial production, housing, consumer confidence and factory use that spelled strength -- and thus, with the usual perversity, danger to the markets.
Not to be ignored, of course, were economic ripples from the Japanese earthquake.
When the dust cleared, the Dow had given back 46 points on Thursday and 12 more on Friday.


IN SHORT: FICTION
COWBOY ANGST  By Jasen Emmons. Soho, $21.


Quiet Policy Shift to Move AIDS Patients in S.R.O.'s
Upper West Side residents have long complained that their neighborhood has received more than its fair share of homeless AIDS patients and other social-service recipients.
Now, the city has decided the residents are right.
Responding to more than a year of public pressure, Deputy Mayor Fran Reiter has quietly put a cap on the number of AIDS patients the city may house in single-room-occupancy hotels within Community Board 7's district.


On This Campus, the Lessons Are Extracurricular
Houseguest  Sinbad, Phil Hartman Directed by Randall Miller PG 108 minutes


The Nation; . . . And When It's Bad, It's Horrid
NEAR the end of 1849, the year that tattooed a gilded image of California on the consciousness of a young America, it started to rain in the boom town built around the gold mines here.
This storm, riding the moisture-larded currents of the jet stream, was no gentle mist; it was what old Yankee farmers call "a gully-washer." It washed much of infant Sacramento away, forcing people to get around by canoe.
They called it the Great Inundation.


Union Journal; Where a Tragedy Occurred, a Coming Together
The artificial flowers are tattered now, and the real ones are dead.
The toy trinkets from McDonald's Happy Meals have fallen over, nudged by rain-sodden stuffed animals.
The battery-powered plastic-angel music boxes sing no more.
Yet, everyday, dozens of people make their way down the pine tree-lined drive to the shore of Lake John D. Long.
Formerly known only to fishermen angling for largemouth bass, the lake has become a shrine, luring visitors from around the South and beyond to pay their respects to Michael and Alex Smith.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


Gardens of Earthly Delights
It is the roofs that enchant one first, their hundreds of domes appearing to have been formed by the winds eternally wearing and rounding the vast spines of rock that cradle Iran.
The enchantment turns to wonder inside; the domes rest on arches of latticed bricks arranged in forms so delicate they make the spirit sing.
For many centuries bazaars have brought together in one immense place religion, political power and the economic life of cities from Morocco to Central Asia.
From the public hall called in Arabic qaisariya ("Caesar's room," suggesting a connection between the oldest bazaars and ancient Roman basilicas) to mosque and seminary and bathhouse, from quiet terraced religious clubhouse to teeming caravansary -- here is the bazaar, made even more appealing by the realization that the global spread of the modern industrial economy has probably doomed this beautiful house of life.
D.
J.
R.
BRUCKNER


Tough Act to Follow
The Republican rookies newly installed in Albany and Hartford will no doubt snap up copies of the budget outline released today by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, hoping to draw strength from the 23-page report as if it were the latest dose of some potent political elixir.
After all, Mrs.
Whitman's tax-cutting prowess in her first year in office in New Jersey was cited so often in the fall elections in nearby states that her name seemed to enter the lingua franca of the campaign trail.
When George E. Pataki repeatedly told New Yorkers that he was a Whitman Republican, most knew what course he wanted to set for the state.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
TAKE ME HOME  An Autobiography. By John Denver with Arthur Tobier. Harmony, $22.


Progress Is Reported In Irish Talks For Peace
Acknowledging that many problems remain, officials of the five-week-old Government of Prime Minister John Bruton say the Northern Ireland peace effort appears to be making significant progress, particularly on the sensitive issue of the disarmament of the Irish Republican Army.
In addition to this issue, which is being discussed by British officials and those of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political wing, the Irish officials say Dublin and London are close to an agreement on a new framework for talks involving all sides.
British officials are less hopeful on the imminence of such an accord, but the Irish Foreign Minister, Dick Spring, and the British Secretary for Northern Ireland, Sir Patrick Mayhew, are to discuss it next week in London.


A Pianist And America Rediscover Each Other
EVERY SERIOUS CLASSICAL CD buyer knows what it is like to rummage through budget bins crammed with disks in no particular order.
You may find superdiscounted budget-line reissues of classic recordings by major artists.
And you are sure to find many recordings by unknown performers on obscure labels: the complete Chopin whatever, or a couple of Beethoven piano concertos for a few dollars.
The performers are usually identified on the back in minuscule type.
Who are they?
Could they possibly be any good?
In the case of Dubravka Tomsic, a Slovenian pianist who has made some 40 recordings on labels like Pilz, Critic's Choice, Classical Gallery and Pentagon, the performances, when you can find them, are treasurable indeed.
Based in Ljubljana, where she teaches at the municipal academy of music, Dubravka Tomsic (pronounced doo-BRAHV-kuh TOM-sitch) has toured Eastern Europe, Australia and Asia regularly in recent decades, but her American concert career has only lately been revived.


Holy Bull, Front and Center; Red Carpet Is Rolled Out for Gray Super Colt's '95 Debut
Luciano Pavarotti will be singing on South Beach in Miami before a crowd of maybe 200,000 people late Sunday afternoon, and the San Francisco 49ers will be flying into town for the Super Bowl game, with the San Diego Chargers right behind.
But up the road here at Gulfstream Park, another star will be taking another stage for another run at racing history, and the marquee outside the gate has had it right all week: Holy Bull's 1995 Debut.
He is big and brawny.
He has gained 40 pounds and now weighs around 1,170.
He stands well over 16 hands.
He covers as much ground in two strides as most horses do in three.
His girth measures 72 inches -- just a couple of inches less than the renowned Secretariat of 20 years ago.
And the comparisons don't end there.


The Supper Bowl
As the pendulum of popular taste swings away from elaborate dinner parties toward simple, homey get-togethers, the cook has every reason to be confused.
On the surface, the sturdy dishes that are fashionable now -- stews and soups, casseroles, rice and pasta dishes -- appear to be less expensive, time consuming and complex than the archly ornate foods synonymous with 80's entertaining.
But as you begin to peel and dice, simmer and stew, you soon realize that one-pot cooking, like almost anything worth doing, takes time.


LIVES WELL LIVED
Hooray for "Lives Well Lived"! Please make this an annual event.
My favorite was Ted Conover on Elizabeth Paepcke.
She was interested in "replenishing the spirit." That's what this issue did for me.
NARDI REEDER CAMPION Hanover, N.H.


A 'Raisin in the Sun' That's Still Rousing
IN a glowing production at the George Street Playhouse, "A Raisin in the Sun" calls to witness the idealism that trusts human perfectibility.
If later voices in black theater sounded louder than Lorraine Hansberry's, they did so in responsive rage against the passive, ineffectual way audiences listened to her forgiving tone.
When an artist is helpless in altering perception and effecting change through compassion, others take verbal arms -- stridently, militantly, more explicitly, less patiently.


Survival of the Neediest
As politicians promise to lower taxes, lay off workers and cut services, the burden on private charities will increase -- as will their need for support from donors.
Most charities are already struggling with their current responsibilities and are hardly in a position to take on more burdens.
Even so, they will inevitably try to do so.
Every one of the charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund can cite stories of overworked staff trying to cope with huge caseloads of desperate people.
Many charities cut back staff last year.
Corporate donations have dropped.
Middle-class families, feeling less secure than ever about the future, find it increasingly difficult to be generous to charities they have long supported.


For the Mane, Of Course
TRIGGER, WHO DOES YOUR HAIR?
For a silkier, thicker mane, men and women are lathering up with shampoo and conditioner designed for coarse equine hair.
The leading brand, Mane 'n Tail, once available only in horse specialty and feed shops, now sells 95 percent of its product to tail-deprived humans.
Four factories work double shifts to fill orders, and annual sales reached $60 million last year (up from $500,000 in 1989).
A PHENOMENON IS SIRED: Barely four years ago, Roger Dunavant, the president of Straight Arrow in Bethlehem, Pa., the maker of Mane 'n Tail, handed out samples to horse folk; they told him what a nice job the concoction did on their hair.
Soon after, a market study found that 10 of 12 buyers were not using it on their ponies.
A LEGAL HORSE RACE: To protect its good mane, Mr.
Dunavant has sued 12 companies and accused them of misappropriating the Mane 'n Tail moniker.
IT ISN'T PRELL, BUT . . .: John Fish, Kmart's hair-care buyer, said customers had requested Mane 'n Tail before he stocked the shelves of the chain's 2,350 stores with it.
"We tested it in our quality assurance department and the information was that it was safe for humans," he said.
"It doesn't sell like Pantene Pro-V or Suave, but it sells very well." A local price comparison found a 32-ounce bottle of Mane 'n Tail selling for $5.99, or about 19 cents an ounce; a 13-ounce bottle of Pantene for $3.19, or 25 cents an ounce, and a 15-ounce bottle of Suave, 99 cents, or 6 cents an ounce.
CELEBRITY NEIGH-SAYER: On the "Late Show With David Letterman," Terry Bradshaw, Fox's football commentator, confided that the equine rinse had grown hair atop his bare dome, a renaissance thus far undetectable to the TV-watching eye.
Mr.
Dunavant said he couldn't make such a claim, "or the F.D.A. will force me to do a $50 million study." But he added, "I haven't lost any hair since I started using it." I'VE GOT THE MOUSSE . . .: Now there are Mane 'n Tail hair spray, perm enhancer, mousse and detangler (all for humans only), as well as The Hoofmaker, a skin moisturizer that doubles as a fingernail strengthener.
What's next, Secretariat lip gloss?
RICHARD SANDOMIR


Angel to the Unknown, Link to the Mighty
BONNIE TIMMERMANN walked across East 57th Street, looking like any other New Yorker scouring the store windows.
But she was, in fact, scouring faces.
A police officer passed in front of Hermes.
"See that cop?" she said.
"She's wearing lipstick. Her face. She's beautiful." She mentally filed the image.
"I never just stroll," she said.


Mid-Winter Calls For Low-Fat Ideas
MID-WINTER is time for comfort food.
Meat loaf and mashed potatoes.
Chocolate pudding.
Macaroni and cheese.
A hot fudge sundae.
Chicken soup.
If holiday partying a few weeks back (coupled with cold weather that inhibits outdoor exercise) has taken its toll on the waistline, some of these favorites, but not necessarily all of them, should be put on hold.


Studying the Computer And Making Friends
In Arthur Schroff's prime as a corporate accountant, whole financial kingdoms could be moved with a sharp pencil across a wide, lined ledger sheet.
These days, it takes a computer.
And so the 78-year-old Mr.
Schroff, who has worked as a private accountant since retiring from Johnson &amp; Johnson in the 1960's, joined a dozen other older citizens this winter to learn the new tools of his trade.


Data Bank/January 22, 1995
Data Bank/January 22, 1995
Industrial Production Index
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Monthly percent change
1.0
0.7
0.4
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
85.4
84.7
84.3
Housing Starts
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,529
1,545
1,436
Business Inventories
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Monthly percent change
0.7
0.7
0.5
Merchandise Exports
In billions
$61.2
$59.8
$60.1
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$71.7
$69.9
$69.4
Coal Production
Jan. 13
Jan. 6
Dec. 30
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
21,731
17,702
16,047
Weekly Jobless Claims
Jan. 6
Dec. 30
Dec. 23
In thousands
323
354
338


Oh, for a Seat To Retire To
Antiques show opens, and 2 legends put their feet up to rest (watch the upholstery, please).


Can We Talk?
IN THE NAME OF SCIENCE, I RECENTLY wandered through Saks Fifth Avenue asking clerks, "Where is the ladies' lounge?" They seemed surprised, but generally obliged by replying, "Fourth floor." Then, no matter how loudly and distinctly the clerk had spoken, I would lean forward and say, "Excuse me?" At that point they eyed me suspiciously, as if trying to decide whether I was a dimwitted fetishist or a deaf cross-dresser.
What I was trying to be was a sociolinguist.
To measure how New Yorkers' accents had changed over three decades, I was repeating an experiment originally performed in 1962, part of a landmark study titled "The Social Stratification of English in New York City." Its author, William Labov, a doctoral student at Columbia, went to three stores -- the upscale Saks Fifth Avenue, the mid-priced Macy's, the discount S. Klein on Union Square -- and asked directions to a department on the fourth floor.
Then he said "Excuse me?" to get clerks to repeat the words more carefully.
The pattern was unmistakable: the more affluent the store's clientele, the more likely the clerks were to pronounce the r in "fourth" and in "floor." Clerks in the discount store most often dropped the r, achieving the classic New York pronunciation "fawth flaw" or, in extreme cases, "fawt flaw." Besides demonstrating sharp class distinctions, Labov's study revealed a peculiar attitude among New Yorkers.


Let Mexico Disclose Its Foreign Reserves
To the Editor:
Mexico's devaluation of the peso by close to 35 percent and the policy leading up to the devaluation is a disaster.
It was caused by Mexico's failure to curb the large trade deficits that resulted from an orgy of consumer buying coupled with Mexico's hiding its dollar reserves from public scrutiny.


Hip-Hop Meets Chanel For 1990's Boots
Women's high-laced boots dominated shoe fashion in the late 19th century and early 20th century.
Now the style is being revived, although this time its influence is from the world of hip-hop, with boots worn half-laced.
As Coco Chanel often said, fashion starts on the street and works its way up to high fashion.
Black ankle boots shown by Chanel for fall are set on spindly heels and laced with ribbon (at right, in circle).
The style, worn with miniskirts or leggings (far right, top to bottom), has already sold out.


At Work; Promotions and Family Matters
WHEN he went to work in 1987 for the Agricultural Marketing Service, an Agriculture Department agency, James Patterson may not have realized he would find his true calling, but find it he soon did.
His job as an agricultural economist, international trade issues a specialty, frequently took him to Canada and Mexico.
He discovered he enjoyed travel and working on the road.
So he set off on the career track offered by the Government, transferring in 1990 to the Foreign Agricultural Service, another unit of the department, intending, after the requisite tests and waiting period, to be promoted to the officer category that would allow him to serve abroad.
Mr.
Patterson sailed through the exams in early 1992, but instead of heading off on the briny for foreign lands, he's still at his old post in Washington, reduced to a superannuated clerical worker, he claims, while the Agriculture Department mulls over a disability discrimination complaint he filed against it in late 1992 with the agency's equal employment office.


Man Is Charged With Rape in Brooklyn
Police Charge Man In Brooklyn Rape  A 31-year-old man was arrested and charged with kidnapping and rape yesterday after he abducted a former girlfriend while she sat in her car in front of her apartment in Brooklyn, the police said.
Sgt.
Edward Caro, a Police Department spokesman, said that the victim's husband heard her screaming, and that when he looked out the window at about 6:30 P.M. he saw the suspect, Elton Whitaker, of 685 Gates Avenue, breaking the driver's side window of his wife's Honda sedan.


A Small Melting Pot, in Danger of Overflowing
About 8,600 Bangladeshis have come to New York in the last decade, making them among the smallest and newest ingredients in the city's melting pot.
Many say that language and cultural barriers have made assimilation especially hard, and they say they fear that a large influx of immigrants expected this year will overwhelm the resources of the local Bangladeshis.
Few immigrants are fluent in English.
Many own small grocery stores, restaurants and coffee shops that cater mainly to other Bangladeshis.


On This Campus, the Lessons Are Extracurricular
Far From Home, the Adventures of Yellow Dog  Bruce Davison, Mimi Rogers Directed by Phillip Borsos PG 81 minutes


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
99.45
98.40
111.55
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5115
1.5330
1.7540
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.4235
1.4107
1.3116
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5890
1.5691
1.4920
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$384.70
$378.50
$381.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Here Come the Many-Hued Camellias
THE camellias are in bloom.
Indoors, of course.
Every year about this time, these glorious plants burst their buds and the display will continue for many weeks in glorious shades.
One is pink, then there is a red one with ruffled petals and a reluctant, show-off white.
Never mind the frozen scene outside; here is beauty.


CRIME
Tim Cornish, a 24-year-old Englishman who narrates his own torments, enters the story as a comely but overweening narcissist who impetuously falls in love with Ivo Steadman, an intellectually aloof paleontologist.
In the time it takes Ivo to return Tim's passion, the little twit is already bored ("He loved me, therefore I loved him no longer") and infatuated with an enigmatic woman he picks up in a bar while Ivo is lecturing on a cruise ship.


Aligning With Mars
Welcome to the age of super-low-budget space travel.
For about the cost of a couple of Spielberg movies ($150 million), NASA plans to send a camera-equipped robotic dune buggy to Mars.
To prepare for the December 1996 launch, scientists at the University of Arizona in Tucson have built a bit of Mars right here on Earth -- 1,600 square feet of red dirt that resembles a Martian river valley.


LIVES WELL LIVED
Clyde Haberman gave short shrift to Rabbi Menachem Schneerson, the Lubavitcher Rebbe.
Certainly, some mention of his lifetime of creative, intellectual, inspirational and charitable activities to revive a post-Holocaust generation of dispirited and alienated Jews, and his clandestine efforts to sustain thousands of Jews suffocating under Communism, would have been appropriate.
BAILA OLIDORT Brooklyn


Prague Restaurants: More Choices And Better Food
IN Prague, a beautiful centuries-old city that was relatively untouched by war, restaurants are set in medieval dungeons, gilt-trimmed merchant houses, historic beer halls and soaring Art Nouveau salons, offering a visual feast.
But until fairly recently, satisfying the palate has been something else.
Despite the excellent beer that accompanies it, traditional Czech cooking, defined by slabs of meat and doughy dumplings in dense sauces, can be heavy going.
And before the Velvet Revolution of 1989, the incentive to lighten, modernize and create went largely unrewarded.
So did any attempt at refining the service.


POSTINGS: Porcelain Medallions for Cultural Significance; Buildings That Made New York New York
If the New York Landmarks Preservation Foundation has its way, a porcelain medallion will be placed at 81-10 35th Avenue in Jackson Heights, Queens, recording the fact that its architect was also the inventor of Scrabble.
The 1953 tan brick and limestone Educational Building was an addition to the Community United Methodist Church, where Alfred M. Butts began testing versions of the game on parishioners during the Depression.


Faltering Mickelson Falls Into 3-Way Tie
Phil Mickelson, Arizona resident and Arizona State University alumnus, played the gracious host today in the third round of the Northern Telecom Open.
Rather than slap his fellow competitors around and bury them under a barrage of birdies, he instead threw open the door and let everybody come on in.
Mickelson, who started the day with a one-stroke lead over Jim Gallagher Jr., struggled with his putter on the deceptively quick Tucson National greens.
He missed some very short putts, including a two-footer at the 16th hole, shot a 70 for a 54-hole total of 14-under-par 201, and wound up in a three-way tie for first with Gallagher (69) and Brett Ogle (68).


Bridging Cultures


Jan. 15-21; Let the Penalties Begin
It was probably just a coincidence that the 15-week hockey lockout was accompanied by unusually warm winter weather in many Northern cities.
Last week, like a frigid Arctic air mass from Canada, the players returned to their 26 training camps after peace broke out on the labor-management front.
They opened their truncated, 48-game regular season Friday night, with the Rangers raising the Stanley Cup banner at Madison Square Garden for the first time since 1940 (and losing, 2-1, to Buffalo).
But because of schedule revisions, there won't be any play outside the conference, so no team along the Eastern seaboard will leave its time zone until the Stanley Cup finals.
The next cup winners won't celebrate until a few days before the Fourth of July.


Player Is Tested for Heart Irregularities
KEITH KUROWSKI, Notre Dame's second-leading scorer at 11.1 points per game, underwent testing yesterday in Indianapolis after suffering heart palpitations, a university spokesman said.


Literary Fashions
To the Editor:
No doubt your front-page reviews of books related to Robert Louis Stevenson will encourage many of your readers, as they did in my case, to read or reread some of his works.
What a letdown!


A Return? The Eagles Never Left
A FEW FACTS TO MULL OVER: OF ALL THE myriad "tribute" albums that have appeared over the last few years, the most successful by far has been "Common Thread: Songs of the Eagles," released in 1993.
On it, an all-star lineup of current country music stars, including Clint Black, Trisha Yearwood and Travis Tritt, paid their respects to the country-rock kings of the 1970's with faithful remakes of Eagles songs like "Desperado," "Peaceful Easy Feeling" and "Already Gone." The album has sold better than three million copies, and it's still selling.
Of all the myriad group "reunion" tours that have saturated the concert circuit in recent years, the most successful by far has been the Eagles' Hell Freezes Over tour.
It began last spring and reportedly finished the year with nearly $100 million in gross receipts, and it's still not over.


LIVES WELL LIVED
Thank you for your recognition of my next-door neighbor and friend for 21 years, Kathryn F. Clarenbach.
On my way home from work, when she would be standing on her front stoop, indulging in her only vice of smoking cigarettes, I often stopped to chat with her.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
A Seaworthy Tickle
IF the specialty is functional art, then the art must be functional, said Jill Barber of Sag Harbor.
That means that Ms.
Barber's work of art, a huge polka-dot shoe that is also a boat, had to be seaworthy.
But how to find that out.
"I'm the artist," Ms.
Barber said.
So she took her creation for a test spin off Sag Harbor.
"I didn't have the engine in yet," she said.
"So I paddled around."
It was December -- cold -- and Ms.
Barber got a little wet in her shoe.
Which is understandable, given that it is an open-toe model.


LIVES WELL LIVED
Daniel Schorr and Paul Slansky on Richard M. Nixon are yin without yang.
Surely, posthumous fairness merits more than both barrels of 12-gauge liberal invective.
That such need to hate and to ridicule has survived both Watergate and the death of their enemy says more about their own character defects than those they ascribe to the late President.
JAMES D. STOROZUK Fair Lawn, N.J.


From a Shoestring to Off Broadway Success
Casey Childs is a nonprofit theater producer in a for-profit state of mind.
It is not his fault that the two most recent plays under the banner of Primary Stages, where he is artistic director, has moved from shoestring beginnings to commercial success Off Broadway.
Somebody had to produce them.
Evidently, the Bay Street Theater Festival did not heed the call when a new script by Charles Busch had a staged reading in Sag Harbor last winter.
Then titled "A Name for Himself," the comedy about a pathologically shy thirtysomething electrologist and his fairy godfather is now known as "You Should Be So Lucky." After a five-week sellout engagement as the first of the four shows at Primary Stages this season, the play reopened at the Westside Theater in Manhattan on Dec. 8.


Kobe's Survivors Try to Adjust: Hand-Ringing, Relief, Laughter
It's not the thousands of deaths that trouble her most, or the loss of her home, or the paralyzing fear of the ground swaying again.
It's the screams.
The veterinarian around the corner was pinned in his house after it collapsed in the earthquake, but he shouted that he was all right.
And so Shizuko Hirajima shouted back and told him he would be O.K., and she worked frantically to rescue other neighbors who seemed to be in greater need.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
DEAD MEN DO TELL TALES  The Strange and Fascinating Cases  of a Forensic Anthropologist.
By William R. Maples  and Michael Browning.
Doubleday, $22.95.


Quayle Proclaims Himself Healthy and 'Back in Arena'
In his first major speech since undergoing surgery that raised questions about his health, former Vice President Dan Quayle tried yesterday to dispel doubts about his ability to run for President by saying that he was "back in the arena," ready for an arduous campaign.
Aides to Mr.
Quayle said he intended to make a formal statement of his candidacy in papers to be filed at the Federal Election Commission by Feb. 21.
And he plans to announce his candidacy in a speech by mid-April, they said.


F.Y.I.
East Side, West Side Q.  There's a "compass" laid into a mezzanine floor at Grand Central, near the Lexington line at the Pershing Square exit.
But unless my sense of direction has completely failed me, the "N" arrow is pointing due west.
Is this just there to confuse the tourists?


Leaf Compost Producing A Public Outcry
VOICES and odors are being raised over the last compositing site in the county that takes out-of-town leaves.
As the site continues to draw the ire of its downwind neighbors, the dispute underlines the problem of pursuing environmentally sound leaf disposal in an area as densely developed as southern Westchester.
Complaints by residents of Edgebrook Co-Ops and Parkway Homes here about Alfredo Inc., a nursery and the last composting site in the county that is not operated for a single municipality, have escalated recently.
The town has repeatedly asked the state Department of Environmental Conservation to revoke Alfredo's permit to run a compost operation.
The state has prohibited the nursery from accepting more leaves, while it conducts weekly inspections of the composting area.


Angry Tenants Pin Hopes on MacArthur Foundation
Harry Helmsley bought the Fresh Meadows apartment complex in October 1972.
And two months later, David Buckwalter likes to point out, the Fresh Meadows Tenants Association was founded.
Some 22 years later, Mr.
Buckwalter, the association's president, has compiled a five-page, single-spaced chronicle of its battle with the landlord: complaints over air-conditioning fees, snow removal, defective elevators.


Chinese Gang Suspected in Abduction of 2
Two recent immigrants from China looking for work as cooks in Manhattan were kidnapped on Friday and forced to ask their families in China to pay $30,000 each in ransom to a powerful gang, the police said.
Both men had emigrated from Fuzhou, the capital of Fujian Province in southern China, and settled in Boston about two years ago, said Lieut.
Joseph Pollini, the commander of the Brooklyn Robbery Squad.
But despite the apparent coincidences, the two men did not appear to know each other, he said.


Balancing the Budget Isn't Like Your Checkbook
To the Editor:
The balanced budget amendment is starting to look like a winner (news article, Jan. 17), probably in Congress and possibly in the states.
Leaving aside the the question of the economic desirability of a balanced Federal budget, the argument being made by many politicians that "the Government should have to balance its budget just like the American family" is specious.


Dr. Bernard L. Oser, Biochemist Expert in Food Safety, Dies at 95
Dr.
Bernard L. Oser, a biochemist whose work enriched public awareness of what can safely go into food and drink and cosmetics, died yesterday in Englewood Hospital in Englewood, N.J.
He was 95 years old.
The cause was a gastrointestinal illness, his family said.


Young Newt Gingrich
To the Editor:
"It Takes One to Know One" (Week in Review, Jan. 15), comparing the early years of President Bill Clinton and Newt Gingrich, Speaker of the House, was entertaining, especially the childhood photos of the two dressed up as cowboys.


Corrections
The bibliography note preceding a front-page review in The Times Book Review today identifies the authorship of one work incompletely.
In the note, about "Making Democracy Work," the third line should read, "By Robert D. Putnam with Robert Leonardi and Raffaella Y. Nanetti."


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and the satellite booth at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold, beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


A SENSE OF PLACE
YES, there is nothing but controversy over the recently released New Jersey employment and economic data for 1994, provided by the United States Labor Department.
And yes, the material is so complex that a simple, helpful, straightforward primer is desperately needed by residents of the Garden State.
Here then, from an elite but fictional panel of economic experts, are some lucid answers to the most commonly asked questions from New Jersey residents:


Prince George: Old Arena, New Battle
As the city's largest welfare hotel in the 1980's, the Prince George was a malignant presence on East 28th Street, its social ills spilling from the graffiti-scarred building onto the surrounding streets day and night.
Drug dealing, muggings, shoplifting and prostitution were commonplace.
Co-op owners, who were unable to sell or rent their apartments, fled anyway.
Merchants moved out as soon as their leases expired.
On the east side of Fifth Avenue between 27th and 28th Streets, every ground-floor business -- except Chemical Bank -- closed in the first half of 1986.


Under the Big Top
ARCHIVAL FILMS OF FASHION SHOWS IN Paris in the 50's offer glimpses of an audience of a few hundred people, seated on dainty gilt chairs two or three rows deep, in suites of rooms at the couture houses.
There is no music.
There is no catwalk -- only a white-muslin path laid down for the models, who parade quietly, each bearing a small card announcing the number of the outfit she is wearing.
The editors and buyers inspect the placement of the darts, the tracery of the seams, the weave of the fabric at such close range that they could touch the clothes.
It would be hard to imagine a more prosaic presentation -- lacking in fantasy, lacking in theater.
The fantasy and the theater would come into play later, in the pages of the magazines, as the editors and photographers interpreted the clothes for their readers, taking the raw material of fashion and turning it into entertainment.
Nowadays, it's the professionals who are being entertained and the readers who are served the clothes plain, without the sauce.
For eight days at the end of October, the New York Public Library's backyard became the scene of the latest three-ring media circus, as some 60 designers mounted their shows for spring -- the majority of them extravaganzas that had more in common with Broadway musicals and MTV than with those old, in-house promenades.
Charlie Rose, Mariah Carey, Susan Sarandon and others whose names routinely appear in boldface type turned out to bask in the flashbulbs' glare.


Alison L. Ross, Jonathan S. Green
Alison Leigh Ross, a daughter of Brooke Grace and Allen Jay Ross, both of Birmingham, Mich., was married last evening to Jonathan Simon Green, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Green of London.
Rabbi Richard C. Hertz officiated at the University Club in New York.
Mrs.
Green, 28, was formerly an administrator and cataloguer trainee at Sotheby's in New York.
She graduated from Tulane University.


Thoroughly Modern Monks
This lickety-split age is offering new opportunities for religious orders.
First, there was the Gregorian chant boom, with monk music climbing the charts.
Now, monks are turning to the digital version of a time-honored pursuit -- record keeping.
Electronic Scriptorium, a private company, employs monks and nuns at six monasteries to do jobs like catalogue Johns Hopkins University's medical records and computerize library catalogues.
At the Monastery of the Holy Cross in Chicago, three monks and a nun recently computerized a card catalogue of 32,000 volumes.
For modern monks, the manuscripts are not necessarily illuminated, but they're surely back-lit.


New Heathrow Center Eases Security Checks
The inconvenience of security checks for international transfer passengers at Heathrow Airport near London has been eased by the launching in December of a new flight connection service.
Streamlined security, check-in, immigration and customs procedures will be handled at one central point.
The Flight Connections Center is designed to help the more than seven million passengers who make flight connections at Heathrow every year.


N.F.L.'s Garage Sale Returns in New Form For Expansion Teams
Remember the Plan B free agent lists, the National Football League management version of free agency?
Each team had a list of protected and unprotected players.
Well, it's back in a modified form and it's called the expansion draft list.
Under Plan B free agency, teams were allowed to protect 37 players and leave the remainder unprotected and the other teams in the league were free to pick and choose from the unprotected list.
It was sort of like an N.F.L. garage sale.
Pick up a slightly dented linebacker used only on Sundays.


LIVES WELL LIVED
To reduce the scientific career of Linus Pauling to his inability to elucidate the three-dimensional structure of DNA is criminal.
To allow James D. Watson and Francis Crick to describe their own work on DNA adds insult to injury.


From the Heart of Blues Country
WHEN DAVID (JUnior) Kimbrough began playing the blues 50 years ago at house parties, fish fries and juke joints, he dreamed of cutting his own album.
But he learned early on that record contracts were as scarce as hen's teeth in the Mississippi Delta.
Then, in 1992, a new label in Oxford, Miss., gave him a $400 advance to record "All Night Long." The critical response was overwhelming.
The Washington Post called it "the best Delta blues album in nearly 40 years." Guitar Player named it Best New Release, and Living Blues magazine proclaimed it Album of the Year.
"I always knew my day would come," says Mr.
Kimbrough, 63, in a voice scratched raw by menthol cigarettes and corn liquor.
"I just never knew it would take so long."


Discovering an Underwater Eden
ONE of the few difficult things about snorkeling is not being able to let out a shout at the sight of a teardrop butterfly fish, or a shy sea turtle, or a rare dragon wrasse as it propels its spiny body in and out of the coral.
Hawaii's underwater world is full of such splendors, and witnessing them is an exercise in restraint.
In this silent, mysterious world, I sometimes feel I will implode with the wonder of it.
Instead I gesture madly to my partner, or swim to find him, only to discover that the spectacle I wanted to show him has vanished.
The fleeting nature of the underwater world is a part of its appeal, but those who think they can have the ultimate snorkeling experience simply by jumping into the ocean in mask and snorkel should think again.
There is nothing random about it.


LIVES WELL LIVED
I am not carping about your including some people who were still "wet behind the ears" in your 40 lives.
I do object to your numbers.
Surely 34 men to 6 women is a rather skewed ratio.
To my mind, the backhanded mention you gave several women in your introduction is more of an insult than not being mentioned at all.
HELENE BENARDO Bronx


Vying for Patients, Hospitals Think Location, Location
The mood is as vital as the medicine at the elegant Upper East Side clinic squeezed among the fashionable addresses of Calvin Klein, Ralph Lauren and Barneys New York.
Silk magnolias bloom in the marble lobby and abstract oil paintings dominate the pale rose corridors of Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center's new satellite at East 60th Street and Madison Avenue.


Minutemen Swat Away Temple Bid At Buzzer
John Calipari predicted "a buzzer game." The Massachusetts coach said: "Whoever has the ball last will win. Fortunately, we have Mike Williams."
Williams is the UMass point guard whose baskets in the final seconds beat Temple twice last season, by 1 point each time.


A Customer Often Wronged Explains the Holiday Slump
To the Editor:
I note recent media reports about disappointing holiday sales figures in local department stores.
Such reports rarely if ever include customer treatment as a factor in sluggish sales.


The Imam and the Hip Hop Nation


Dining in Paris
To the Editor: The culinary highlight of my recent trip to Paris was the sumptuous meal enjoyed by six friends and myself at La Sologne, recommended in "What's Doing in Paris" (Oct. 2) as a restaurant that featured seasonal game.
Situated on the eastern side of Paris, in a quieter district than the Latin Quarter (164 Avenue Daumesnil, 43.07.68.97), the restaurant is not likely to be frequented by the unguided tourist.


The Damaged Remnant of a Son
THE PAPERBOY By Pete Dexter. 307 pp. New York: Random House. $23.


Some Co-ops Still Struggle With Default
LIKE thousands of New Yorkers eager to join the real estate gold rush in the mid-1980's, Eric Marcus bought an apartment in a newly converted co-op building.
And like many New Yorkers in the mid-1990's, Mr.
Marcus has seen his investment collapse.
His co-op, the Lincoln Spencer on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, is in foreclosure; his equity, about $25,000, is in danger; his 350-square-foot studio, bought for $65,000, is unsalable.


Tinkering and Debugging
To the Editor:
In his review of Roger Penrose's book "Shadows of the Mind" (Nov. 20) and in his response to Mr.
Penrose's letter to the editor (Dec. 18), Hilary Putnam claims that one can reasonably assume the possibility of a properly functioning computer program that by the time it "has been tinkered with and debugged, no one is really able to explain exactly how it works." Moreover, this isn't any ordinary program that he proposes but an enormous one that is "in the form of a volume the size of the Manhattan telephone book" and that simulates "the brain of an idealized mathematician."


Musical Theater Is Discovering a New Voice
NEVER TURN YOUR BACK ON an audience.
It used to be a golden rule of the theater.
Forgetting your lines was even forgivable; so was missing an entrance.
But turning your back on the "wonderful people out there in the dark," as Norma Desmond called the audience, was the ultimate insult.
Nowadays, turning your back is, well, as common as a comeback.
Thanks to voice amplification -- or, to employ the far more vulgar term, miking -- musical-theater performers can stand on their heads with their backs to the audience, spit nickels and whistle "Dixie" at the same time, and no one's in the least upset.


For Sinai Military Observers, Boredom Is a Friend
The wind, his constant companion, blew cold and harsh as Specialist Montgomery Leija peered through his binoculars to see if any ships were sailing past his island outpost and through the Strait of Tiran.
Nothing.
It was a familiar situation for him and six other American soldiers assigned to lookout duty on desolate Tiran Island, a few miles off this southern tip of the Sinai Peninsula.
They were finishing a three-week tour, and about the most exciting news they had for their commanders in Sharm el Sheik during that period was the Egyptian patrol boat they had spotted entering the Gulf of Aqaba.


CRIME
Tim Cornish, a 24-year-old Englishman who narrates his own torments, enters the story as a comely but overweening narcissist who impetuously falls in love with Ivo Steadman, an intellectually aloof paleontologist.
In the time it takes Ivo to return Tim's passion, the little twit is already bored ("He loved me, therefore I loved him no longer") and infatuated with an enigmatic woman he picks up in a bar while Ivo is lecturing on a cruise ship.


The Park Drives Are Open. No, Closed. No . . .
Under rules that took effect Jan. 2, the drives in Central Park are: closed sometimes and open the rest of the time.
Or is it vice versa?
To some, the park's rules seem to change daily and by whimsy.
Willie Bly, managing director of the League of Mutual Taxi Owners, said, "My men keep coming in here and saying, 'Willie, it's ridiculous, what can we do?' "


Correction
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about new residential construction in New York included an outdated description of the method being used to strengthen the former Gulf and Western Building.
In renovating it for use as a condominium and hotel, builders plan to erect a concrete wall rising through the center of the building to the 33d floor.
An earlier plan, to reinforce the building with a series of columns and trusses, has been abandoned.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE LAST BONGO SUNSET  By Les Plesko. Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.


At Age 80, the Shubert Reassesses Its Role
Mama, it is a play that tells the truth about people, Negroes and life and I think it will help a lot of people to understand how we are just as complicated as they are -- and just as mixed up -- but above all, that we have among our miserable and downtrodden ranks people who are the very essence of human dignity.
That is what, after all the laughter and tears, the play is supposed to say.
I hope it will make you very proud.
See you soon.
Love to all,
Lorraine


Getting to the Top Has New Meaning
The view from the pinnacle of a 110-foot mast, whether it be on a sleek America's Cup yacht, or a lumbering schooner, is quite spectacular.
Like looking at the world through a fish-eye lens, the global proportions of earth begin to take on their distinctly rounded shape.
But it wasn't a fabulous view that the crew of Black Magic 2 had in mind when it watched Murray Jones, a member of the boat's afterguard, perch himself atop the mast during racing last week off San Diego.
It was to look for a fresh breeze.
And by all accounts, the most important of which was the New Zealand team's 5-0 record at the end of the week, they found it.


Commutation From the Exurbs
To the Editor:
Regarding your "Commuting at the Edge of the Exurb Belt" on Dec. 11, dismissing Pennsylvania's Monroe County as culturally schmaltzy and full of heart-shaped bathtubs is unfair to the perfectly normal families and retirees who live in the Poconos' many residential communities.


Neighbors Against Market Should Try Westchester
To the Editor:
As a vendor in the market at Columbus Avenue and 76th Street, by far the best of its kind in New York City, I take serious exception to the biased Jan. 8 article, "Flea Market's Growth Has School Neighbors Waspish."


A Debate Over Punitive Damages
To the Editor:
Richard A. Booth misapprehends the nature of punitive damage awards and the Exxon case.
He emphasizes the role of such awards in allocating social costs by both fine-tuning compensatory damages and raising the incentive to sue, which is only partly true.


14 Hours


On This Campus, the Lessons Are Extracurricular
Tales From the Crypt Presents Demon Knight  Billy Zane, William Sadler, Jada Pinkett Directed by Ernest Dickerson and Gilbert Adler R 93 minutes


Resident Artists on Center Stage
NOTED Connecticut performers and distinguished visitors make up the concert schedule this week.
Among the resident artists are the founding directors of Chamber Music Plus, the cellist Harry Clark and the pianist Sanda Schuldmann, whose recital in Hartford today features guest appearances by the violist Lois Martin, and Isidore Cohen, who for many years was the violinist of the Beaux Arts Trio.
The 3 o'clock program in the Bushnell Seaverns Room lists works of Bruch, Dvorak and the radiant Schumann Piano Quartet.
The telephone number is 232-0085.
Two faculty recitals at Sprague Memorial Hall in New Haven begin the week at Yale, at 8 tonight, with the wife-husband, flute-guitar team of Rie Schmidt and Benjamin Verdery performing an offbeat assortment of solos and duets by Ravi Shankar, Leos Janacek and four lesser known composers.
The pianist Boris Berman will follow with an 8 o'clock program tomorrow night devoted to Haydn, Brahms and Debussy (432-4158).


The 'Jungle Book' And a 'Hallelejah'
COSTUMED ragtime and a narrated "Jungle Book," an all-female "Hallelujah" Chorus and four men from the Metropolitan Opera singing Stephen Foster songs: it's all part of the far-ranging musical mix this week in Westchester.
And for those who venture as far afield as Pearl River, the Fine Arts Symphony under Louis Simon will be sampling the scores from "The Lion King" by Elton John and "The Jungle Book" by Miklos Rozsa.
James Young narrates this "Children's Musical Adventure" today at 2 P.M. in the Pearl River High School.
For travel directions, call 368-2300.


U.S. Exhorted To Maintain Role in Africa
The President of Eritrea, one of Africa's newest nations, has come here to urge the Clinton Administration and Congress not to let the bitter experience of Somalia lead the United States to withdraw from the continent's affairs.
The Eritrean President, Isaias Afewerki, who is on a two-week trip to the United States, said in an interview that African nations need America's diplomatic clout and economic aid to help them achieve peace, democracy and better living standards.


Less Can Mean More
Discounted air fares may get a bit more costly this year for one-time customers booking through American Express.
Starting sometime in the first quarter of 1995, the company plans to add a small service fee to low-cost airline tickets and hotel bookings for leisure travelers in several test markets.
Neither the test markets nor the fees have been determined yet, according to Christine Levite, director of public affairs for American Express Travel Related Services.
But the charges will not apply to corporate clients or regular customers and are not connected with the American Express card.


Please Please Me
To the Editor:
Please!
Enough already!
Really, the time has long passed when your faithful readers should have publicly rebelled against disgruntled authors being granted space on the Letters page to rebut recent reviews of their books that may have been something less than positive.
To add to this clutter, the reviewer is often allowed space to rebut the rebuttal.


It May Be 27 Against 1, But Angelos Battles On
Peter Angelos sat at the most remote corner of a quiet restaurant in Baltimore's Little Italy last week, but still they found him.
Businessmen, the movers and shakers of Baltimore's ever-expanding harbor area, his friends, relatives.
Everyone in Baltimore seems to know one another, it was mentioned to Angelos.
"That's because it's like a family," Angelos said proudly.


Ms. Lindstrom, Mr. Fredericks
Ivy Jo Lindstrom, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vernon O. Lindstrom of Omaha, was married yesterday to William Curtis Fredericks, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Wayne Fredericks of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Philip Clarke performed the ceremony at the Park Avenue United Methodist Church in New York.
Mrs.
Fredericks is a managing director in corporate finance at KPMG Peat Marwick, the accounting concern in New York.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father retired as a store manager at J. C. Penney in Omaha.


LIVES WELL LIVED
I was deeply moved by Wayne Koestenbaum's tribute to Jacqueline Onassis.
Considering that he did not have a personal acquaintance with "Jackie," I thought he captured a very wonderful part of her personality.
JEANNE HAMILTON TROAST Oldwick, N.J.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Displaying Unity, Democratic Party Installs Its Leaders
Setting aside the recriminations and infighting that followed November's stunning defeats, Democrats came together, at least for today, as they installed their party's new leadership and greeted President Clinton with chants of "Six more years!"
At a gathering of the Democratic National Committee that took on the air of a rousing revival meeting, the President followed the Vice President, their wives, two former party chairmen and a former chairwoman and the two new party leaders in promising to do enthusiastic battle with the new Republican majority in Congress.


Pomodoro Scales Down to Open a Junior Version
POMODORINO in New Hyde Park is Pomodoro's kid brother.
It is Pomodoro without the rack of lamb, filet mignon or T-bone steak.
The well-known Pomodoro Restaurants in Port Washington, Huntington and Manhattan have eliminated the highest-priced entrees from their menus and chopped $1 to $3 off most other main courses for the bill of fare at the striking new Pomodorino at 3365 Hillside Avenue (739-1318).


Hearing Seeks Public's Input On 'Contract'
For the first time since its resounding victory last fall, the Republican Congressional majority took its "Contract With America" on the road today, holding a hearing to ask members of the public here for guidance on how to cut the Federal budget.
Despite the first major snowstorm of the year, the hearing by the House Budget Committee drew an overflow weekend crowd to the 850-seat auditorium of Ohio Dominican College.


LIVES WELL LIVED
In his remembrance of George W. Ball, Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. refers to Ball's collaboration with Jean Monnet in transforming post-World War II Western Europe from " 'a coterie of competing states mired in ancient rivalries'  [ in Ball's words ]  into a united continent in which people and goods could move freely." The Marshall Plan was the first step.


It's Two for the Road: U.C.L.A. Wins on Spurt
U.C.L.A. 85, Arizona State 72
Charles O'Bannon scored 19 points and led a run starting the second half that propelled No. 4-ranked U.C.L.A. past No. 13 Arizona State, 85-72, yesterday.
The game was tied, 42-42, before U.C.L.A. began the second half with a 20-5 burst.
O'Bannon had 8 points during the streak.


Rangers Win First, Thanks to 2d Line
During the peak of the Edmonton Oiler era of the 1980's, the problem with playing them was that opponents had to worry about two lines centered by two stars.
If Wayne Gretzky's finesse didn't beat you, Mark Messier's power might do the job on the next shift.
Now that Messier is the veteran captain of the Rangers, he centers their top line, a Power Ranger trio that includes Adam Graves on his left wing and Steve Larmer on his right.


Modern Art's New Home Ready in San Francisco
THIS month the movers and shakers of the international art world and their benefactors are gathering to celebrate the new San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, which was scheduled to open on Wednesday.
The new home of the 60-year-old museum, designed by the Swiss architect Mario Botto and situated on the edge of San Francisco's financial district at 151 Third Street between Mission and Howard Streets, is San Francisco's answer to the rival Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art, which was built nine years ago.


Istanbul
To the Editor: Having returned recently from a trip to Istanbul, I feel compelled to comment on a restaurant recommendation by your correspondent, Alan Cowell, that appeared in "What's Doing in Istanbul" (May 22).
Although many of Mr.
Cowell's recommendations were excellent, the restaurant Sureyya was a big disappointment.
Although the article was about Istanbul, the restaurant is really in Istinye, a 40-minute cab ride awayThe restaurant is in a seaside village, but we were ushered to a table on the terrace overlooking a large Mobil sign at a gas station; we were told that the terrace was otherwise reserved.
Twice we were given a menu without prices; the third menu had prices.
We asked repeatedly for red wine, but were offered white wine twice.
We finally settled for rose, although we had to send back the first rose because it had turned into vinegar.


Pope Calls for Reconciliation in the Chinese Catholic Church
To the Editor:
Re "Pope Offers Chinese a Deal on the Church's Role" (news article, Jan. 15):


BEHIND THE WHEEL/1995 Chrysler Cirrus; New Sedan Recaptures Glory Days of Chrysler
MY maternal grandfather was named Walter Marshall, and he looked very much like Winston Churchill.
He was round and bald.
He chomped stogies.
And he taught me to drive in his pride and joy, a 1936 Chrysler that he had painted green -- with a paintbrush.
He was amazingly patient, considering that I was a 16-year-old leadfoot with immense confidence and no skill.
As I recall, he didn't even say much when I barreled into a corner, bounced over the curb and stalled the engine in what happily was a vacant lot.


POSTINGS: Porcelain Medallions for Cultural Significance; Buildings That Made New York New York
If the New York Landmarks Preservation Foundation has its way, a porcelain medallion will be placed at 81-10 35th Avenue in Jackson Heights, Queens, recording the fact that its architect was also the inventor of Scrabble.
The 1953 tan brick and limestone Educational Building was an addition to the Community United Methodist Church, where Alfred M. Butts began testing versions of the game on parishioners during the Depression.


From Board to Board for Cedar Grove
Complaining of rising crime, a civic association in Cedar Grove announced recently that it wanted to wall off its small community by erecting gates and employing security guards.
Now, the city has decided to redraw the lines for Community Boards 7 and 8.
Cedar Grove would move from 7 into 8.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Bonnie Timmermann, casting director, finds faces for Hollywood, sometimes in strange places.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Joseph and Pilar Montero's bar in Brooklyn echoes with the sounds of a maritime past.
MOVIE CLOCK 12  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 13  Photographs from the depths of Grand Central, a tribute to community gardens and art from the over-60 crowd.
GOOD EATING 14  A tour through Chelsea, a mix of Italian, Mexican and Asian fare.
SOAPBOX 15  You see something wrong.
You want to get involved.
One man's story.
Plus letters.


Mickey in a Post-Modern Mecca: A Fest of Art Talk
FOUR THOUSAND ARTISTS, art historians, curators, critics, other arts professionals and students will be there.
More than 100 sessions (as well as exhibitions, receptions and job-placement events) are on the roster.
But what's on their minds?
Here are excerpts from papers that will be presented at the annual meeting of the College Art Association, the nation's only professional association for the visual arts, which starts on Wednesday in San Antonio.
Mickey, Minnie and Mecca: Destination Disney World, Pilgrimage in the 20th Century -- Cher Krause, Temple University


The Chechen Backlash
Just a few years ago the Russian Army was thought capable of barreling across the Fulda Gap in Germany and swiftly engulfing Western Europe.
Those days are gone.
The army required more than a month to push back a ragtag militia and win control of the presidential palace in Grozny, the capital of Chechnya.
That blundering performance demonstrates how little the army threatens the rest of Europe -- and how much it threatens Russia itself.
Even a partial accounting of the Chechen battle, which President Boris Yeltsin has prematurely declared over, shows the calamitous cost of keeping a broken army: hundreds of civilians killed in indiscriminate bombing raids, a small city left in ruins, scores of soldiers dead from friendly fire or gunned down during feckless efforts to capture Grozny, near insurrection in the ranks and officer corps.


Sides of Grand Central Commuters Never See
EVER wonder what's underneath Grand Central Terminal (besides the rats and the cockroaches)?
"It's a whole 'nother world down there," says Howard Asch, director of public programming at the Jamaica Arts Center in Queens.
What the average person is not allowed to see is exactly what Accra Shepp has put into an exhibition of his photographs, which opened yesterday at the center.


The Discomfort of Aging in 'Gin Game'
IT'S Sunday afternoon, visitors' day at the Bentley Nursing and Convalescent Home for the Aged, but nobody's coming to call on Fonsia Dorsey and Weller Martin, whose lives have been defined by estranged relationships and free-floating hostility.
And it only gets worse in "The Gin Game," the playwright D. L. Coburn's untranscendent, humorless view of aging, where the benumbed are cooped up in "a warehouse for the intellectually and emotionally dead."


46 Years


In Chappaqua, Sculptors and Curators With County Roots
WHETHER or not they live in Westchester, the four sculptors showing in the garden of the Chappaqua Library, here, all have their roots in the county.
The same goes for the show's curators, Gary Golio, who succeeded Marilyn Grossman as director of the gallery last summer, and his longtime friend, Mary Udell, whose Sound Shore Gallery flourished for six years in Port Chester, before relocating (six years ago) to its present site in Stamford.
Given the space presided over by Mr.
Golio and the sculptors in Mrs.
Udell's stable, the collaboration was inevitable.
Chappaqua Library is a grand spread with walls inside and out made of blond concrete that has a ridged surface reminiscent of wide-wale corduroy.
While the roughly 14-year-old structure is the last word in the International Style, the grounds have a medieval touch in the stream that flows around the edge like a moat.
Visitors walk through the library to find the gallery at the rear -- a long room with windows and doors giving on to the garden and its sculpture display, of which more anon.
In the gallery is a show of paintings by Belle Manes and small bronzes by Isabel Shaw, which was selected by Mr.
Golio's predecessor.
Ms.
Manes has exhibited her still lives and interiors with figures in the galleries and museums of Connecticut and Westchester for more than a decade, during which time her compositions seem to have grown denser and her colors stronger.
Where some might regard drawing and painting as separate activities, this artist does the two simultaneously, building up masses even as she defines and redefines their contours.
It is a technique born of Cubism, which in Ms.
Manes's case, yields recognizable shapes notwithstanding numerous pentimenti.


Let's Hear It (But Quietly) For Listeners
RECENT SUGGESTIONS THAT CONCERT halls hire interior decorators, hang video screens and foster a hip, informal atmosphere may be meretricious attempts to seduce the innocent into empty seats, but they are also signs of a profound change.
The classical-concert form, once a seemingly inviolate set of practices and behaviors, is in transition.
For several generations, the concert has had an almost ritualistic quality.
A two-hour event, it generally offers works in 19th-century styles, beginning with an overture or other curtain-raiser, proceeding to a concerto or other showpiece and concluding (after intermission) with a grand symphony or a work demanding unusual concentration.
Encores are chosen to amaze and entertain, with acrobatic marvels or disarmingly simple lyricism.
This sequence serves a purpose, drawing listeners deeper into the art form before sending them off with frothy desserts.


BENEFITS
St.
Bart's Restoration  MONDAY -- The New York Landmarks Conservancy and St.
Bartholomew's Church will celebrate a joint effort to restore the church, at Park Avenue and 51st Street, and its community house.
A reception at 6 P.M. will include a guided tour and will be followed with a lecture at 7 by Roger G. Kennedy, the director of the National Parks Service.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 995-5260.
Cabaret for a Hospital  MONDAY -- The New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center will benefit from a cabaret evening at the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center.
The black-tie event will include a reception at 7, a performance by Natalie Cole and a dinner-dance.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 685-1095.
Year of the Pig  THURSDAY -- The Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund will benefit from a celebration of the Lunar New Year at the Silver Palace, a restaurant at 50-52 Bowery (near Canal Street).
The event will welcome the Year of the Pig.
A cocktail reception at 6 P.M. is to be followed by a Chinese banquet.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 966-5932.
For the Academy of Medicine  THURSDAY -- The New York Academy of Medicine will honor Dr.
Mathilde Krim and Dr.
Saul J. Farber at a black-tie evening at the Plaza.
The event begins with cocktails at 6:30.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 675-9474.
Heart Throbs  THURSDAY -- The American Heart Association will benefit from an auction of evenings with some prominent bachelors, including Alex Donner, Chappy Morris and Fabio.
The event, at Maxim's, 680 Madison Avenue at 61st Street, will begin with cocktails at 7:30, followed by the auction at 8:30.
A light buffet will be served.
Tickets, $70, from (212) 661-5335, extension 206.
Viennese Opera Ball  FRIDAY -- The 40th annual Viennese Opera Ball benefiting the Margit Bokor-Norman Scott Memorial Fund for Cancer Research at Columbia Presbyterian Cancer Center will be held at the Waldorf-Astoria.
A Champagne reception at 8 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing.
White or black tie, and decorations.
Tickets, $270, from (212) 819-0158.
Painting the Town Red  FRIDAY -- The 1995 Beaux-Arts Ball at the National Academy of Design, 1083 Fifth Avenue (at 89th Street), will benefit the academy's education and exhibition programs.
The event, from 8:30 P.M. to 12:30 A.M. and sponsored by the academy's junior committee, will include a casino, a raffle, drinks, a buffet and dancing.
Black tie for men; red dresses are suggested for women.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 369-4880.
Growing Up With Opera  FRIDAY -- A party and preview of two works will benefit the education programs of the Metropolitan Opera Guild.
The afternoon party will begin at 3:15 at the John Jay Theater, 899 10th Avenue (at 59th Street), and the performance, aimed at children 6 through 12, will start at 4:15.
Children must be accompanied by an adult and must be at least 6.
Tickets, $30, from (212) 769-7068 or 7062.
For Movement and Dance  SATURDAY -- Movement Research, an organization for dance and choreography, will benefit from a reception at 6 P.M. and a performance at 8 at the Pace Downtown Theater, 3 Spruce Street (across from City Hall).
Dancers include Lucy Guerin and the Ralph Lemon Company.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 477-6854.
Benefit for Boys and Girls  SATURDAY -- The Madison Square Boys and Girls Club will hold its annual fund-raiser party at the Toy Building, 200 Fifth Avenue (at 23d Street), from 9 P.M. to 2:30 A.M.
The event includes hors d'oeuvres, an open bar and dancing.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 532-0858.


East Germany Kept Nazi Past in Mind
To the Editor:
"Germany's Awful Anniversary" (The Week in Review, Jan. 15) is only partly accurate to state that for two decades after World War II: "Germans assiduously ignored much of the truth about the Nazi dictatorship. Schoolchildren were taught little about the horrors their parents witnessed or perpetrated." You note that many bureaucrats and industrialists who had been part of the Nazi machine "were quietly welcomed back into society."


Corrections
An article yesterday about allegations of foul play in the death of Doris Duke, the tobacco heiress, rendered several names incorrectly in some editions.
Miss Duke's butler was Bernard Lafferty, not Bertrand; her father was James Buchanan Duke, not James Biddle Duke; her doctor was Harry B. Demopoulos, not Demopolous.


INSIDE
Treatment Close to Home
Seeking to draw new patients, hospitals like Columbia-Presbyterian are setting up clinics in neighborhoods far from their home base, and even overseas.
Page 25.
Thorny Bosnia Tenure
The commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia is finishing his stint there, leaving behind a safer capital but an angry Government.
Page 6.


Here Come the Many-Hued Camellias
THE camellias are in bloom.
Indoors, of course.
Every year about this time, these glorious plants burst their buds and the display will continue for many weeks in glorious shades.
One is pink, then there is a red one with ruffled petals and a reluctant, show-off white.
Never mind the frozen scene outside; here is beauty.


'The Tomato in America'
To the Editor:
I was delighted that Laura Shapiro bothered to review only a few pages of my book "The Tomato in America: Early History, Culture, and Cookery" ("Book Salad: Sometimes Food Is a Character, Sometimes Just a Fashion Accessory," Dec. 25).
As she evidences no knowledge about the introduction and adoption of the tomato in America, she would only have botched the review further had she proceeded.


Gang in Kobe Organizes Aid for People In Quake
Already harshly criticized for confusion in its earthquake relief effort in Kobe, the Government is now suffering the embarrassment of reports that Japan's largest organized crime group is running a big operation to provide food and supplies to quake victims.
For the fourth straight day, the Yamaguchi-gumi, a feared group of gangsters based in Kobe, handed out food, water and diapers today to people in its devastated neighborhood.
In Japan, organized crime groups operate largely in the open, and the operation, which is said to be more efficient than the Government's, has been a source of pride for the gangsters.


Chicken Enchilada And Pastas Galore
BRIGHT FOOD SHOP ++ (212) 243-4433; 216 Eighth Avenue, at 21st Street; $; no credit cards


A Debate Over Punitive Damages
To the Editor:
Richard Booth aside from failing to recognize that the Exxon jury was sending a message, perhaps the only one that giant companies can understand, was also advancing the baseless, and by now, stale arguments customarily used to attack any award of punitive damages.


Technology; Want the 99th Floor? Getting There May Be Half the Fun
THERE seems to be a rule of life in the high-rise world: when you are really, really in a hurry, the elevator takes forever to arrive.
Elevator makers have been trying to make vertical travel quicker and more convenient.
They have been replacing the slower motor and gear technology with gearless lift systems.
Those elevators eliminate the gears and make the motor part of the pulley that controls the movement of the wire cables that suspend the elevator car and its counterweight.


Bicycles With Attitude
"CYCLES of Expression," the Southern California Institute of Architecture's show of 32 born-again bicycles at Grand Central Terminal, may take you back to the days when you were about 5 years old and trying to tame a two-wheeler.
Bicycle No. 1 has no pedals, No. 2 has no brakes, and the steering wheel is missing on No. 3.
You can only travel downhill on this bicycle and only in circles on that one.


RESULTS PLUS
HIGH SCHOOLS  Guard Versus Guard  Shaheen Holloway, of St.
Patrick's in Elizabeth, N.J., believed that his New York City homecoming in the Adidas Super would turn out much different than it did yesterday at Fordham University.
The nation's No. 1 rated junior point guard expected it to be him against Stephon Marbury, the country's top-ranked senior guard.
Holloway also anticipated his shots falling with consistency and his team, ranked No. 19 in the nation, knocking off the land's No. 10 team, Lincoln.


Pain Is Too Much Fun To Share With Animals
DOWNTOWN -- There are many things you could wear to the Tunnel, the club on West 27th Street, that might offend Steve Lewis enough to turn you away.
Mr.
Lewis, the suave associate director in charge of the door, learned his craft by studying Steve Rubell at Studio 54, and has worked at many clubs that became known for treating patrons like applicants.
He has an eye for what he calls "dressed."
The concept of "dressed" can operate on a sliding scale.
Johnny Depp, for example, would be welcome at the Tunnel in old jeans and a sweatshirt.
You might not, unless the look really worked for you or you had a business card that said something useful like "MTV" on it.
White sneakers might also keep you out of the Tunnel.
Platform sneakers or a skateboard could get you in, but not always.
Black is usually safe, as is anything silly like a tutu or bunny rabbit hat.
But it's hard to know for sure.


Carol Atkin and Martin Munter
CAROL ATKIN owns Stella Dallas, a vintage-clothing store in Greenwich Village filled with fitted jackets, fedoras with feathers, hostess pajamas and other clothes from the 1940's.
She calls Barbara Stanwyck and Claudette Colbert, screen stars from that era, the guardian angels of the store.
"The 40's were a special time in history, when men went to war and women ran businesses, drove buses, made money," Ms.
Atkin said.
"There was a jaunty joy and confidence that came along with that, and you can see it in the clothes. It's a never-say-die look."


James Bell, 80, Expert on Plasticity
James Bell, a professor of solid mechanics at Johns Hopkins University who did extensive research into how materials undergo change, died on Sunday at his home in Baltimore.
He was 80.
The cause was cancer, said his wife of 54 years, Perra Bell.


In Totalitarian Cuba, Ice Cream and Understanding
IN THE EARLY YEARS OF THE Cuban revolution, Havana's landmark Coppelia ice cream parlor served 54 flavors.
Fidel Castro boasted that this impressive array surpassed even the selection offered by that Yankee capitalist enterprise Howard Johnson's.
But with Cuba now in severe economic straits, visitors to the open-air Coppelia are lucky to find two flavors.
"Strawberry and Chocolate," the latest work of the 66-year-old Tomas Gutierrez Alea, Cuba's foremost director, has its key scene at the ice cream parlor, where a gay intellectual named Diego (Jorge Perugorria) contrives to pick up a heterosexual Communist militant, David (Vladimir Cruz).
The film, which opened here on Friday and will be shown at the Sundance Film Festival this evening, chronicles their unlikely friendship in a controlled society where respect for diversity, be it of ice cream flavors, sex or ideas, has often been hard to come by.
Caryn James of The New York Times, reviewing "Strawberry and Chocolate" at the New York Film Festival last fall, called the movie a "breezy charmer about a relationship shaped by severe political struggle."


Plow in One Hand, Six-Shooter in the Other
THE FRONTIER IN AMERICAN CULTURE By Richard White and Patricia Nelson Limerick.
Edited by James R. Grossman.
Illustrated. 116 pp.
Berkeley:  University of California Press.
Cloth, $30.
Paper, $15.


'Harmless' Light Logo Meets a Brick Wall
Batman is free to beam his spotlight emblem into the night skies.
But what goes in Gotham does not necessarily fly in New York.
The Velvet Room, a restaurant on East 76th Street, has caused a stir by using a halogen-bulb projector to display its name in white light every night.
The image, about two stories high, appears on a brick wall across the street at Wagner Junior High School.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 22, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
19
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
9
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young student's mysterious drowning in Victorian England.
3
32
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
4
4
NATURAL CAUSES, by Michael Palmer. (Bantam, $5.99.) A physician is accused of being responsible for the deaths of pregnant women.
5
36
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
6
17
THE VAMPIRE LESTAT, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Eerie carryings-on in a tale ranging from ancient Egypt to the 20th century.
7
12
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery writer's happy family life -- and the madman determined to take his place.
8
21
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
9
1
LITTLE WOMEN, by Louisa May Alcott. (Pocket, $5.50.) The 1868 novel about four sisters in New England.
10
2
LORD HARRY, by Catherine Coulter. (Topaz, $5.99.) A 19th-century woman disguises herself as a man to avenge her brother's death.
11
1
SHEBA, by Jack Higgins. (Berkley, $5.99.) In 1939, an archeologist discovers a Nazi plan to destroy the Suez Canal.
12*
14
THE QUEEN OF THE DAMNED, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Continuing the author's chronicle of 6,000 years of vampirism.
13
8
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $4.99.) The romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
14
1
LOVERS, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $6.99.) Romance, rivalry and fun as experienced by half a dozen couples.
15
2
ELOQUENT SILENCE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $6.50.) A man, a woman and his deaf daughter look for solace in New Mexico.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
18
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
5
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on life.
3
2
CONTRACT WITH AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich, Dick Armey, et al. (Times Books/Random House, $10.) The Republican program.
4
54
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
5
17
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters reflect on their lives.
6
6
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
7
585
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
8
13
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
9*
21
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
10
52
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
11
99
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) A memoir.
12*
36
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
13
1
FLY FISHING THROUGH THE MIDLIFE CRISIS, by Howell Raines. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) A journalist looks at middle age through the prism of his favorite sport.
14
11
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.
15*
27
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
16*
9
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) Thoughts on 44 years of marriage.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
17
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
3
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1995. (World Almanac/Funk &amp; Wagnalls, $8.95.) The latest edition of the reference work.
3
195
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
4
1
WHAT TO EXPECT THE TODDLER YEARS, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $15.95.) For parents of children in their second and third years.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 7, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


In Mexico, Ruling Party Faces Revolt By Members
Jose Dominguez Cruz had a bloody scrape under one eye and another across his nose, but the smile on his face was triumphant.
"We have tolerated many things," the burly, 67-year-old welder said Thursday night, after he and other governing party stalwarts had driven out hundreds of leftists who had been blocking the governor of Tabasco state from entering his offices since his disputed election last fall.
"We are not going to tolerate them anymore."


Echoes of Piaf
To the Editor: Enjoyed the Piaf article and would like to add a line of credit for the noted sculptor of the plaque at the Piaf memorial.


Streetscapes/1088 Park Avenue; The Virtues and Vices of New, and Old, Windows
AFTER a three-year moratorium on window replacements, the co-op corporation of the 1925 apartment house at 1088 Park Avenue has decided to go ahead with a first-class window replacement program.
Because many of the shareholders will be allowed to keep their original wooden frames, the building will become an ongoing laboratory for studying the virtues and vices of new -- and old -- windows.


School Plans Longer Classes
KINGS PARK is planning to double the length of periods in its high school in September and pave the way for a new curriculum.
Last month four faculty members from Kings Park High School and the principal, John Merone, visited Brockport High School near Rochester with one parent.
Brockport started longer periods last year, because, the district said, the schedule uses time better, improves college preparation, allows for additional in-depth study and creative thinking and requires less time to change classes.


Bale That Hay, Prepare That Food and Sack That Quarterback
It capsized Troy Aikman 19 times, soiled his uniform and dislodged his mouthpiece.
The San Francisco 49er defensive line may come from all walks of life -- there's a hay baler and a restaurateur, to name two -- but it keeps meeting at the quarterback.
Aikman, its target, was sacked four times in last Sunday's playoff game, and that's not counting the 15 other times he was knocked off his feet.
As Deion Sanders will testify from his Atlanta days, a defensive secondary is only as good as its pass rush, and the 49ers now have some semblance of one -- just in time for the Super Bowl.
It is an evolution two years in the making, and San Francisco has Emmitt Smith to thank.


The More Cabdrivers Change . . .
It was 1 A.M., and Little India was stirring.
Taxis snaked down Lexington Avenue.
The staccato of slamming car doors pierced the night silence.
Drivers poured out of their cabs, and filed into East in the West cafeteria.
Some sat in groups, speaking Bengali or Punjabi, between bites of naan bread -- the house speciality.
Others read copies of Thikana, which bills itself as the largest Bengali news weekly.


Who's Gifted? Schools Take a New Look
A SIXTH grader failing nearly every subject is the best arts student in the school.
A fifth grader reads on a third-grade level but is chosen for All County band, while an eighth graderseems always to be straightening out other people's arguments.
Which of these students is gifted?
They all may be.
Under a new program in the Mount Vernon school district, giftedness is seen as a wide spectrum of talents that the schools must find and cultivate.


Shoes by the Square Foot
Some 24,000 square feet of footwear -- including shoes worn by Queen Victoria, Elton John and Winston Churchill -- will be displayed at a new museum in Toronto scheduled to open in early May.
The Bata Shoe Museum, at 327 Bloor Street West, is a project headed by Sonja Bata, who is a director of Bata Ltd., the headquarters of a group of international shoe manufacturing and retail companies.
The museum, with five floors of exhibit space, will be supported by a charitable foundation and members of the Bata family.
The first exhibits will include 19th-century shoes, Inuit boots and illustrations from contemporary children's books about shoes.
TERRY TRUCCO


Plymouth's Past, Present and Future
Reports of Plymouth's death have been greatly exagerated.
Almost from its birth in 1928, Plymouth was a contender.
By 1932 it was no. 3 in sales, behind Chevrolet and Ford, a position it steadfastly held in most model years throughout the 30's, 40's and 50's.
Then in the early 1960's, the Chrysler Corporation, Plymouth's parent, seemed to lose its way for a time.


Nets' Owners, Coleman To Display Solidarity
Beset with growing criticism and with the knowledge that his reputation among fans is turning sour quickly, Derrick Coleman has been tentatively scheduled to speak at a press conference with two of the Nets' owners after today's game at the Meadowlands, a source familiar with the situation said late last night.
With the purpose of pledging his long-term commitment to the franchise and ending all speculation surrounding the possibility of his leaving the team, Coleman will reportedly attend the press conference with Nets' officers David Gerstein and Jerry Cohen after the club's 2 P.M. game with Washington.


Swiss and Austrians In a Carnival Mood
Travelers looking for unusual Carnival events in Europe will find them in Switzerland and Austria.
In Basel, for example, the customary pre-Lenten observance takes place a few days after Ash Wednesday, which this year is March 1.
Called Basler Fasnacht,(Basel Carnival) the three-day celebration stretches from 4 A.M. on Monday, March 6, to 4 A.M. on Thursday, March 9.
Until daybreak on the first morning, as many as 20,000 people gather in the old part of town to watch groups of costumed revelers carry huge lanterns through the streets.
On Monday and Wednesday afternoons there are parades with floats and horse-drawn carriages, and on Tuesday children dress up in homemade costumes for their own parades.
Each evening residents and visitors gather in restaurants, where humorists recite poems about politicians and current events; throughout the night people follow fife and drum players through the streets.


Technology; The Sears Tower Challenge
CONTROL systems are at the cutting edge of elevator technology, with the mechanical components largely proven and highly reliable.
But very tall buildings can pose unusual challenges.
One was posed by the elevators that run to the observation deck at the top of the 110-story Sears Tower in Chicago.
When the elevators in the building were updated in the mid-1980's, the engineers calculated that the wire cables lifting the cars would stretch as much as 10 feet during the cables' useful life of four to five years.


Jan. 15-21; I Compute, Therefore You Die
IT is a sobering thought that after decades of developing the technology to create a global computer community, one of the first things users have done with their newfound power is to figure out a way to blast each other into oblivion.
The phenomenon is Doom, a stomach-churning, three-dimensional computer game that revels in blood and gore and has become entrenched over the last year as the biggest cult hit of the computer world.


LIVES WELL LIVED
Indeed, if Mrs.
Onassis did lead one of the "lives worth celebration," then she deserved to be celebrated by someone who knew her, and not by a panting, self-described "Jackie-lover," who seems to have spent far too much time staring at tabloids in supermarket aisles.
RAEONA JORDAN Chicago


In Performance; THEATER
Restoration Comedy From a Female Hand  'The Emperor of the Moon' The Ohio Theater
The 17th and 20th centuries are coexisting agreeably these nights at the Ohio Theater on Wooster Street, where the theater company Arden Party is romping through Karin Coonrod's staging of "The Emperor of the Moon."


Budget Amendment May Be Short Of Enough States for Ratification
If Congress approves a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced Federal budget, many state legislatures will probably ratify the measure quickly, but maybe too few to make it part of the Constitution.
A state-by-state survey by correspondents of The New York Times found that some legislatures, afraid of the fiscal consequences, would most likely refuse to ratify the amendment and that the outlook was cloudy enough in others to raise considerable doubt that it will ever be adopted.


Brodeur Strong in Net, But Devils Settle for Tie
Martin Brodeur was hampered by a sprain in his left ankle all week, but when the Devils took the ice for their season opener he came up with a goaltending performance reminiscent of last season's playoffs.
Still, Brodeur and the Devils had to settle for a 2-2 tie with the Hartford Whalers here tonight because Whalers goaltender Jeff Reese was equal to if not better than Brodeur.


Ohio Edison Co.(OEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Does a Thriller's Title Contain a Clue? Guess.
VANISHING ACT  By Thomas Perry  289 pages. Random House. $23.
At the outset of Thomas Perry's complicated but ultimately gratifying new thriller, Jack Killigan, a private investigator, is stalking a woman in a Los Angeles airport.
The woman is apparently running away from her wealthy husband, who has hired Killigan to catch her and bring her back.


Astoria Financial Corp.(ASFC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bay Networks Inc.(BNET,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ruddick Corp.(RDK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


New England Business Service Inc.(NEBS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 23


Bank of Boston Corp.(BKB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Taps Go Dry as Puerto Rico Copes With Drought
Domingo and Ramona Maldonado say they saw it coming.
First, the water from their faucets lost pressure.
Then, it sputtered to a halt.
After weeks of speculation, water rationing began again this week for parts of Puerto Rico because of what officials say is a continuing drought that has depleted some water reserves.


Thousands Protest the Dismissal of a Leftist French Bishop
While Pope John Paul II was addressing huge crowds in Asia and the Pacific last week, thousands of people in France were in the streets demonstrating against his dismissal of the Bishop of Evreux for his leftist views.
Today thousands more spilled out of the soaring Gothic church that had been Bishop Jacques Gaillot's cathedral for 12 years and into the rain-swept streets to hear his last homily here.
The message was to take the gospel of hope for the poor and others he called "outcasts" -- AIDS victims, homosexuals, the unemployed -- as the Bishop did.


Coleman Wants to Be a Lifelong Net
From his perceived bad attitude to his alleged lack of commitment, Derrick Coleman tried to do away with all the innuendo and speculation today, pledging his commitment to the franchise that made him the league's highest-paid player a year ago.
His team, of course, did everything they could to change his mind in a 109-103 loss to the Washington Bullets at Byrne Meadowlands Arena this afternoon.
But no dice.


Slipping Through Cracks and Out the Door; Pressures of Policy and Budget Let Psychiatric Patients Just Walk Away
Each day, Fred Daniels sends out four or five patients at a time for fresh air, under the watch of the single worker he can spare from Ward 10A of Manhattan Psychiatric Center.
Then he waits to see how many come back.
Often, one of the patients bolts while the worker looks on helplessly, unable to abandon the other patients.
Mr.
Daniels says it makes no sense to ask one worker to look after so many people, but he says the hospital has no choice.
State officials settled a lawsuit by requiring that hundreds of patients be escorted outside each day, but provided no new escorts and have yet to finish the fenced-in area that would minimize runaways.


Data Network Is Found Open To New Threat
A Federal computer security agency has discovered that unknown intruders have developed a new way to break into computer systems, and the agency plans on Monday to advise users how to guard against the problem.
The new form of attack leaves many of the 20 million government, business, university and home computers on the global Internet vulnerable to eavesdropping and theft.
Officials say that unless computer users take the complicated measures they will prescribe, intruders could copy or destroy documents or even operate undetected by posing as an authorized user of the system.


Perkin-Elmer Corp.(PKN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Despite the Risks, the U.N. Plans a World Conference on Poverty
Threatened by a general decline in foreign aid worldwide, a Republican-led Congress bent on cutting American contributions, and a White House that is cool toward internationalism except where trade is involved, the United Nations is nonetheless preparing for its first conference on poverty and other social problems.
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali and diplomats who have been promoting what they call the World Summit for Social Development see it as a chance to demonstrate that the United Nations, far from being only a peacekeeping agent, has a major role in alleviating social ills in an age of petty wars and widening income gaps.


'Harvey Milk' Opens in Houston With the Reverence Built In
A giant image of Maria Callas with bright red lips appears several times in "Harvey Milk," which received its premiere at the Houston Grand Opera on Saturday night.
She looms over an onstage audience of cheering gay men.
In their midst is Harvey Milk, San Francisco's first openly homosexual elected official, who loved opera and even attended a performance the night before he was assassinated in 1978.
So how does he fare on the other side of the proscenium, as the subject of a much-discussed, already debated work that will be shown here through Feb. 5, at the New York City Opera in the spring and in San Francisco next season?
To the opera's credit, the answer is not simple.
With music by Stewart Wallace and libretto by Michael Korie, the work is a rambunctious combination of banality and effective drama, posturing, playfulness and polemics.
Long stretches of the score, which is written with a mixture of free atonality, 1980's eclecticism and ersatz pop, are lyrically awkward and unconvincing, but much of the last act is pungent and focused.
The cast was generally excellent (with one relatively unknown singer, Gidon Saks, making a strong impression), the conducting by Ward Holmquist fervent, and the production by Christopher Alden imaginative, but it was impossible to separate onstage events from offstage history.


FPL Group Inc.(FPL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


LaSalle National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Vietnam Won the Right to Choose Its Destiny; Real Foundation Stones
To the Editor:
Thomas L. Friedman in "Ha Noi or Ha Loi" (column, Jan. 15) describes an incident in Hanoi where every morning a Vietnamese woman crouched on the sidewalk with her bathroom scale, and he gave her a dollar and weighed himself.


Federal Paper Board (FBO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Michigan National (MNCO,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Vietnam Won the Right to Choose Its Destiny; What's in the Archives?
To the Editor:
It may be wise for the United States to establish full diplomatic relations with Vietnam, as Thomas L. Friedman advises (column, Jan. 18).
But some of his arguments are based on misconceptions.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Suns Cut It Close in Overtime  Elliot Perry's free throw with four-tenths of a second left in overtime lifted the Phoenix Suns to a 111-110 victory over the visiting Orlando Magic yesterday in a meeting of the league's two best teams.
Because Perry missed the rim on his second shot, Orlando got the ball back but couldn't get a shot off before the buzzer.
Perry, who also hit a key 3-pointer in overtime, was fouled by Anfernee Hardaway, a former high school teammate, as Perry let go a desperation 18-foot jumper.
Dan Majerle led all scorers with 28 points and Charles Barkley added 25.
Shaquille O'Neal had 24 for Orlando (32-8).
Phoenix is 30-8. (AP)


Teppco Partners L.P.(TPP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Footwear Marketers Change Accounts
Three casual footwear marketers made account changes last week.
The Stride Rite International Corporation unit of the Stride Rite Corporation in Cambridge, Mass., has selected BDDP in Boulogne, France, as the first agency to handle advertising for its pan-European account.
Though billings were not disclosed, Campaign, the British trade publication, estimated them at $15.5 million.


Revealing the Magic of Movie Making
Even in a season of multipart PBS documentaries, "American Cinema" is a big-ticket item.
This 10-hour analysis of more than a half-century of made-in-America movies looks affectionately at stars and studios, at westerns and romantic comedies, at war movies and film noir and more.
Although the achievement does not match the ambition, there are rewards along the way.
Tonight's opener, "The Hollywood Style," is strongest when it is demonstrating the ways directors, writers and film editors keep us enthralled.
Among the more pertinent and pleasurable examples are Joseph Mankiewicz's dialogue in "All About Eve," the fast cuts from "Bonnie and Clyde" and the way the camera put the audience in Montgomery Clift's shoes in "A Place in the Sun," in Jack Nicholson's shoes in "Chinatown" and in Robert De Niro's seat in "Taxi Driver."


Aaron Rents Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Vastar Resources Inc.(VRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pinnacle West Capital Corp.(PNW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Pilgrim's Pride Corp.(CHX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accounts
Coleman Co., Wichita, Kan., to Martin/Williams Advertising, Minneapolis, to handle advertising for the maker of camping and outdoor leisure products, previously at Sullivan Higdon &amp; Sink, Wichita.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $7 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Unknown intruders have developed a new way to break into computer systems.
For computer users, the problem is akin to homeowners' learning that burglars have master keys to all the front doors in the neighborhood.
The new form of attack leaves many of the 20 million government, business, university and home computers on the global Internet vulnerable to eavesdropping and theft.
A Federal computer-security agency plans to advise users today on a complicated set of measures to prevent it.  [ Page A1. ]


Wilmington Trust Corp.(WILM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TNT Freightways Corp.(TNTF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Oshkosh Truck Corp.(OTRKB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Embassy Officials in Bosnia at Odds Over Talks With Serbs
Sharp dissent emerged at the United States Embassy in Sarajevo today over the Clinton Administration's decision to change its policy and engage in direct negotiations with the Bosnian Serbs despite their rejection of an international peace plan.
The dissent centered on what one official described as attempts by the State Department to oust the American Ambassador to Bosnia, Victor Jackovich, who has always rejected direct talks with the Serbs until they accept the peace plan.
He was recalled to Washington on Wednesday for what were officially described as "consultations."


Ethyl Corp.(EY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dare May Need Knee Surgery
Yinka Dare's rookie season has been nothing short of a bad dream, and it may get worse before it gets better for the Nets' first-round draft choice.
Coach Butch Beard and General Manager Willis Reed said today that the 7-foot center from George Washington University may have to have surgery on his right knee soon.
Dare, who will be re-evaluated by team doctors this week, will not travel with the Nets for their West Coast swing.
He has been on the injured list since Nov. 15 with tendinitis in his right knee.
He played in only one game before that, grabbing 1 rebound in 3 minutes against the Bullets.


Navy's First Female Combat Pilot Loses Sea Duty
The Navy has reassigned the first female pilot qualified to fly combat missions from an aircraft carrier because she had problems landing on the ship, Navy officials said today.
Lieut.
Shannon Workman, 28, of Cumberland, Md., has returned to a Navy command in Norfolk, Va., from her assignment as an EA-6B pilot aboard the aircraft carrier Eisenhower in the Adriatic Sea because of performance problems, said Comdr.
Stephen Pietropaoli, a Navy spokesman.


Suicide Attempts on the Rise Among Cuban Refugees
Cuban refugees at an American-operated camp in Panama, frustrated by their inability to win admission to the United States, have been attempting suicide in increasing numbers, causing rising concern among military officials there over the detainees' well-being.
The officials said that in the last six weeks 31 Cubans had tried to hang themselves or overdose on prescription drugs, equaling the number of refugees who tried to harm themselves in the first 13 weeks of the Panama operation, which began in September near the Panama Canal.
None of the suicide attempts -- only 12 of which the military considered serious -- were successful.


Living Centers of AmericaInc.(LCA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Unlocked Doors Invite Public Housing Crime
To the Editor:
As a lawyer who represents rape victims assaulted in their New York City Housing Authority buildings, I am compelled to respond to "Bringing Cops to Public Housing," your Jan. 17 editorial on the high rate of crime in the projects and the proposal that Housing Authority police should reside in the projects.


Standard Products Co.(SPD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fort Wayne National reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Smith (A.O.) Corp.(SMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Continuum Co. (CNU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First National Bancorp (Georgia) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Auctions Set At Treasury
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week includes today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills and two- and five-year notes to be sold on Tuesday and Wednesday
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.73 percent and the rate on the six-month bill was 6.20 percent.


Boatmen's Bancshares Inc.(BOAT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Molex Inc.(MOLX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Russell Corp.(RML,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Teen-Ager Fatally Stabs Her Mother in Argument
A Brooklyn teen-ager was charged with second-degree murder yesterday after the police said she stabbed her mother to death with scissors in the family's Starrett City apartment on Saturday.
The girl, Elizabeth DeCicco, 15, an honors student at James Madison High School, was angry when her mother, Sharon, repeatedly demanded the scissors during an argument shortly after noon, said Officer Scott Bloch, a police spokesman.


Mercantile Bankshares Corp.(MRBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tough on Veterans
To the Editor:
William Safire got it wrong when he said in "Sacred Cow, II" (column, Jan. 19) that his research showed that the Heritage Foundation "has zero in its files on potential savings on veterans' spending."


Eltingh's Aces Sink McEnroe
Fueled by his first-round demotion of third-seeded Boris Becker, 65th-ranked Patrick McEnroe was hoping he would replicate his 1991 sleeper sprint here to the semifinals, but 34 aces by his fourth-round opponent, Jacco Eltingh, eventually left him on the losing end of a five-set marathon.


Rose Kennedy, Political Matriarch, Dies at 104
Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy, the mother of President John F. Kennedy and of two United States Senators, the wife of a fabulously wealthy businessman-ambassador and the matriarch of a family whose political triumphs and personal tragedies she carried with quiet dignity for 80 years, died yesterday at the Kennedy family compound in Hyannis Port, Mass.
She was 104.
Surrounded by family members at her rambling, white-shingled seaside home on Cape Cod, she died of complications from pneumonia at 5:30 P.M., her son, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, said.
She had been in a wheelchair, partly paralyzed and mostly silent, since 1984, when she suffered the first of a series of debilitating strokes.


Random Access Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sony and Microsoft Set Video-on-Demand Pact
In a marriage of Japanese hardware and American software, the Sony Corporation and the Microsoft Corporation have agreed to work together to develop systems for "video on demand" and other applications of high capacity communications networks, a Microsoft spokeswoman said today.
The two companies will work together on both home terminals, like set-top boxes, and on central computer systems that would deliver video and audio programs over the cable or telephone network in response to requests from particular consumers.
The companies will also explore the development of future consumer electronics products.


Loyola Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Essay; Return of Whitewater
Why has Senator Alfonse D'Amato, the tiger of Senate Whitewater hearings, suddenly appeared to turn into a judicious pussycat?
Why has Representative Jim Leach, anguished and frustrated accuser of the Clintons in the farcical House hearings, fallen silent now that he and D'Amato have become chairmen of the House and Senate Banking Committees?
Interviews with both men and others suggest this answer: They are satisfied that a serious investigation is under way by Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr, and that each of their committees is getting traction in its own inquiries.


Kigali Journal; In Rwanda, a Time to Weep and a Time to Wed
Two years ago Capt.
Jean Nkurikiye promised Sgt.
Sandrine Uwamwezi that if they survived the civil war he would marry her.
On Jan. 14, the two rebel soldiers had their wedding, along with two other couples, in the Cathedral of St.-Michel, the bride in a ruffled white gown and veil, the bridegroom in a new maroon suit as the chorus clapped hands, beat drums and mixed African hymns with traditional Catholic ones.


Market Place; What is so fickle as the weather, or the price of natural gas?
WHEN you follow the natural gas industry, the fickle ways of the weather can play havoc with even the best of projections.
"I'm throwing in the towel," said Michael Barbis, gas industry analyst for NatWest Securities, who in November issued a report predicting that natural gas prices were on the verge of recovery and would rise 10 to 15 percent this year.


Dodd Is Going on the Offensive Against the G.O.P. Majority
Senator Christopher J. Dodd, the incoming leader of the Democratic National Committee, promised on Friday to take the offensive with the new Republican majority.
He even invoked the name of an old enemy, the late Lee Atwater, the unapologetically combative Republican strategist.
He lost no time keeping his pledge.


General DataComm Industries Inc.(GDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Symantec Corp.(SYMC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Park Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Octel Communications Corp.(OCTL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rowan Cos.(RDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Patents; A Biotechnology Company Uses Bacteria to Make Crops Unappetizing to Certain Insects
FOR more than a decade, agricultural scientists have been tinkering with the genes of plants in hopes of making them more naturally resistant to diseases and pests.
Now a San Diego-based biotechnology company has received what appears to be a broad patent covering a method for making crops unappetizing to insects.
The patent for the Mycogen Corporation covers bacillus thuringiensis, a soil-based bacteria better known as Bt.
This bacteria manufactures proteins that can cause an insect's stomach to explode, but apparently do not harm humans.


BayBanks (BBNK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rollins Truck Leasing Corp.(RLC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bancorp Hawaii Inc.(BOH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No Headline
"Right now it's a bloody process, and with bloody processes we don't achieve peace." -- PRESIDENT EZER WEIZMAN of Israel.  [ A1:6 ]


Session for Tarpley
Dallas Mavericks forward ROY TARPLEY has a meeting today with representatives from his after-care program, hoping to clear up questions about his recent demeanor.
Dr.
LLOYD BACCUS, Tarpley's Atlanta-based after-care supervisor, plans a formal session with the player, The Fort Worth Star-Telegram reported, quoting Tarpley and a team source.
As a condition for returning to the National Basketball Association after a three-year absence for violating the league's drug policy, Tarpley undergoes daily tests for alcohol, heroin and cocaine.


Kobe Sows Seeds for a Recovery, But Japan May Reap the Benefits
One island of calm in this smashed, overwhelmingly sad city today was the warmly lit branch of the Bank of Japan, the central bank.
Even though it was a Sunday and most of the city remained paralyzed, bank officials in three-piece suits were busy, planting the first seeds of economic regeneration with those brave enough to think of the future.
"Basically, we came through almost untouched," said Shigeru Uebayashi, the assistant branch manager, as he nodded toward the businessmen lining up to withdraw cash inside the squat vault of a building.
"I know our outward appearance is rather unimpressive, but this is a strong structure."


Revolutionary Rock Extravaganza, With Nostalgia
The rock musical "Jesus Christ Superstar" is one of those show business phenomena that thrives on being many things to many people.
Much like the myth of Elvis Presley, the most deified of rock stars, you can read into it whatever you want.
For some, Elvis is synonymous with a 21-year-old boy from Mississippi slicing through 1950's complacency with his swiveling rockabilly.
For others, he is the bloated, sequin-encrusted "King" of the 1970's holding court in Las Vegas.
There are those for whom "Jesus Christ Superstar," which is playing the Paramount in a raggedly glitzy bus-and-truck production through Sunday, will always be synonymous with the record album that started it all.
For others, the quintessential "Superstar" remains the 1971 Broadway show directed by Tom O'Horgan.
For still others it is the 1973 movie version starring Ted Neeley as Jesus and Carl Anderson as Judas.


Prudential Official May Face Lawsuit
A top executive in Prudential Securities' retail sales department was informed on Friday that lawyers for the Securities and Exchange Commission plan to recommend civil charges against him, people with knowledge of the investigation said.
The executive, Charles Grose, the firm's mid-Atlantic regional director, was immediately placed on a paid leave from Prudential to allow him time to answer the charges, Charles Perkins, a firm spokesman, said.


Data General Corp.(DGN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 24


CIT Group Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Maxtor Corp.(MXTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 24


Sub-Par Mickelson Is Good Enough
One indicator of greatness in golf is the ability to win while playing below one's standards.
By this measure, Phil Mickelson has taken another step toward the upper echelons of the game.
Overcoming a shaky putting stroke and the challenges of three other players, Mickelson, 24, won the Northern Telecom Open today, shooting a round of 68.
In doing so, he re-established himself as the pre-eminent young player in the United States and accomplished something no player in the history of the game has done: He became the only man to win the same tournament as an amateur and a professional.


Sabres' LaFontaine To Miss More Games
Buffalo Sabres center PAT LaFONTAINE will miss three to four weeks as he attempts to recover from knee surgery, according to a report published yesterday.
Citing unnamed sources, The Buffalo News reported that LaFontaine will definitely miss Wednesday's home opener against the Devils and miss up to a month -- more that one quarter of the 48-game season.


Correction
An article in Business Day on Saturday about an increased bid by Eridania Beghin-Say, a French agricultural products company, to acquire the American Maize-Products Company misstated the value of the new bid.
It is $37 a share, not $38.


First Hawaiian Inc.(FHWN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jorgensen (Earle M.) Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stone &amp; Webster Inc.(SW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


FirsTier Financial Inc.(FRST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sybase Inc.(SYBS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New York Bonds Face Rate Rise
The bond market is hardly spooked, but the problems in balancing New York City's $31.8 billion budget have made investors nervous enough that they are likely to exact slightly higher interest rates this week, when the city sells $645 million of new bonds.
That will eventually translate into millions of dollars more that the city must pay at regular intervals to service its debts.
New York is the most active issuer of bonds in the country, after the Treasury, and every hundredth of a percentage point -- or basis point -- in interest is significant.


Valero Energy Corp.(VLO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Oryx Energy (ORX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clinton Plans A New Vision Once Again
Bill Clinton has revived, reinvigorated or reinvented himself half a dozen times since he set out to win the White House, and in his State of the Union Message on Tuesday night, his advisers say, he aims to do so once again by sketching a vision of how he will cooperate -- and compete -- with the new Republican ascendancy.
In the 11 weeks since the midterm elections ended Democratic control of Congress -- and many of his own hopes for sweeping legislation -- the President has consulted with people as diverse as historians and "personal growth" gurus in contemplating what to make of the rest of his term, and how to win another.
He now plans a speech that will be less a list of new proposals than a litany of the themes that helped elect him: economic security for working Americans, reform of Washington's wayward ways, and shared responsibility between a caring Government and committed citizenry.


UGI Corp.(UGI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Auto Makers Begin to Rethink Prices
Prices for new cars and trucks have risen faster than most Americans' income in the last 20 years, and the auto companies are now embroiled in a debate over whether they are leaving too many customers behind.
In recent months, average spending on a new car has exceeded $20,000 for the first time.
That has produced healthy profits for the industry but also caused at least a few auto makers to begin looking for ways to make their vehicles less expensive.


Oakland Journal; Life Atop A Fault Continues Unshaken
Lillian Alnev knows the dangers of living here, astride the Hayward fault, the tear in the Earth that bears eerie similarities to its deadly counterpart in Kobe, Japan.
But knowing about a potential geological disaster and doing something about it are very different matters.
Ms.
Alnev says she has sorted all this out.
"Living here is a considered risk," Ms.
Alnev, a book illustrator, said as she sipped espresso at the Peet's Coffee store here.
"But I love this area, and I'd rather live to be 50 in the Bay Area than 100 in Kansas."


Hopes for Algerian Peace Fade as Rome Plan Is Rejected by Militants on Both Sides
Ten days after Islamic and secularist opposition parties in Algeria offered a proposal to end the country's civil war, the hope for an early peace has evaporated as militant groups on both sides have vowed to fight on.
A French businessman was shot and killed today in Algeria, the 25th French citizen killed there in the last year.
Yesterday, the president of the Algerian Soccer Association was shot and killed by suspected Islamic militants.
Over the weekend two Islamic armed factions dissociated themselves from the proposals made by the opposition parties at a meeting in Rome, which had been rejected by the Government as well.


Bridge
Two Manhattan experts confirmed their reputation as one of the world's strongest partnerships by winning the Cap Volmac World Top tournament in the Hague, the Netherlands, yesterday after three days of play.
Michael Rosenberg and Zia Mahmood, who won the same event three years ago, headed a field of 16 star partnerships.
The standings were: 1st, Rosenberg and Zia, 853 victory points; 2d Jens Auken and Dennis Koch, Denmark, 835; 3d, Henky Lasut and Eddu Manoppo of Indonesia, 829; 4th, Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell, United States, 823; 5th, Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco, Brazil, 822; 6th, Alain Levy and Herve Mouiel, France, 819.


Willamette Industries(WMTT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rain Adds to Misery of Quake Survivors
As if the rumbling earth had not created enough misery here, the skies opened up today and poured down more of it, with heavy rains in Kobe threatening to touch off landslides and topple earthquake-weakened buildings.
The rain complicated the search for nearly 200 people still listed as missing after the deadliest earthquake in Japan in more than 70 years.
The death toll approached 5,000 tonight and seems likely to exceed that number later this week.


Southern National Corp.(SNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Changes in Account For Sci-Fi Channel
USA Networks has made changes on the consumer and trade advertising account of the Sci-Fi Channel, its new cable television network.
Dan Martinsen, a spokesman for USA in New York, said on Friday that the trade portion of the account would be placed in review soon, while the consumer portion would be moved in-house.
Both portions of the account had been handled by Ahern Needleman Fleizach in New York since May 1993.
Spending in 1994 was $5 million.
Mr.
Martinsen said a budget for 1995 had not been determined.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A SCHOOL WHERE IT'S O.K. TO EXCEL
Any school with a selected population is destined to shine, especially if it has high standards, advanced courses, strong leadership and involved parents.
Midwood High School in Flatbush, Brooklyn, with 55 percent of its students selected for excellence from all over the city, has all of those, and extras, like access to Brooklyn College across the street.
But there is something else about Midwood.
By all evidence, it succeeds unusually well for the students who come from the neighborhood, too.
Midwood manages to overcome what educators say is one of the gravest problems in schools today -- peer pressure against achievement.
Metro Matters, B3.


Advest Group (ADV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Varian Associates Inc.(VAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Existing-Home Sales . . .
Dec.
Thursday  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
Dec.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  G.D.P. . . . 4th Qtr.


Changing of the Guards Next Step for St. John's?
It's inevitable when a team hits the skids the way St.
John's has done.
Suggestions on how to end a losing streak that grew to five with yesterday's 94-87 loss to Pitt at Madison Square Garden are starting to emerge from all sectors.
James Scott, who has been one of the first reserves off the bench, now thinks he should start and plans to make the suggestion to Coach Brian Mahoney before tomorrow night's game at Georgetown.


Computer Sciences Corp.(CSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


First Fidelity Bancorp (FFB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Money magazine's new print campaign stresses long-term success over short-term results.
SEEKING to reassert its hegemony in the competitive category of personal finance magazines, Money is borrowing an approach from the investment firms that advertise in the magazine: stressing long-term successes over short-term results.
In warm, humor-tinged print advertisements that begin running today, Money revives a theme, "America's financial adviser," used during the 1980's.
The campaign replaces one appearing since October 1991 that carried the theme "Money. Where American dreams still come true."


Citizens Bancorp (Md.) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Silicon Graphics Inc.(SGI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Downey Savings &amp; Loan Association (DSL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Suncor Inc.(SU,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kaydon Corp.(KDN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Far-Reaching Effects Seen If Mexico Rescue Is Halted
A failure by Congress to approve the $40 billion rescue package for Mexico would have far-reaching effects that would go far beyond America's relationship with its third-largest trading partner, economists and political analysts say.
The vote may take place as early as this week.
Should the measure fail, reaction in financial markets both here and abroad will almost certainly be negative.
Equally profound, analysts say, would be the signal sent to the rest of the world about the manner in which the United States intends to conduct international economic policy.


Edward Hidalgo, 82, Ex-Navy Secretary
Edward Hidalgo, a Mexican-born lawyer who was Secretary of the Navy in the Carter Administration, died Saturday at a hospital in Fairfax, Va.
He was 82.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, said Lieut.
Comdr.
Joseph Quimby, a spokesman for the Navy.


Holy Bull's Victory Script Resumes Without a Hitch
Holy Bull, the 3-year-old champion of 1994 and a sure shot to be voted Horse of the Year later this week, returned to the races today for the first time in four months and glided to a 2 1/2-length victory in the Olympic Handicap.
The great gray colt picked up where he left off last September, when he won the Woodward Stakes at Belmont Park and, with Mike Smith on his back for the first time since then, measured his five opponents with an almost regal purpose.
He nailed Dusty Screen with a quarter of a mile to go, beat back a brief and late challenge from Birdonthewire and coasted home in command after seven flying furlongs.


Vietnam Won the Right to Choose Its Destiny
To the Editor:
Thomas L. Friedman makes a convincing case in "Good Morning, Vietnam" (column, Jan. 18) for ending our grudges against Vietnam.
"It's time that we declare victory," he announces.


The Contract's False Tax Promise
The Republicans loaded their "Contract With America" with tax cuts they say are honorably designed to stimulate economic growth.
Democrats sneered at key proposals -- tax cuts for business investment and capital gains -- because they would overwhelmingly benefit well-to-do families.
These two proposals are definitely flawed.
But the problem is not simply one of equity.
If lowering the tax on capital gains -- the profit from selling stocks, bonds and other assets -- and the taxes on business investment would boost the economy, then Congress could consider embracing the contract, and find other ways to collect additional money from high-income investors.


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  (BGE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Special Offers by Airlines Come Under U.S. Review
Airline advertisements, including those that list one-way fares but require travelers to buy a return ticket, will be scrutinized more closely by the Transportation Department under a new program that Secretary Federico F. Pena is expected to announce today.
The agency also said it would more closely monitor other airline marketing practices, including "two-for-one" fares that often require travelers to buy a ticket that costs more than advertised discount fares, as well as fare sales in which only a few seats are available at the sale price.
Frequent flier programs and the degree to which airlines overbook passengers will also be examined more closely.


Sports of The Times; 'Talkin' Baseball' Is All There Is
PRO football awaits its Super Bowl.
The Stanley Cup banner hangs high in the Madison Square Garden rafters.
The Knicks finally dominate the Rockets as John Starks scores 22 points -- too late to change the logo on the National Basketball Association championship banner in Houston, but better late than never.
Baseball, meanwhile, is being played only in memories, in hotel ballrooms where nostalgia is the entree, as Willie Mays, Mickey Mantle and Duke Snider were last night at the New York Baseball Writers Dinner at the Sheraton New York.
And where Terry Cashman, the baseball balladeer, serenaded them with his familiar words:


Haggar Corp.(HGGR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Plexus Corp.(PLXS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Letter: On New York Medicaid; No Price Controls for Care Plans
To the Editor:
I appreciate the prominence your editorial page gave to my report on Medicaid savings opportunities for New York State ("The Ugly Side of a Tax Cut," editorial, Jan. 20).
However, two points should be clarified to allay unnecessary fears that quality of care or access to care would decline.


Air Products &amp; Chemicals Inc.(APD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
ERIC UTNE, the founder and editor in chief of the Utne Reader, which is often called the Reader's Digest of the alternative media, is so convinced that conversation is a dying form of communication that he is determined to revive it.
He is sponsoring an evening of talk on Thursday at Town Hall on West 43d Street that he bills as a "Visionfest."
In Mr.
Utne's view, the state of conversation in this country is abysmal.
"We are amusing ourselves to death," he said the other day from his office in Minneapolis.
"We have fallen silent in turning to the tube. We are a nation of visionaries with cataracts. We no longer see what there is to see."


Dividend Meetings


On Her Dad's Fire Truck


The British Way of Civility Lives On
To the Editor:
"This Sceptered, Smug, Shortsighted Isle" by Roy Denman (Op-Ed, Jan. 18), on the demise of Britain as a world force, moves me to describe something that happened when I was a young Air Force officer on leave in London just after World War II in 1946.


Physician Sales &amp; Service Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For Moten, UConn Is Mettle Game
By the time the 1994-95 season is over, Lawrence Moten should be the career-leading scorer at Syracuse.
And if he lives up to the preseason predictions of conference coaches, he'll be the Big East player of the year.
That would seem to warrant an automatic pass into the upper tier of the first round of the National Basketball Association draft, as it was for the former Syracuse players Derrick Coleman and Billy Owens.
But despite all he has done in his three and a half seasons at Syracuse, Moten has yet to thoroughly convince N.B.A. skeptics that he can make an impact as a pro.
In a way, that's what much of Moten's senior season at Syracuse is all about: reaching the Final Four and turning doubters into believers.


PNC Bank Corp.(PNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


After Decades of Darkness, Tools for New Life
There was a time, Khanukasion Nisanov remembers, when he looked at his son and saw only greatness.
An old, yellowing photograph transports Mr.
Nisanov back to those spirited days, when 5-year-old Vitaly was just discovering his musical gift.
After hearing a song played only once, Vitaly would sing it himself, note for note, entertaining his parents and friends.
Even Mr.
Nisanov's musician friends agreed that the child was charmed, and they predicted that he would become an important composer.


Precision Castparts (PCP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Haitian TV Reporters Strike Over Official Meddling
After enduring military censorship and harassment for three years at their old jobs, newly hired reporters at Haitian National Television were expecting the restoration of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide and of democratic rule to usher in a new era of serenity.
Instead, the state-run network was plunged into turmoil after the Government dismissed its director early in January, and the news staff walked out in protest.
The reporters and technicians are protesting what they describe as political interference in news broadcasts by the Ministry of Information.
They complain that the Aristide administration, like every other Haitian Government in living memory, has sought to manipulate and control news coverage at the official Government network, known by the French and Creole initials T.N.H.


Gunmen Fire In 3 Incidents In Brooklyn
Five people were shot and wounded, two critically, when gunmen broke into a Brooklyn apartment looking for crack cocaine and money late Saturday night and opened fire, the police said.
The incident was one of three unrelated episodes of violence late Saturday and early Sunday in which groups of people were shot in three Brooklyn neighborhoods, the police said.
In all three cases, it was still unclear yesterday why the gunmen opened fire.


Keycorp (KEY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Debate on Abortion Moves to New York
On the 22d anniversary of Roe v.
Wade, abortion rights advocates rallied in New York City, warning that violent clinic attacks were undermining the decision.
More than 700 people attended a vigil at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, left, where Planned Parenthood officials criticized what they termed "religious persecution" of women.
Farther downtown, at St.
Patrick's Cathedral, John Cardinal O'Connor criticized a culture that he said tolerates abortion on demand, even among teen-agers.


Abroad at Home; 'A Prized American Privilege'
Americans too often take for granted their country's most precious quality: freedom.
We do not sufficiently appreciate how that freedom has been developed by judges, building on the bare words of the Constitution.
A case at hand dramatizes how fortunate we are in our liberty-oriented law.
It is a case from Singapore: the prosecution of a newspaper, The International Herald Tribune, for contempt of court.


North Fork Bancorp (NFB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Enduring Voice for Black Women
In 1970 four black men with no magazine experience published 50,000 copies of the first general magazine aimed at African-American women.
They hoped it would provide some jobs, make some money and help bring self-esteem to women who had been virtually ignored by mainstream publishers.
Twenty-five years later, Essence magazine has become the pre-eminent voice for black women.
Its circulation passed one million last year.
And, after years of wooing luxury markets, the magazine now includes among its advertisers Chanel, Giorgio, Cadillac and Estee Lauder.


It's Not Too Soon to Lift Mandate Burden
To the Editor:
"What's the Rush on Mandates?" (editorial, Jan. 18) contains a good summary of the need for legislation to control the costs imposed on state and local governments by the Federal Government.


Read-Rite Corp.(RDRT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


People's Bank (Bridgeport, Conn.) (PBCT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Earthquakes
An earthquake as powerful as the one that struck Japan last week is not likely to occur in the region, but scientists say the chances of a damaging quake in the New York City area are not as remote as people might think.
The last big earthquake in the city was on Aug. 10, 1884 and one of similar strength (5.5 on the Richter scale) today could cause tremendous damage.
The advanced age and fragility of the area's infrastructure make any quake potentially dangerous.
East Coast cities have made little effort to make buildings and other structures earthquake-resistant.
Next month, however, the New York City Council is expected to pass a long-discussed bill mandating stricter standards for new construction.


Islanders Discover That Pretty Doesn't Count, Points Do
Three points in two games.
The Islanders were hoping for something more, but after last season, they'll take it.
For the second consecutive evening, the Islanders pummeled the opposing goalie with shots from every possible angle.
For the second consecutive evening, the opposing goalie stood on his head.


House Panel Takes to Road To Build 'Contract' Backing
For the first time since their resounding victory last fall, Congressional Republicans took their "Contract With America" to the road on Saturday, holding a hearing here to ask the public for guidance on how to cut the Federal budget.
Despite the first major snowstorm of the year, the hearing, by the House Budget Committee, drew an overflow weekend crowd to the 850-seat auditorium of Ohio Dominican College.


Security Guard Is Wounded In Shooting at a Movie Theater
A security guard was wounded and movie-goers waiting in line to buy candy and popcorn dropped to the floor when gunshots were fired into the crowded lobby of a theater complex here early this morning.
Shortly after midnight, the police said, two unidentified gunmen fired several shots, striking the guard in the left leg and left hand as he stood at the main entrance to the Commack Multiplex Cinemas, a 15-theater complex at Exit 51 of the Long Island Expressway.


Amid Speeches and Protests, Abortion-Rights Battle Shifts to New York
Seizing on the 22d anniversary of the Roe v.
Wade decision to press their cause, thousands of abortion-rights advocates rallied in New York City and dozens of other cities yesterday, calling for more vigilance in protecting abortion clinics.
And from his pulpit at St.
Patrick's Cathedral, John Cardinal O'Connor used the anniversary to assail what he called a culture of tolerance that lets teen-agers get abortions on demand.


Petrolane Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 23


Sidney Slon, 84, Radio Scriptwriter
Sidney Slon, a radio scriptwriter who wrote "The Shadow" and "Dick Tracy" shows in the 1940's, died on Saturday morning at a nursing home in Ramapo, N.Y.
He was 84 years old and lived most of his life in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure after suffering from Alzheimer's disease for five years, his family said.


Cellstar Inc.(CLST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Oakwood Homes Corp.(OH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Performance; DANCE
Personal Experiences And Splintered Societies  Liz Lerman Joyce Theater
Like the world itself, the Washington-based Liz Lerman Dance Exchange is made up of people of many races, ages, sizes and shapes.
Dancers between the ages of 22 and 70 appeared on Wednesday night in a program for the Altogether Different series that featured works about social problems and personal experiences.


Bearings Inc.(BER,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Redman Industries(RDMN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


New York Gets a Third Of Latest Arts Grants New York Gets a Third of the Latest Arts Grants
The National Endowment for the Arts has announced $24 million in grants for the first quarter of the year, and $7.7 million -- nearly one third -- will go to institutions and artists in New York City.
The Metropolitan Opera received the largest grant nationwide, $462,000, to support its 1995-96 season.
Several New York dance companies received grants of $150,000 to $300,000, including the New York City Ballet, the Joffrey Ballet, the Ballet Theater Foundation, the Cunningham Dance Foundation, the Martha Graham Center of Contemporary Dance, the Trisha Brown Dance Company, the Paul Taylor Dance Foundation and the Dance Theater of Harlem.


In Performance; POP
Oh, for Those Bouncy Old Days In Which Angst Was Repressed  Manhattan Rhythm Kings Rainbow and Stars
Pop nostalgia doesn't get more polished than in the performances of the Manhattan Rhythm Kings, the vocal trio that recently left the cast of the Broadway musical "Crazy for You" after 850 performances.
At the Rainbow and Stars cabaret atop Rockefeller Center (30 Rockefeller Plaza), where they are appearing through Feb. 4, the trio deftly resurrects the musical era when, in their words, "the radio in your living room was roughly the size of a Buick."


Simpson Trial Strategies: From Alibi to DNA Tests
Perhaps not since the kidnapping of the Lindbergh baby has a crime so captivated the American imagination.
And now, after nearly seven months of legal maneuvering, the O. J. Simpson murder trial will finally enter its decisive phase when opening statements begin on Monday.


Paccar Inc.(PCAR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


It's a Competitive School, Where It's O.K. to Excel
TO the casual visitor, Midwood High School in Flatbush seems like a place under some kind of spell.
The principal talks of the school's "gestalt." Students praise teachers.
Teachers boast about students.
Even the neighborhood police officers show a regard for the place.
The reason for this good cheer is as basic as it gets. Success.


Offerings This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
American Sensors Inc., Markham, Ontario, 2 million shares, 1.6 million in U.S. and Canada.
Paine Webber.


World Economies


Peoples Heritage Financial Group Inc.(PHBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ethan Allen Interiors Inc.(ETH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mammoths in the Rabbit Hole
In this instance the White Rabbit was a draft of air coming out of the ground in the gorges of Ardeche, nearly 100 miles north of Avignon, France.
Two men and a woman exploring the gorges promptly started clearing the debris covering a small hole leading to a larger space.
Six days later, on Dec. 24, the three crawled through the narrow 21-foot tunnel they had made and into a sight as extraordinary as that which greeted Alice on her journey down the rabbit hole.
"It was a great moment," one of them said. "We all shouted and yelled."


Atmel Corp.(ATML,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Man Is Fatally Shot by Officer in Brooklyn
A police officer fatally shot an apparently unarmed man in Brooklyn early yesterday when the man mimicked pointing a gun at the officer after a chase on foot, the police said.
The dead man was tentatively identified as Anibal Carasquillo of 410 Westminster Road in Flatbush.
The police said he had a record of several previous arrests.


This Time, Starks Connects For Knicks
When the Knicks were embarrassed by the Miami Heat at Madison Square Garden in December, the basket looked like a thimble to John Starks.
Tonight, it looked more like an Olympic-sized swimming pool.
Starks scored a game-high 26 points as the Knicks came from 10 points behind in the third quarter to defeat Miami by 104-95 at Miami Arena.


Don't Punish the Children
"It took me 20 years to come off welfare, and I refuse to go that road again," a single parent named Stephanie Pitts told a Times reporter recently.
"Self-respect, self-esteem and independence . . . that's what this center has done for me."
Ms.
Pitts is a teacher's aide, and her 10-year-old daughter is a participant in the after-school program at the 20-year-old Miccio Day Care Center in the Red Hook section of Brooklyn.
But not, perhaps, for much longer.
Miccio is one of 10 centers the Giuliani administration proposes to ax -- most of them in poor neighborhoods.


SHADOW CAST OVER PEACE TALKS
One or more Muslim suicide bombers set off two powerful explosions today at a bus stop packed with Israeli soldiers, killing at least 19 people, wounding 61 and casting ominous shadows over troubled peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians.
It was a grim scene that has become steadily more familiar to Israelis in recent months: bodies blown apart and sent flying through the air, rescue workers picking up the pieces from the ground and from treetops, victims sobbing in grief or sitting numb in confusion.


Orange &amp; Rockland Utilities Inc.(ORU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Robotics Inc.(USRX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; The new Speaker may actually be helped more than hurt by his dealings with journalists.
IN his first weeks as Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich has made a point of declaring his disdain for what he calls "the liberal media elite."
But the realities of the way journalists work may actually have helped him more than both he and they admit.


Revelations and Agonizing On Soviet Seizure of Artwork
Opening the doors ever wider to some of their long-hidden wartime secrets, Russian officials traveled to New York last week to offer striking new glimpses of what have been called the last prisoners of World War II: missing works of art, books and archives seized by the Soviet Red Army in vanquished Germany almost 50 years ago.
In one of the most extraordinary disclosures at a three-day international symposium, the Russians showed slides of 7 of 130 paintings -- masterworks by El Greco, Goya, Degas, Renoir, Manet, Tintoretto and Corot -- that disappeared from private Hungarian collections during the war and that officials said would be exhibited in Moscow for the first time this year.


Owen Healthcare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Stockton Is Unrecognized, Unassuming, Unmatched
Like a typical tourist, the dark-haired man with the video camera and wife and their three small children in tow was filming the merry scene along crowded Las Ramblas, the heart of Barcelona, Spain, during the Olympic Games in 1992 when a woman caught his attention.
She was a vision in red, white and blue, wearing a flowing scarf in the Stars and Stripes and a skirt of the same ilk and a T-shirt with an imprint of the Dream Team.
"Do you mind if I get you on camera?" the man asked her.


Illinois Central Corp.(IC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


West Hartford Tries to Cope As Its Schools Are Integrated
As minority families leave Hartford's poor neighborhoods and immigrants from Southeast Asia join booming enclaves here, this community, a symbol for generations of the suburban good life in Connecticut, has run afoul of the state's racial-balance law.
Across the town's grid of colonial and Tudor houses, in the shops and restaurants along Farmington Avenue, and especially in the endless meetings that drive public life, little seems changed.
The people, as always, are well dressed, well spoken and overwhelmingly white.


Delta Woodside Industries Inc.(DLW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chargers Take Adventurous Route
They were Tijuana's team, until a Super Bowl was their invitation back.
They were on a five-year plan for 30 years, until a gate swung open last Sunday night, sending 68,000 fanatics in search of their bus.
Better late than never, but the San Diego Chargers are finally a rock-and-roll band.
They have an owner with tape over his mouth, a quarterback with food in his mouth and a defensive end who periodically needs soap in his mouth -- a team for eternity.
A saga that began with Sid Gillman's bow tie and Don Coryell's cheat sheet ends with people begging for locks of Charger hair.


Kasler Holding Co. (KAS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


B.A.T. Expands Role With Grey
British-American Tobacco in London has expanded its relationship with Grey Advertising, also in London, by naming Grey to handle advertising for the Silk Cut cigarette brand outside Europe.
Billings were estimated at $10 million to $15 million.
B.A.T.
Industries, the parent of British-American Tobacco, recently acquired the ownership of Silk Cut outside Europe from American Brands, which had assigned the brand to agencies including Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide.
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising continues to handle Silk Cut in other markets, like Britain.


First American (Tenn) Corp.(FATN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SCEcorp (SCE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nedved Is What's New About New Rangers
After only two games, it is too soon to rush to judgment about the Rangers.
Certainly they displayed a slightly different look as they began defense of their Stanley Cup championship with a loss to Buffalo on Friday night and a victory over Montreal on Saturday night, both at Madison Square Garden.
Perhaps after home games tonight and Wednesday against Boston and Pittsburgh, respectively, followed by a visit to Quebec on Saturday night, their strengths and weaknesses will become more apparent.


INSIDE
Psychiatric Patients Escape Through Policy Loopholes
Policies meant to protect psychiatric patients' rights have combined with intense budgetary pressures to cause hospital managers and New York State officials to look the other way as thousands of patients each year run away.
Page B1.
Soviet Art Seizures
An international symposium attempts to resolve a Russian-German impasse on settlement of German claims that Soviet troops stole art treasures in World War II.
Page C11.
The Price of Wheels
Prices for new vehicles have risen faster than most Americans' wages, and auto makers ask if they have left customers behind.
Page D1.
An Eye on Air Fare Ads
The Government is expected to announce that it will begin monitoring advertisements for bargain air fares and other travel deals.
Page A10.


First Bancorp of Ohio (FBOH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Noise Is Not on the Menu
San Francisco arrived here for Super Bowl XXIX a day ahead of San Diego, encountered their first distraction and put in place their first team rule -- no arcade games will be played during dinner.
The hotel that the 49ers are staying in provided 10 arcade games for the players -- free of charge -- in the area where they dine.
During the first team dinner, several players took advantage of the games.


CHRONICLE
DR.
LLOYD JOHN OGILVIE, a prominent Presbyterian minister in Hollywood, Calif., author of more than 30 books and a religious broadcaster, has been nominated for the $115,700-a-year post as Chaplain of the United States Senate.
Dr.
Ogilvie, the senior pastor at First Presbyterian Church of Hollywood, is the latest in a long line of Presbyterians to be appointed to the 205-year-old job.
He replaces DR.
RICHARD C. HALVERSON, 78, who held the job for 14 years and is retiring because of poor health.


Rose Kennedy, Political Matriarch, Dies at 104
Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy, the mother of President John F. Kennedy and of two United States Senators, the wife of a fabulously wealthy businessman-ambassador and the matriarch of a family whose political triumphs and personal tragedies she carried with quiet dignity for 80 years, died yesterday at the Kennedy family compound in Hyannis Port, Mass.
She was 104.
Surrounded by family members at her rambling, white-shingled seaside home on Cape Cod, she died of complications from pneumonia at 5:30 P.M., her son, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, said.
She had been in a wheelchair, partly paralyzed and mostly silent, since 1984, when she suffered the first of a series of debilitating strokes.


In Performance; DANCE
Almost Like Being at Sea With Beings Almost Animal  Jennifer Monson P.S. 122
Jennifer Monson re-examines a sumptuous image and even more sumptuous score in "La Mer," performed on Thursday night.
The score is actually by Zeena Parkins, but Ms.
Parkins takes the Debussy classic as a departure point, layering it with everything from a phrase or two of "Silent Night" to Middle Eastern instrumental music.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  SUICIDE ATTACK KILLS 19 IN ISRAEL
One or more Muslim suicide bombers set off two explosions at a crowded bus stop, killing at least 19 people, wounding 61 and casting shadows over troubled Mideast peace talks.
A1


Brahms's Complex Clarinet
The clarinet moved Mozart and Weber profoundly.
It seems also to have loosened Brahms's dour rectitude as few things ever did, making way for the relaxed and generous style of his last chamber music and piano pieces.
No other wind instrument has attracted such a powerful repertory, or such serious performing talent.
In all three cases, fascination with the clarinet's dark, complex and ambiguous tone was associated with particular people.
Mozart wrote for Anton Stadler, Weber for Heinrich Baermann.
An aging Brahms met Richard Muhlfeld in 1890 and was enchanted.
The result: the Clarinet Quintet, the two duo Sonatas (Op. 120) and the A-minor Trio that Paul Meyer, Yo-Yo Ma and Emanuel Ax played at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday night.


Central Hudson Gas &amp; Electric Corp.(CNH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reporter's Notebook; Strategies of Defense In L.I.R.R. Shootings
Colin Ferguson spent the weekend at the Nassau County jail preparing the opening statement he plans to deliver in court this week against charges that he murdered six people on a Long Island Rail Road train more than a year ago.
When he left court on Friday, after a day of questioning prospective jurors, Mr.
Ferguson was given a two-and-a-half-inch-thick folder containing a detailed account of the prosecution's evidence against him and a list of witnesses, including the names of many of the victims who survived the shooting on Dec. 7, 1993.


The Talk of Hollywood; In Hollywood, a Party Is a Party, And an Awards Show Is Even Better
The annual awards season in Hollywood is defined by two ceremonies that are polar opposites.
The prime event, the Academy Awards, scheduled for March 27, is a serious and, let's face it, sometimes deadly affair given by the movie industry to congratulate itself.


With Few Clues, Hearing Will Open on USAir Crash Near Pittsburgh That Killed 132
Four months after USAir Flight 427 rolled abruptly to the left and plunged to the ground at 300 miles an hour, killing all 132 people on board, the National Transportation Safety Board will open hearings in Pittsburgh today with a disturbing lack of clues and no working hypothesis about what caused the crash.
By the time the safety board gets to the hearing stage, said a spokesman, Mike Benson, "you usually have some better indications than what you have here."


Sampras Escapes; Martin Does Not
The Houdini-esque maneuverings that rescued the Australian Open's defending champion, Pete Sampras, on Sunday didn't work for the event's 1994 runner-up, Todd Martin, in his fourth-round match today.
The stadium court simply wasn't big enough to contain the errant shots launched by the eighth-seeded Martin, who sprayed 50 unforced errors in a span of 96 minutes and lost to 10th-seeded Yevgeny Kafelnikov, 6-1, 6-4, 6-2.
Martin dropped his serve six times and broke Kafelnikov, who menaced him from the backcourt with his angled winners, only once.


NBD Bancorp Inc.(NBD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


But Let Us Remember The Real Dr. King
To the Editor:
"Martin Luther King, American" by Anita Haya Goldman (Op-Ed, Jan. 16) and "Dr. King's Memorial" (editorial, same day) display a tendency to rewrite history to celebrate an individual or event.
Dr.
King's work was important, but too many people overlook the very real failings that plagued his later career.


Congress Has Duty To Assess Intelligence
To the Editor:
"Mr. Aspin, Pick Up the Pace" (editorial, Jan. 16) urges President Clinton to get the commission on the future of intelligence moving.
You err, however, to argue that Congress should have only a consultative role.


Pacific Gas &amp; Electric Co.(PCG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Signed Ryan Lorthridge, guard, for the remainder of the season.


Trying to Escape a Hopeless Routine
Nestor Villamil slipped away from Creedmoor Psychiatric Center six times in the span of a year.
Each escape was a desperate, doomed attempt to find a place for himself in the larger world.
His longings were simple: He wanted a job.
He wanted a girlfriend.
He wanted never again to see a plate of hospital food loaded down with "cruddy pork chops" and soggy vegetables.
But each time he ran away, he wound up at his mother's door, dirty, disheveled and scared.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Optimistic Mahler Seventh Without Irony or Paradox  Minnesota Orchestra Carnegie Hall
Mahler's Seventh Symphony is perhaps the happiest of his major works, but one wonders whether the Rotary Club optimism radiated by the Minnesota Orchestra under Edo de Waart on Thursday was quite what the composer had in mind.
This blunt, blaring, truly executed performance scrubbed away such pesky accretions as irony, paradox and double-entendre.
The first movement's booming brass enunciations and the Andante Amoroso's quiet grace had value if taken on their own terms, but enthusiasm and good manners take this music only so far and so deep.
The Minnesota is an international orchestra of real accomplishment; it has the flexibility to do what it is asked.
So one can only assume that this was the kind of playing Mr. de Waart had in mind.
The Seventh, like all the Mahler symphonies, is music written by a conductor for a conductor.
Thursday's man in charge demonstrated decisively his can-do attitude.
Transitions from tempo to tempo were well thought out and seams between phrases neatly managed.


Capitol Workers Skeptical of Labor Bill
In the august chambers of the Capitol, the bill to make Congress abide by a variety of labor laws it already applies to private employers is celebrated as landmark legislation.
But down in the bowels of Congress, where the national legislature's machinery is kept running, that bill, the Congressional Accountability Act, is viewed with skepticism.


Peru Combats Drug Traffic, Winning U.S. Team's Praise
With terrorism receding, Peru is increasingly confronting drug trafficking gangs that make this nation the largest producer of semi-refined cocaine, said American antidrug officials who visited Peru last week.
In the last month, Peru has made its largest cocaine and opium seizures ever, dismantled one of the largest drug trafficking groups, and indicted an army general for protecting cocaine shipments.


TV's Latest Crucible: The Disappointing Hit
In the recent history of television there has not been a more attractive place to set up business than the piece of prime-time real estate situated at 9:30 Thursday nights on NBC.
It is the gold-framed time period, a place where ratings success is all but guaranteed.
The slot is so rich because it falls between the current twin towers of network television: "Seinfeld" and "E.R."


One Valley Bancorp of W.Va. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Associated Banc-Corp (ASBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rose Kennedy, Political Matriarch, Dies at 104
Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy, the mother of President John F. Kennedy and of two United States Senators, the wife of a fabulously wealthy businessman-ambassador and the matriarch of a family whose political triumphs and personal tragedies she carried with quiet dignity for 80 years, died yesterday at the Kennedy family compound in Hyannis Port, Mass.
She was 104.
Surrounded by family members at her rambling, white-shingled seaside home on Cape Cod, she died of complications from pneumonia at 5:30 P.M., her son, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, said.
She had been in a wheelchair, partly paralyzed and mostly silent, since 1984, when she suffered the first of a series of debilitating strokes.


Global Marine Inc.(GLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gallagher (Arthur J.) (AJG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Israel Tightens Rules on Construction by Settlers
In an action overshadowed by the terrorist bombing that killed at least 19 people, the Israeli Government took measures today that are supposed to tighten its controls over new construction by Jewish settlers, especially those in West Bank towns near Jerusalem.
The Government created a committee of six Cabinet Ministers, led by Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who will have the final say on all housing plans for Israeli-occupied territories, including those financed with private money.


Market Place; In a proposed drug takeover, recognition that bigger is better.
THE $14 billion marriage proposal by Glaxo to Wellcome P.L.C. may not have been made in pharmaceutical heaven, but it does deal with a hard reality: Every day, it gets more difficult for the companies to stay single.
Glaxo P.L.C. is a victim of its own success with Zantac, the world's best-selling drug.
Meanwhile, Wellcome is only medium sized in drug industry terms, struggling against giants.
But together, the British companies provide each other with complementary strengths in different market catagories.


Let's Move Past Stigma on Mental Illness
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal points out in "The Broken People" (column, Jan. 17) the irrational discrepancy in the way our society ignores individuals with psychiatric illness while promptly treating those with nonpsychiatric medical illness.


Lisbon Must Protect Prehistoric Artwork
To the Editor:
A few years ago the discovery of a 5,300-year-old ice man in the Alps left everyone thrilled by new knowledge and insight into humankind.
Last year an equally unexpected discovery was made: a so-called open-air Stone Age art gallery in Portugal, thought to be the most important outdoor paleolithic site known.


Chirping, Chirping for a Cleaner Cut
SCIENTISTS have found that leaf-cutting ants use high-frequency chirps to help them slice neatly through tender greenery.
The researchers, whose study appeared in the journal Science this month, say that when the barely audible chirps are transmitted through the slicing edge of the ants' jaw, the vibrations stiffen the soft leaves, making for a cleaner cut.
The ants produce their chirps in much the same way that crickets sing, by scraping one body part against another.


Sherwin-Williams Co.(SHW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Minerals Technologies Inc.(MTX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


By Design; A Familiar 60's Look for the 90's
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis' style lives on, particularly her way of dressing in the 1960's.
The spring shows in Europe and the United States were filled with the kind of sleeveless dresses and short-jacket suits that she favored then.
All manner of clothes and accessories re-creating the Jackie look for the 90's are in stores now.
Henri Bendel has A-line pique dresses in white or pink by Shelli Segal ($155) and in white or black by Cynthia Rowley ($170).


Hirwaun Journal; For These Miners, How Green Is Their Valley Now
For Tyrone O'Sullivan, the worst day of his life was 31 years ago when he was an apprentice electrician at the Tower coal mine.
His father, a miner like his grandfather and his great-grandfather, was killed in a fall below ground.
The second worst day was April 23 last year when British Coal announced it was closing the mine.
Driving home, he had to pull over to the shoulder.
"I had to stop the car and I could not stop crying," he recalled.
"I felt as though I had lost my father again."


Ralcorp Holdings Inc.(RAH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chargers Prove Studious
It was as if the Chargers had to look at every last bit of film, study it until they were bleary-eyed, use up every piece of chalk until they finally were ready to arrive tonight prepared to face the 49ers in Super Bowl XXIX.
The heavily favored 49ers, who had virtually the same trip in air miles, already were in town for a day.


Germans, 5 Years Later: Bitter and Still Divided
Judging by what has happened since reunification in 1990, Germany is likely to be more preoccupied with itself over the next five years than intent on exercising the new economic and political might that made its European neighbors so uneasy five years ago.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl rammed unification through the NATO alliance and the European Community in 1989 and 1990, brushing aside fears that Europe would be dominated by a German colossus of 80 million people.


Budget's Losers Display A Touch of Resignation
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman warned today that there would be winners and losers in her $16 billion budget, and they lined up almost as soon as the Governor ended her speech.
Among the biggest losers are state workers, whose numbers could be pared by as many as 3,400, and the state's wealthiest school districts.


Republicans Change Portrait, And Democrats Are Furious
He was a rabid segregationist, blocking civil rights legislation at every turn.
He was a Democrat in name, but was disowned by his own party.
Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the former Speaker, called him "an ultraconservative who was no more a Democrat than the man in the moon."
Buried by the Democrats, Representative Howard W. Smith has now been resurrected by the Republicans.


Two Generations of Reminiscences by Gowdys
The Super Bowl has now been passed from one Gowdy to another.
Curt Gowdy Sr. called eight Super Bowls, including the first, in 1967.
Curt Jr., an 18-year veteran of ABC Sports, will produce Sunday's two-hour pre-game show before the 49ers-Chargers game, as well as the halftime and post-game shows.
"I was a big A.F.L. fan, and I vividly remember Dad calling their games with Paul Christman and Al DeRogatis," Curt Jr. said yesterday at ABC's production compound at Joe Robbie Stadium.
"He always said Super Bowl III was the greatest sports event he ever saw because of the David-Goliath aspect."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.37
3.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.80
5.73
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.24
6.20
3.14
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.82
7.80
5.69
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.90
7.88
6.30
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.75
8.77
7.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.80
6.77
5.51
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Clorox Co. (CLX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Extra Effort Starts Paying Off for Mason
Last Friday, a cherished day off for the Knicks, Anthony Mason persuaded an assistant coach, Jeff Van Gundy, to spend an hour with him in a gym working on his offensive moves.
That kind of diligence is becoming second nature with Mason.
He is a gym rat with a purpose.
The more he practices, it seems, the more it shows on the court.


A Next-Generation Casino With a 'Star Trek' Theme
The Hilton Hotels Corporation and Paramount Parks, a division of Viacom Inc., are expected to announce today that they have formed a joint venture to build an entertainment complex in Las Vegas, Nev., based on the "Star Trek" science fiction theme.
Projected to cost more than $50 million, the attraction will incorporate interactive video and virtual reality stations, enabling visitors to participate as crew members in missions of Starfleet, whose best-known spacecraft is the Enterprise, said a person close to the negotiations between the two companies, speaking on condition of anonymity.


Ending the Corruption Feud
Within the last year, nearly 40 New York City police officers have been arrested on corruption charges.
City Hall sees the arrests as evidence that the department can police itself.
But it could also be argued that this recent vigilance is at least partly a result of pressure from the Mollen commission's corruption hearings last year and the City Council's subsequent campaign to create an independent agency to monitor and investigate corruption.
The Council voted to create a strong agency with independent investigative and subpoena powers, as the commission recommended.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani vetoed the bill.
Then, when the Council overrode him, he threatened to ignore the vote, forcing the Council to take him to court to establish the agency.
Governance by litigation is threatening to become a habit with this Mayor.


Corning Inc.(GLW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


INSIDE
Abortion Opponents March
An estimated 45,000 opponents of abortion marched to mark the 22d anniversary of the Supreme Court decision in Roe v.
Wade.
Page A12.
Transit Police Lose a Round
New York City has the right to stop paying $320 million a year to support the transit police, a judge ruled, in a victory for Mayor Giuliani.
Page B1.
Long- Term H.I.V.
Survivors
AIDS researchers are seeking clues from H.I.V.-infected people who live for years with healthy immune systems.
Science Times, page C1.


First-Time Donors Offer The Reasons They Care
Years ago, when she was raising a daughter alone, Barbara Gardiner was well acquainted with hardship.
Although she now lives comfortably in Scarsdale, N.Y., her precarious past still haunts her.
Eager to help other single parents, Ms.
Gardiner made her first contribution to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund last month.
"Having been a working single mother for years in my past, I would like this check used for a single-parent family to ease their life and help them move forward," wrote Ms.
Gardiner, who sent $50.
"I count the many blessings my life has, but always keep the memory of the harder times my daughter and I experienced."


Prestone Review Has Six Finalists
The Prestone Products Corporation said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its estimated $5 million account to six finalists.
The account had been at Young &amp; Rubicam New York from 1985 until November, when that agency and the company agreed to end their relationship because the brand, which includes antifreeze and automotive products, had changed ownership.


Water Main From 1870's Breaks Under Broadway


Officials Offer New Plan To Retain the Yankees
Yankee officials have rejected New York City's initial plans for upgrading Yankee Stadium and the surrounding neighborhood, and city officials presented team representatives with yet another proposal yesterday designed to keep the team from leaving the Bronx.
In the latest plan, the city proposes to upgrade the stadium with a new outer wall that copies the stadium's original facade, to add about 100 luxury boxes.
It also proposes to increase the number of parking spaces and to make it easier to travel to the stadium by car.


President Will Seek a Higher Minimum Wage, Senior Aides Say
President Clinton will buck certain Congressional opposition to seek an increase in the minimum wage as a sign of his resolve to buttress the earning power of working Americans and stress the value of work, senior White House officials said today.
In the face of widespread demands for new requirements that would force welfare recipients to find jobs or lose benefits, administration aides described the President's proposal as one step toward providing new incentives for work.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the New York Islanders' search for a new mascot misidentified a team that had worked with the Islanders' design firm.
It was the Florida Panthers of the National Hockey League, not the Carolina Panthers of the National Football League.


WHITMAN PLEDGES EARLY COMPLETION OF 30% TAX CUT
Saying that she had kept her promise, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman announced today that she would complete her 30 percent reduction in state income tax rates by next January, a year ahead of schedule.
The reduction would be paid for by a catalogue of cuts in state government that would reduce the state work force by 3,350 employees, or nearly 5 percent.
The announcement was a surprise, since most legislators listening to the Governor's annual budget message had forecast a new tax cut of only 5 percent on top of the 15 percent in reductions already enacted, and since Mrs.
Whitman herself had indicated in October that she might not be able to keep to her three-year timetable.


RESULTS PLUS
PRO BASKETBALL  Price Is Out for 6 to 8 Weeks  The Cleveland Cavaliers won a game but lost their best player for at least six weeks.
Tyrone Hill had 23 points and 14 rebounds and Tony Campbell keyed the decisive 20-2 run in the second quarter as the Cavaliers beat the visiting Los Angeles Clippers, 90-68.
Earlier, they learned that Mark Price, their All-Star point guard, will undergo surgery tomorrow to have a screw placed through the broken navicular bone in his right wrist and will be out for six to eight weeks.


Florida Progress Corp.(FPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Q&amp;A
Measuring Mountains
Q.  How do scientists measure mountains like Mount Everest?


Vulcan Materials (VMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Fashion; Unashamedly Couture
Who would have guessed that the most effective answer for fashion's most boring question -- whether couture will survive -- would come from such an unexpected place as the runways of ready-to-wear's avant-garde designers.
While the rise of luxury ready-to-wear certainly once hurt couture, it was couture style that saved the last ready-to-wear season.
Fashion has thus come full circle.
The ready-to-wear, influenced by 1950's couture, is in turn pushing couture to be more true to itself.


Abortion Foes Rally in Joy Over G.O.P. Surge
Thousands of abortion opponents marked the anniversary of Roe v.
Wade today with speeches, patriotic songs and a peaceful march in a Washington that they clearly felt was more sympathetic to their cause than it has been since the Supreme Court affirmed a woman's right to abortion 22 years ago.
While the marchers consider President Clinton an enemy -- unlike his Republican predecessors who sent messages of encouragement to the annual rallies -- speaker after speaker exulted in the newly conservative Congress.


Making It Easier to Enter the Web
NOT too long ago, the Internet was similar to a wonderful book bazaar or library, without any system for organization, where many interesting works could be found if one had the patience to sift through the random stacks.
Woe to the reader who dug into the mounds of books in search of one particular tome.
In the last few years the Internet has expanded at a phenomenal rate, and it now dwarfs any library in the physical world.
The equivalent of the Library of Congress goes whizzing through the global computer network every few seconds.
Trying to find that one particular piece of information on the Internet can be a frustrating experience, especially for newcomers.


Amoco Corp.(AN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chemicals Shield Oil Earnings
Several big oil companies said yesterday that they were helped in the most recent quarter by strong earnings from chemical products as their oil and gas operations slumped.
Gains from chemicals contributed to strong quarterly earnings by Exxon and Atlantic Richfield.
Better performances in chemicals, however, failed to lift earnings for Amoco and Ashland Oil.


Patterns
Backstage Maneuverings
It might be time to install bleachers backstage at the haute couture shows and forget all those gilded chairs in front.
Despite the complaints of models, constricted quarters and the increasing annoyance of designers and their public relations staffs, there are more cameras and reporters requesting backstage passes than ever before at shows.


Safeco Corp.(SAFC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Trying to See the Visions Of Ancient Eyes.


A Tenor, a Baritone And 'Winterreise'
Singers of songs fall into two categories: the actors and the tellers.
The first take us straight to the song's source, using a theater of sorts to recreate people, places and thoughts.
It is no easy job, standing relatively immobile and nearly alone, with only a piano to lean back on.
This is acting in sound: altering the color and force of the voice, slowing down or speeding up, making musical accent a metaphor for impulses of the heart: all as surrogates for the poet's imagination.
Peter Schreier, who with Alexei Lubimov performed Schubert's "Winterreise" at Carnegie Hall on Friday night, is an actor.


On Both Sides of the Border, Peso Ills Were Long Ignored
While the Clinton Administration and the Mexican Government were saying until late last year that Mexico was a booming example of an emerging market that would bring wealth to workers in both countries, warnings were running rampant in both capitals that severe economic trouble lay ahead.
According to officials in Washington, the Treasury Department told several Mexican officials beginning last summer that the country's short-term borrowings had reached a dangerously high level and that the peso was being kept artificially high.
But on several occasions, officials said, the Mexicans responded that they were aware of the problem, but that nothing could be done during and just after the election that brought Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon to power.


METRO DIGEST
WHITMAN PLEDGES TO COMPLETE TAX CUT
Saying that she had kept her promise, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey announced that she would complete her 30 percent reduction in state income tax rates by next January, a year ahead of schedule.
The reduction would be paid for by enacting a catalogue of across-the-board cuts in state government that will reduce the state work force by 3,350 employees, nearly 5 percent.
A1.
The Governor warned that there would be winners and losers in her budget, and they lined up almost as soon as she ended her speech.
B5.


Canada's Pale Version of Peso Crisis
The Bank of Canada has raised short-term interest rates for 11 of the last 12 weeks in an effort to stop the precipitous slide of the Canadian dollar, but has failed so far to reverse its downward spiral to a near record low.
The central bank acted because a declining Canadian dollar reduces the value of the nation's wealth and compounds the Government's fiscal problems by increasing the cost of servicing Canada's huge national debt.


Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy
Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald, born in 1890, was a child of the Boston Irish.
Her ancestors came from a country in which, as Roman Catholics, they had been barred by law from voting, holding office, owning land or attending school.
So had the forebears of her husband, Joseph Patrick Kennedy, whom she married when she was 24.
Together they founded an extraordinary political dynasty, comparable only to the Adams family and the Roosevelts -- together, because his ambition and anger (he never forgot his snubbing by Brahmin Boston) was complemented by her commitment to their children.
Let one of their sons run for office and she, and their daughters, were right out there on the hustings with them.


'Holy War,' Fragile Peace
The Israeli Government faces a daunting challenge to protect its people from zealots willing to die in misguided service to a cause, like the Islamic Holy War terrorists whose bombs killed 18 Israeli soldiers and one civilian at a bus stop Sunday.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin now faces an almost equally difficult challenge -- keeping peace talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization on track after the fifth major bombing in less than a year by Islamic radicals determined to destroy the negotiations, the P.L.O. and Israeli morale.
To Mr.
Rabin's credit, he has reaffirmed his commitment to peace diplomacy, rejecting the arguments both of right-wingers who never believed in peace with the Palestinians and of doves like President Ezer Weizman who now question whether such "a bloody process" can ever lead to peace.


Crane Co. (CR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in The Living Section last Wednesday about places where professional chefs shop for kitchen equipment referred incorrectly to Jean F. Tibbetts, an author and the manager of Lamalle Kitchenware.
She is a woman.


House Republicans Seek Edge for Their Version of Balanced-Budget Measure
House Republican leaders said today that they would arrange this week's debate on a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution in a way intended to give the version they prefer -- one that would make it very hard to raise taxes -- the best shot at passage.
But they conceded that its prospects were uncertain.
And one Republican, Representative Gerald B. H. Solomon of upstate New York, said the party's leaders would probably decide on Wednesday evening, after the first day of debate, whether to continue pushing for their version or to throw their backing to a competing measure.


Sports of The Times; Willhite Has Been in J. R.'s Shoes
NICK WILLHITE heard the news about J. R. Richard at home in Salt Lake City, where he lives and works for the Utah Alcoholism Foundation Center, and believed he had an understanding of the tragedy, of how Richard, who once threw a fastball as fast as his Astros teammate Nolan Ryan, had wound up homeless.
Of how it was learned that Richard had been living in a disheveled state under a bridge in Houston, the town where many of his triumphs occurred some 15 years earlier.
Willhite had gone through a similar experience, reaching a dream of pitching for the National League champion Dodgers in 1963 and for their World Series championship team in 1965, and then some 20 years later becoming homeless, a drug and alcohol addict, wandering the streets of Salt Lake City.


Cadbury Confirms Talks To Acquire Dr Pepper
Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C., the London-based soft-drink and candy behemoth, yesterday confirmed reports that it was trying to acquire the Dr Pepper/Seven-Up Companies, based in Dallas, the third-largest American maker of soft drinks.
An executive with knowledge of the negotiations said the price and the composition of Dr Pepper's future management were the principal sticking points in the continuing negotiations.
An acquisition price of $33 to $34 a share for Dr Pepper was expected by analysts.


Ally of Pataki Defies Him With Deal on Pension Bill
Setting up a surprising confrontation with Gov.
George E. Pataki, the leaders of the Senate and Assembly agreed today to pass legislation that would increase the pensions of state and city workers and saddle Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani with a heavy bill.
Mr.
Pataki supported the bill, which would grant retirees their first one-time increase in pension levels since 1988, while courting unions during last year's campaign.
But he quickly reversed course after his election, saying it would be too costly for the state and for New York City.
The new Republican Governor suggested strongly today that he would veto the legislation.


Commerce Chief Is Accused of Misleading Panel on Investment
Presenting the initial results of a yearlong investigation, the Republican chairman of a House committee today accused Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown of profiting from a company that defaulted on a Federal loan and of misleading Congress about those profits.
Representative William F. Clinger Jr. of Pennsylvania, chairman of the House Government Oversight and Reform Committee, said the panel had found evidence that linked Mr.
Brown to the Corridor Broadcasting Corporation, a television company that defaulted in 1993 on a Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation loan at a cost to taxpayers of $23.3 million.


Retirement Isn't Out Of Picture For Rice
If the 49ers beat the Chargers on Sunday in Super Bowl XXIX, Jerry Rice, arguably the best receiver in the history of the National Football League, said he would consider retiring.
Rice said today that he was approaching the Super Bowl as if it were his last game because that's the way he keeps motivated and focused.
Later, someone asked Rice, 32, whether he was contradicting a statement he made this season that he would consider playing another five or seven years.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $50 million of notes due in 1996 through Chase Securities Inc.
The noncallable issue is priced at par to yield 7.16 percent.


Long-Term Survivors May Hold Key Clues To Puzzle of AIDS
NEWTON L. BUTLER is a 41-year-old resident of the San Francisco Bay area who has been infected with H.I.V, the AIDS virus, for 10 years for sure, and possibly 15.
Yet he is, by his own and his doctor's accounts, a picture of health.
He works full time, hikes, exercises regularly and has never taken anti-H.I.V. medication.
An occasional cold causes him to worry that he might be developing AIDS.
But, he said in an interview, he has never had any of the myriad opportunistic infections that develop when the immune system falters from H.I.V. infection.
In fact, frequent tests of Mr.
Butler's immune function, particularly the count of CD-4 white blood cells, all have been well within the normal range.


Illinois Town a 'Testing Field' in Labor Relations
The ovens of industry are burning with gusto in this old prairie city's east end, where factories abut dormant black cornfields and the asphalt skirts of auto body shops and bowling alleys.
Day and night, the A. E. Staley corn milling plant belches plumes of smoke that dust the downtown with a scent as sweet and thick as a bakery's.
A few blocks up 22d Street from Staley, the two-story brick plant of the world's No. 1 tire and rubber company, the Bridgestone Corporation of Tokyo, is operating, too, and so, a few blocks farther up 22d, is the still bigger plant of the world's No. 1 producer of earth-moving equipment, Caterpillar Inc. of Peoria.


The Met Orchestra At Carnegie
When James Levine's all-Strauss program with the Met Orchestra on Sunday passed the two-hour mark, several concertgoers chose to leave Carnegie Hall, after Margaret Price's moving account of the "Four Last Songs." They chose poorly.
The reading of "Don Quixote" that closed the concert was one of the finest orchestral performances I have heard in the last few seasons.
It offered the staggering beauty of tone one is accustomed to hear from this ensemble night after night, and it went further into a rich emotional realm that often eludes modern-day Strauss interpreters.
Mr.
Levine's Metropolitan Opera powerhouse is one of very few American orchestras that could pull off a "Don Quixote" with soloists drawn from its own ranks.
Jerry Grossman and Michael Ouzounian, the orchestra's principal cellist and violist, handled their solo roles with technical accomplishment and acute dramatic intelligence.
Mr.
Grossman moved in and out of the orchestral texture with an ease that full-time soloists often cannot manage in this work.
All sections played splendidly: the brass was rock solid and never overloud, the woodwinds sharply characterful, the strings gorgeous at all dynamic levels.


Mexico Chief Again Shuffles His Cabinet
Seeking to blunt criticism of his leadership, President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon has shuffled his Cabinet for the second time in less than a month, dismissing an Education Minister who had falsely claimed to have a doctorate from Harvard.
In a series of changes announced late Sunday, Mr.
Zedillo also backed away a bit from the young, American-trained technocrats who dominated his original team.


Monsanto Co.(MTC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Deficient Hormone May Be Culprit In Painful Diabetes Complication
A PAINFUL and sometimes disfiguring complication of diabetes may be caused by an underproduction of a hormone that nourishes and maintains the body's nervous system, according to a new theory.
The theory offers a novel explanation for the condition known as diabetic neuropathy, a gradual deterioration of peripheral nerves that generally affects old patients and initially causes a painful burning sensation in the hands and feet.
It can lead to foot amputations, impotence, incontinence and gastrointestinal problems.
It had been thought that the condition was caused by too much sugar in the blood, but the new theory suggests that it is caused by a deficiency of a recently discovered nerve growth factor.


World News Briefs; New Italian Chief Gains on Vote Prospects
Prime Minister Lamberto Dini appeared more likely today to survive his first test in Parliament after his predecessor and former patron, Silvio Berlusconi, and other center-right leaders indicated that they would probably not vote against him in a confidence vote expected on Wednesday.
Mr.
Berlusconi vowed last week to oppose Mr.
Dini's Government of nonpartisan technicians, thus robbing it of the majority it needs, unless both the new Prime Minister and the President, Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, committed to elections in June.


State of the Union? One Day, Paralyzed
When the Framers replaced the Articles of Confederation with the Constitution, they gave the Government unqualified and unimpeded fiscal powers.
Today, a new Republican majority in Congress proposes to overturn that decision.
Speaker Newt Gingrich says he intends to reverse the growth of the Federal Government's role in society since 1932.
The legacy he challenges, however, is not only that of Franklin D. Roosevelt but more fundamentally that of Alexander Hamilton.
As President Clinton delivers his State of the Union Message tonight, many Americans will wonder about the fate of particular programs and policies in the new Congress.
But the larger question raised by the Republicans is the Government's capacity to act, for they propose not just to shrink programs but to impose a permanent constitutional straightjacket that is likely to paralyze the Government in future crises.


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


Sierra Pacific Resources (SRP,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Intel to Alter Disclosure of Chip Flaws
The Intel Corporation plans to brief industry analysts and consultants Tuesday on a disclosure procedure the company is introducing to inform its customers and the public about flaws in its chips.
New flaws will be disclosed as they are discovered and analyzed, Intel said.
The shift in policy comes after an unreported division error in the Pentium chip caused a nationwide uproar last year.


Let's Move Past Stigma on Mental Illness
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal points out in "The Broken People" (column, Jan. 17) the irrational discrepancy in the way our society ignores individuals with psychiatric illness while promptly treating those with nonpsychiatric medical illness.


Texaco Inc.(TX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Titanic Burst Of Dying Stars Is Linked To Neutrinos
AT the end of their bright lives, their nuclear fires spent and the heavy hand of gravity bearing down, stars of the most massive kind muster one last spurt of energy and go out with a bang.
First the cataclysmic collapse: the star's iron core implodes, shrinking in less than a second from a diameter of several thousand miles to an extremely dense ball of 40 miles, with no loss of mass.
Then the explosion: milliseconds after the collapse, in an eruption that is among the most violent events in nature, all of the star's outer layers blow apart.
For a brief time, the fireball shines with the brilliance of 100 billion stars.


Giuliani Wins Ruling on Halting City Funds for Transit Police
New York City has the right to stop paying $320 million a year to support the transit police, a judge ruled yesterday, in a victory for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani as he pressures transit officials to agree to merge the transit force with the city police.
In a complicated 12-page decision, Justice Charles E. Ramos of State Supreme Court in Manhattan resoundingly rejected the Transit Authority's claim that the proposed cutoff of funds violated the city's contract with the authority and was subject to outside mediation.
"The city's right to terminate is both unconditional and unilateral," he wrote.


Long-Term Survivors May Hold Key Clues To Puzzle of AIDS
NEWTON L. BUTLER is a 41-year-old resident of the San Francisco Bay area who has been infected with H.I.V, the AIDS virus, for 10 years for sure, and possibly 15.
Yet he is, by his own and his doctor's accounts, a picture of health.
He works full time, hikes, exercises regularly and has never taken anti-H.I.V. medication.
An occasional cold causes him to worry that he might be developing AIDS.
But, he said in an interview, he has never had any of the myriad opportunistic infections that develop when the immune system falters from H.I.V. infection.
In fact, frequent tests of Mr.
Butler's immune function, particularly the count of CD-4 white blood cells, all have been well within the normal range.


Plan to Aid Business on Tax Fades
The only item in the Congressional Republicans' Contract With Americathat was meant strictly to be a boon to business appears to stand no chance of becoming law.
The measure, which was supposed to give businesses more generous tax deductions when they bought expensive machinery and equipment, does not even have the support of the industries it wants to help.
Top Republican lawmakers have also expressed qualms that it could end up sharply increasing future budget deficits.


Retro Retrospective of Movie Songs
When the song lyricists Alan and Marilyn Bergman scored their first hit 38 years ago with a pop-calypso throwaway called "Yellow Bird," who would have guessed that three decades later they would be the torchbearers for an endangered species of Hollywood pop grandeur?
With a catalogue that includes "The Way We Were," "The Windmills of Your Mind" and the underappreciated score for "Yentl," they are the most important lyricists still writing movie songs in a pre-rock style.
Attesting to their success was Mrs.
Bergman's recent election to head the board of Ascap.
Opening the 25th season of the 92d Street Y's popular Lyrics and Lyricists series on Sunday afternoon, the Bergmans were the hosts of an extensive retrospective of their work.
For nearly three hours, the Y's main auditorium resounded with the billowing Technicolor ballads of love and longing that make up the bulk of their output.
Joining them on the stage were the cabaret singer Nancy LaMott and her accompanist, Christopher Marlowe, and the singer Sandy Stewart backed by the Mike Renzi Trio.


Amerada Hess Corp.(AHC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bell Atlantic's (Mild) Interest In Public Broadcasting Deal
Prodded by Republican lawmakers who want to eliminate Federal financing for public broadcasting, executives at the Bell Atlantic Corporation said today that they might be interested in acquiring a stake in the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, but cautioned that the idea had not progressed beyond casual responses to questions from members of Congress.
"We haven't been lobbying at all on this," said Eric Rabe, a spokesman for Bell Atlantic, adding that the idea of investing in public television was just one of dozens of possibilities the company might consider for acquiring new programming.


That UConn Cannonball Keeps Thundering On
The fans kept checking the schedules.
There had to be some mistake.
Connecticut and Syracuse -- in Gampel Pavilion?
This type of game, No. 2 versus No. 6, had been removed from the small campus arenas years ago, when the Big East became bigger.
Syracuse had not played on this campus in more than 22 years, since Nixon was President, Jim Boeheim was an assistant coach, Connecticut's traditional passion was a secret and the concept of a Big East was a fantasy.
Not since places like Manley Field House and McDonough Arena and Alumni Hall were full-time addresses had two teams in this league squeezed so much talent and such intense feeling into so small a space.


Fire Trucks Collide While Responding to a Blaze


Chang and Pierce, Seeking Breakthroughs, Reach Semifinals
On a sunny morning that would have been idyllic were it not for the intrusion of the resident blowfly population, the Australian Open gained its first two semifinalists.
Michael Chang, who has designs on ending his six-year slam drought here, used his patented never-say-die technique to aggravate and eliminate Andrei Medvedev, 7-6 (9-7), 7-5, 6-3.


Equifax Inc.(EFX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  International League


Presenting a Program That Lives Up to Its Name
"Unconfined Movement" was an apt title for a program produced by Shannon Hobbs featuring six choreographers who are independent thinkers.
One of these is Ms.
Hobbs, who last year bucked dance-world trends by creating a powerful and abstractly stated solo about the war in Bosnia.
The three premieres she presented on Friday night at the Cunningham Studio were more overtly dramatic and less terse in their movement vocabulary.
Ms.
Hobbs, who obviously belongs to no downtown cult, is still in the process of finding a personal vocabulary to match her strong pictorial images and ideas.


Golden West Financial Corp.(GDW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jaspers Continue Hot Start
Manhattan, which was denied an invitation to last year's National Collegiate Athletic Association Tournament by Loyola of Maryland, rudely welcomed the Greyhounds to its Draddy Gymnasium in the Bronx last night.
The Jaspers (15-2), who have won six straight games and are off to their best start in 42 years, put together a dominant second half, crushing the Greyhounds, 85-56, with a barrage of 3-point field goals and one of the stingiest man-to-man defenses in the nation.


Imperial Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


World News Briefs; Officials Among 30,000 Honoring Iran Critic
More than 30,000 Iranians took part today in funeral ceremonies for former Prime Minister Mehdi Bazargan, who became a chief opponent of the Islamic Government in recent years but was posthumously hailed by senior Government officials.
Mourners marched for two miles through Teheran streets with Mr. Bazargan's body.


Justices Rule For Employees In a Bias Suit
Ruling unanimously in a job discrimination case, the Supreme Court today rejected a defense that employers have used with increasing success to avoid liability for dismissing an employee for an illegal reason like race or age.
The Court ruled that employees who lose their jobs because of discrimination are still entitled to back pay, even if the employer later discovers misconduct that would have justified dismissal had it been known at the time.


Viking Office Products Inc.(VKNG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
The show must go on . . . but sometimes technology makes it difficult.
Last Tuesday, for example, a performance of "Sunset Boulevard" was canceled because of hydraulic equipment problems that prevented the scenery from moving.
Four days later, at the Saturday preview matinee of "Love! Valour! Compassion!," which was a hit at the Manhattan Theater Club and has moved to the Walter Kerr Theater on Broadway, a computer glitch left the production without sound effects or music.


Assembly Backs a Revision of Law on Toxic Chemicals
The Assembly today voted to revise a 1991 law aimed at reducing the use of toxic substances in manufacturing, responding to the plea of businesses, who said they were being strangled by red tape.
Both industry and environmental groups praised the Pollution Prevention Law when it was enacted with unanimous legislative support.


Advocates Say Cuts Cripple AIDS Agency
Leaders of community groups that work with AIDS patients clashed yesterday with officials of the Giuliani administration, contending that cuts in the budget and the work force had severely crippled the effectiveness of the city's Division of AIDS Services.
Administration officials acknowledged at a City Council hearing that AIDS workers have higher caseloads, but said that more efficient management had allowed the agency to accommodate AIDS patients' needs.
"I am glad to report that despite fiscal constraints, we continue to provide timely service to clients," said Ronald F. Cavalier, Acting Deputy Commissioner of the city's Human Resources Administration.


Minorities In Gritty Part Of Quake City Bear Big Loss
This crumpled city struggled to get back to work today, as supply-laden helicopters crisscrossed the gray skies to avoid horrific traffic jams, businessmen pedaled to work on bikes and the city began its first garbage pickup since last week's huge earthquake.
Water is now running to 41 percent of households, and electricity has been restored to nearly every home that remains habitable.


Ziff-Davis Plans Layoffs
The Ziff-Davis Publishing Company said yesterday that it planned to eliminate a total of about 34 positions within the next several weeks.
The publisher owns 12 magazines in the United States, led by PC Magazine, and another 12 magazines overseas.
The company employs a total of 3,100 people, and a company spokesman said it planned to lay off 18 people in its corporate departments that have a total of 676 employees.
He said this included six positions in the facilities department and five in human resources.


Armstrong World Industries Inc.(ACK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pick a Reason, Any Reason, for the Rangers' Defeat
Call them valid reasons or merely good excuses, but there were many explanations for the Rangers' 2-1 defeat last night to the Boston Bruins in a good, tough game at Madison Square Garden.
The Bruins got another excellent performance from a rookie goalie, Blaine Lacher, who has given up two goals in two victories in two days and whose weaknesses are so far unscouted.


Stock Jitters Over Mexican Aid Package
The stock market dropped sharply yesterday morning, but rallied just as sharply in the afternoon as Newt Gingrich, the Speaker of the House, sought to reassure nervous financial markets that the Clinton Administration's $40 billion rescue of Mexico "is going to happen."
The leading stock indexes yesterday closed mixed after being sharply negative most of the day.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 2.02 points, to 3,867.41, the third consecutive decline for the blue-chip index.
The broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index gained 1.04 points, to 465.82, and the smaller-company Nasdaq composite index dropped 2.54 points, to 759.51.


Miami Asks Cowboys' Davis to Be Coach
Barring a last-minute breakdown in contract negotiations Tuesday morning, the University of Miami finally has a successor to the departed head football coach Dennis Erickson.
It's Butch Davis, a 43-year-old former Miami assistant who has been an assistant coach with the Dallas Cowboys for six seasons, the last two as the defensive coordinator.


Merrill Lynch Profit Fell 53.5% in the 4th Quarter
Marking a tough end to a tough year, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company reported a 53.5 percent drop in fourth-quarter earnings yesterday, as virtually all of its major business segments registered sharp declines.
For the period, Merrill, the nation's largest securities firm said it earned $162 million, or 76 cents a share, in the fourth quarter, compared with $347.2 million, or $1.53 a share, a year earlier.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  DAY OF MOURNING IN ISRAEL  Israel buried the 19 people, most of them young, killed by a suicide bomber, and the country's conversation was dominated by questions about whether Israel was on the right track in seeking peace.
A1


Clifton Phalen, 88, a Chairman Of New York Telephone, Dies
Clifton W. Phalen, who set out in 1928 as a telephone lineman and student engineer in Syracuse and retired 38 years later as chairman of the New York Telephone Company, died on Friday at his home on Shelter Island, L.I.
He was 88.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Some Simple Tools For Sunday Painters
OWNING a computer and a painting program will not make most of us artists, any more than owning oil paints, brushes and canvases will.
But whether Rembrandt or Richard Roe, an artist or would-be artist needs the proper tools.
Flying Colors, from Davidson &amp; Associates of Torrance, Calif., phone (800) 545-7677, provides many: stamps (images); an eraser; brushes; ovals and rectangles both solid and hollow, and patterns.
On the monitor of a computer running Windows 3.1 with 256 colors, the screen is so sparkling that you may hesitate to mar it with your own efforts.


Republicans Hope to Put President On Defensive
Republicans hope to turn the tables Tuesday night when President Clinton delivers his State of the Union Message.
With a Democrat in the White House, the Republicans on Capitol Hill might be expected to respond point by point to the President's initiatives.
But the Republicans are giddy with their new-found power and are so eager to demonstrate it for a national audience that they intend to treat the President's speech as a response to their own initiatives.


If You Can't Beat 'em . . .
LENNOX LEWIS is relying on the man who plotted his downfall to help him get back to the top.
The British boxer said yesterday that he had signed the trainer EMANUEL STEWARD, who was in OLIVER McCALL's corner when the American knocked out Lewis to gain the World Boxing Council heavyweight title Sept. 24.
Steward, whose Detroit gym has produced champions from TOMMY HEARNS to EVANDER HOLYFIELD, said he was ending his association with McCall for a multiyear deal that will also give him a percentage of Lewis's management.


J. Edgar Joseph; City Opera Costume Chief, 81
J.
Edgar Joseph, the head of the costume department at New York City Opera for 35 years, died on Jan. 12 at Sharp-Cabrillo Hospital in San Diego.
He was 81 and lived in San Diego.
The cause was complications after surgery, said Susan Woelzl, the publicity director at the New York City Opera.


Chess
Forewarned is not always sufficiently forearmed, as the outcome of the Pan-American Intercollegiate Championship showed.
Borough of Manhattan Community College alerted everyone to its strength when it won a year ago, but still no team could stop its squad from winning again in Providence, R.I., in a tournament held Dec. 27 to 30.
Manhattan scored the winning 5 1/2- 1/2 out of its six matches in a Swiss-system field of 31 teams.
McGill University of Montreal was second with 5-1, followed by New York University, Universidad Nacional de Pedro Henriquez Urena of the Dominican Republic and Harvard.


Death Row Inmate Allowed New Appeal
Ruling 5 to 4 in a death penalty case, the Supreme Court today gave a Missouri death row inmate a chance to persuade the lower Federal courts that his execution would be a "miscarriage of justice" because of new evidence that he says proves his innocence of the prison murder of which he was convicted in 1984.
The Court ruled that the lower courts had misapplied Supreme Court precedent in setting an extremely high standard for the inmate to meet before he could even get a hearing to present his evidence to a Federal judge.


No Headline
"It's almost as if there are two management philosophies. One seeks to cut payrolls and reduce labor costs and tries to bust unions or control union power. The other seeks to empower workers and give them a greater voice." -- ROBERT B. REICH, Secretary of Labor.  [ A7:4. ]


Insensitivity to Food's Fat Content Seen as Obesity Factor
A RELATIVE insensitivity to the fat content of foods could be an important factor in promoting and maintaining obesity, a new study indicates.
The findings, published in The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, suggest that the plethora of nonfat and low-fat food products now on grocery shelves could indeed help to curb the nation's steadily growing problem with overweight by reducing overall caloric intake among people with weight problems.
The study, conducted at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in Baltimore, examined the effect of a premeal snack of yogurt on food intake at lunch.
The yogurts, which were served 30 minutes before lunch, were surreptitiously spiked with different amounts of fats or carbohydrates.
The researchers then analyzed how much food the participants consumed at lunch.


Dinner at 8? San Francisco Will Be Feasting by Then
ARE you ready for Super Bowl XXIX (that's 29)?
Get ready for another blowout.
Another half-game.
Another half Super Bowl.
So here are XIV and a half (that's 14 1/2) reasons why the San Francisco 49ers will rip the San Diego Chargers:
I San Francisco has the Golden Gate Bridge, Twin Peaks and is The City by the Bay.
San Diego has the zoo.
Where do you want to spend your vacation?


Economic Report Proposes Novel Step
As a Senate subcommittee draws closer to holding hearings on baseball's exemption from antitrust laws, members of Congress have received a nonpartisan economic report that questions whether the exemption "serves a useful public purpose."
The 22-page report, compiled by the Congressional Research Service of the Library of Congress, also shows how the salary cap the clubs have implemented would benefit the owners in an overwhelming economic way and suggests the novel step of placing new franchises in existing large-revenue markets like New York, Chicago and Los Angeles as a way of leveling revenues between high-revenue and low-revenue clubs.


Panthers' New Coach Explains Philosophy
DOM CAPERS brought his defensive expertise to the Carolina Panthers yesterday, but he said stopping opponents won't be his only goal as he becomes the National Football League expansion team's first coach.
"It's like going into a game," Capers said at a news conference formally introducing him as the head coach.
"You do extensive planning, you do your homework, and then you have to react.


Further Delay in Simpson Trial


On My Mind; Choices for Rabin
The President of Israel, a pioneer air force general who became part of the movement for peace with the Palestinians, looked at the Israelis left dead after Sunday's terrorist massacre, visited the wounded and then said what he felt had to be said at last.
The time had come, President Ezer Weizman said, to suspend the talks with the Palestinians, for the Labor Government and the Likud opposition to get together -- and, most important of all, for Israel to "rethink which way we are going."


Webb (Del) Corp.(WBB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Doubts and Despair Mar Japan Recovery
The Japanese city of Kobe struggled to get back to work yesterday, a week after a devastating earthquake, but there were fears that the economy in some of the hardest-hit areas would be permanently scarred.
The earthquake may leave political scars as well, with Japanese newspapers publishing accusations that poor preparation, indecision and bureaucratic rivalry may have added to the death toll.
Some critics said the earthquake exposed a lack of flexibility that they said is the Government's greatest weakness.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALCO STANDARD CORP., Wayne, Pa., acquired Central Label and Supply Company, Groveport, Ohio, which sells and services packaging equipment and systems.
Financial terms were not disclosed.
ALLIED HEALTHCARE PRODUCTS INC., St.
Louis, a maker of medical gas equipment and respiratory products, plans to acquire Bear Medical Systems Inc., Riverside, Calif., which produces breathing-assistance devices, for an undisclosed amount.


Lives Could Have Been on Line As Mitchell Sprinted This Time
The authoritative Track and Field News ranked Dennis Mitchell the world's No. 1 sprinter last year.
He is an Olympic and world-championship medalist.
A week ago, he won the equivalent of another medal, not in track and field, but in life.
Mitchell and his manager, Charlie Wells, had just arrived in Osaka to meet with Mizuno, the Japanese track-shoe manufacturer that sponsors Mitchell.
They took an elevator to their 16th-floor rooms and went to sleep.
At 5:46 A.M., the earthquake struck.


L.I.R.R. Defendant Helps Pick Jury, Then Says It Is Biased
Colin Ferguson helped complete selection of a jury in his murder trial in Nassau County Court today, then described the jurors as unfair and called for the trial to be moved.
Mr.
Ferguson, who continued to act as his own attorney over the objections of his legal advisers, is charged with killing six people on the Long Island Rail Road a year ago and wounding 19 others.


Norton Goes for Unprecedented Third Straight Victory
Linebacker Ken Norton took a calculated risk when he left Dallas, a two-time defending Super Bowl champion that looked primed to three-peat, for the promise of championship glory with San Francisco.
"All along I knew when I left that team it would be them or me," Norton said.
"So I did everything in my very power to make sure it was not going to be them."


Retired U.S. General to Aid Muslim-Croat Federation
The United States will soon send a retired general, Frederick M. Franks Jr., to Bosnia to assist the Muslim-Croat federation here with the integration of its armed forces, American officials said today.
The dispatch of General Franks, the former commander of VII Corps, which delivered the knockout blow to the Republican Guard in Iraq during the Persian Gulf war, will recreate a union with a British general that was of decisive importance in the gulf.


Pataki Is Reaching Out With Good Will and Humor; The Governor Tries the Personal Touch As a Way of Defusing Political Tensions
For much of his first three weeks in office, Gov.
George E. Pataki has mounted a good-will blitzkrieg across the state, bringing a personal touch to every political relationship.
He has opened the executive mansion to a near daily flow of guests, ranging from the State Legislature to the Albany press corps.
He has spiced every speech with personal anecdotes, corny quips and references to members of his audience.
He has met with most county executives, the mayors of the state's largest cities and a group of black ministers led by the Rev.
Al Sharpton.
Last week, he became the first sitting governor in memory to address the New York City Council.


How to Reintroduce Wolves Humanely
To the Editor:
There has been considerable discussion and debate on the reintroduction of wolves to the Adirondacks and Yellowstone National Park.
Gray wolves are being held in metal boxes near Yellowstone awaiting their fate -- freedom or death, pending legal outcome.


St. John's Lopez Prepares For Battle of the Freshmen
In Felipe Lopez's fledging basketball career, he can't remember ever losing five straight games.
"Not even when I was playing in the playgrounds," he said.
But that's where St.
John's losing streak stands heading into tonight's game against Georgetown in Landover, Md.
One more loss would match the six-game skid that ended the 1993-94 regular season.
St.
John's is 8-6 over all and 2-5 in the Big East; the Hoyas are 12-3 and 5-2 after a 66-60 loss to Villanova on Saturday.


Inquiry Finds No U.S. Involvement in the Iraqi Arms Buildup
Clinton Administration lawyers said today that they had found no evidence to support accusations that aides to President George Bush had secretly armed Iraq and covered up their activities after Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait in August 1990.
In a lengthy report commissioned by Attorney General Janet Reno, investigators said no one deserved to be prosecuted beyond a small handful of bankers in Atlanta who secretly helped finance some of Iraq's arms purchases and who have already been convicted.


Arthur Cohen, 74, Research Engineer
Arthur Cohen, an engineer who helped to develop the proximity fuse detonator, a battlefield device that caused enemy missiles to explode prematurely, died on Jan. 12 at New York Hospital.
He was 74 and lived in Flemington, N.J.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter Denise Shapiro.


A Politician's Poetry: From Life, With No Leaps
ALWAYS A RECKONING And Other Poems  By Jimmy Carter  Illustrated by Sarah Elizabeth Chuldenko. 130 pages.
Times Books. $18.
At first glance, the vocations of poet and politician might seem completely antithetical.
Poetry, after all, requires subtlety, introspection and fidelity to language, qualities not exactly valued by most politicians.
Oddly enough, in the case of former President Jimmy Carter, the very qualities that helped cripple him as a politician are also the qualities that make him a mediocre poet.
As President, Mr.
Carter was frequently criticized for lacking a real vision; he was widely described as a technician, an engineer, an ineffectual manager lacking imagination, passion and focus.
As one associate put it, he "knew all the words and none of the music." The same might well be said of the poems in "Always a Reckoning": well-meaning, dutifully wrought poems that plod earnestly from point A to point B without ever making a leap into emotional hyperspace, poems that lack not only a distinctive authorial voice, but also anything resembling a psychological or historical subtext.


Lyondell Petrochemical Co.  (LYO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ashland Oil Inc.(ASH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Teradyne Inc.(TER,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In San Francisco, a New Home for Art
Painters like Clyfford Still and Richard Diebenkorn and eccentrics like Bruce Conner and William T. Wiley have helped to make San Francisco a center of new art for half a century.
Yet the Museum of Modern Art here has long been a poor cousin to other local cultural institutions.
For 60 years it rented cramped quarters upstairs in the Depression-era War Memorial Veterans Building in the Civic Center, where most of the permanent collection had to come down to make way for temporary exhibitions.
The museum gave Jackson Pollock and Arshile Gorky their first shows in the 1940's, but it was always an uphill struggle because of space.
San Franciscans watched enviously nine years ago when Los Angeles hogged the spotlight with its new Museum of Contemporary Art.


D.M.B.&amp; B. Office Will Start Agency
The Los Angeles office of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles said yesterday that it had acquired the Pacific Marketing Group, a promotion and marketing communications company in San Francisco, and would form an integrated marketing communications agency called Highway One Communications.


Beckman Instruments Inc.(BEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lotus Makes Price Cuts On Notes
The Lotus Development Corporation yesterday announced a new, cheaper version of its hot-selling Notes groupware product and a price cut for the full version of Notes, in a bid to widen its lead in the growing market for such communications software.
Lotus also announced agreements with I.B.M. and Apple Computer Inc. to ship a scaled-down version of the product called Notes Express with I.B.M.'s new OS/2 Warp operating system and certain Apple Power Macintosh and Powerbook computers.
Jim Manzi, Lotus's president and chief executive, said these alliances could lead to millions of new Notes users.


Political Footsteps
To the Editor:
While it is true that George Walker Bush is the first son of a President to be elected governor ("Fathers' Footsteps: Other Political Families," Jan. 18), it should also be noted that Theodore Roosevelt Jr., son of President Theodore Roosevelt, served as Governor of Puerto Rico from 1929 to 1932 and as Governor General of the Philippines from 1932 to 1933, appointive positions.


Reynolds &amp; Reynolds Co.(REY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Simpson Judge Delays Trial Opening and Will Allow Questioning of Detective on Bias
With all the world braced today for opening statements in the O. J. Simpson double murder trial, Judge Lance A. Ito, bogged down by last-minute motions and evidentiary haggling, put them off yet again.
Relatives of the two victims and the defendant, news helicopters, button and T-shirt salesmen will all converge again on Tuesday, when the main event is all but certain to start.


New York City Students Should Ride the Buses and Trains Free
To the Editor:
New York City should eliminate the requirement that students carry and present transportation passes to ride city buses or trains in traveling to and from school.
All students, 5 to 21 years old, should be permitted free access to transportation seven days a week.


Stratus Computer (SRA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Pirates Sale Closer
The sale of the Pittsburgh Pirates to the cable television entrepreneur JOHN RIGAS received preliminary approval yesterday from baseball's ownership committee.
Rigas will now attempt to negotiate a purchase agreement by Sunday, the expiration of the six-month deadline given the city to find a new buyer. (AP)


Washington Talk; Quarrels and Sour Memories Fuel a Hostility to Gingrich
Sometimes it isn't ideology or partisanship that explains the behavior of the House of the Representatives, but basic human relations.
In many ways, the House is a small town, and like any other small town, it has its share of great feuds, ancient enmities and perceived betrayals.
This helps explain why Newt Gingrich, despite his efforts to present himself as a more statesmanlike Speaker, faces continued, low-intensity warfare with the Democrats.
Why today, as on other days in recent weeks, Democrats took the floor to denounce the new Speaker's book deal and press for a more rigorous investigation into his ethics.


Tidewater Inc.(TDW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cuomo Puts Ideas on Paper And Shops for a Book Deal
Conservative books are hot, publishers say.
Liberal ones are not.
But never mind that.
Former New York Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, whose liberal politics were soundly voted down in November, has decided to weigh in anyway.
His proposed book theme: "progressive pragmatism."
In a two-and-a-half-page letter now being shopped around New York's publishing houses by his agent, the former Governor promises a fresh rebuttal to what he calls "Gingrichism" and the "Newt world order." Publishing executives say that Mr.
Cuomo is asking for a seven-figure advance.


Lindros Rink Rats To Play Each Other
Eric Lindros has an interesting perspective on what it will be like to play against his younger brother, Brett, in the National Hockey League this season.
"I see it as a couple of free dinners on the Island," said the Philadelphia Flyers' captain, who is already on the verge of N.H.L. superstardom less than a month short of his 22d birthday.


Holy Bull Rests Before Next Race
On the morning after he returned to the races and won for the 13th time in 15 starts, Holy Bull walked leisurely around Barn 3 at Gulfstream Park, cleaned his breakfast bucket and rested before opening training for his next appearance: the $300,000 Donn Handicap on Feb. 11.
"He came back fine," said Jimmy Croll, the owner and trainer of the gray champion.
"He'll be ready for the Donn. And if he runs the way he should, I'd like to go to California with him for the Santa Anita Handicap -- for the exposure and for his career."


Giulio Turcato, 82, Avant-Garde Artist
Giulio Turcato, a painter and sculptor who was a prominent member of Italy's postwar avant-garde, died on Sunday at his home in Rome.
He was 82.
Mr.
Turcato, who was born in Mantua in 1912, studied and then taught art in Venice.
In 1943, he settled in Rome, where he took part in the anti-Fascist underground.
After the war, he was part of a group of artists who in 1948 signed a manifesto proclaiming themselves "formalists and Marxists," clashing with Italian Communist Party officials who contended art should be realistic.
Blending aspects of Picasso and Futurism, he developed a nongeometric style of abstraction for which he claimed political subject matter primarily through titles like "Revolts," "Political Gatherings," "Factories" and "Mines."


Brave New Forecasts Go Beyond Tomorrow To Next Year's Weather
FROM now until June at least, it is likely to be warmer than normal most of the time in most of the country, including the Northeast, according to the first of a new generation of forecasts that the National Weather Service has begun issuing a year or more in advance.
Predicting the weather even a month ahead in even the vaguest and most general terms has been a chancy proposition given the atmosphere's chaotic behavior.
Until now Government meteorologists have issued forecasts for no more than three months in advance, and then only to describe the chances that a given area would be warmer, colder, wetter or drier than normal.
The meteorologists believe they now have the tools to make useful forecasts of this kind many more months ahead, at least under some conditions and in some seasons.


Exxon Corp.(XON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In a French Cave, Wildlife Scenes From a Long-Gone World
Stone Age murals discovered last month in southern France come in red hematite, ochre yellow and hues of charcoal, and specialists believe they were made some 20,000 years ago.
French explorers found the 300-odd paintings and engravings beautifully preserved in the darkness of a great underground limestone cavern.
The team of two men and one woman were probing a gorge not far from the Ardeche River near the town of Vallon-Pont-d'Arc when they spotted their first clue: a draft coming through the stones.
After clearing a narrow passage, the team dropped down 30 feet and landed on the floor of a great chamber.
Here they saw the first red markings on the walls.


Sex and the Fruit Fly: Price of Promiscuity Is Premature Death
WHETHER in the towering tragedies of Sophocles or the basement pulp of Hollywood, sex and death are intertwined: yin and yang, strophe and antistrophe, head and tail of the same mortal coin.
So it is in nature, where the urge to reproduce is fraught with risk, and the cost of raising young drains a parent of resources that might otherwise be devoted to keeping oneself alive just a little bit longer.
Scientists have now discovered yet another reason sex can kill, at least in the case of a favorite laboratory creature, the fruit fly.
They have determined that a compound in the male's semen is toxic to the female, and that over the long run (which, by fly standards, means a few weeks), the ingredient significantly shortens her life.
And the more partners a female fly consorts with, the sooner will her tiny wings and heart cease to beat.


USAir Transcript Shows Plunge Was a Complete Surprise
Whatever brought down USAir Flight 427 last September, pushing the Boeing 737 into a skid to the left, a roll and a 300-mile-an-hour corkscrew plunge to the ground, it was a complete surprise and mystery to the cockpit crew, it became clear today when the National Transportation Safety Board released a transcript of the cockpit voice recorder.
The transcript of the flight, which ended in a crash that killed all 132 people on board, runs from the mundane to screaming terror in the space of a few minutes.


McSween's Surgery
DON McSWEEN, an Anaheim Mighty Ducks defenseman who severed tendons in his left wrist during a game at Winnipeg last week, will have surgery this week to repair the injury, the team said yesterday.
McSween will miss the rest of the National Hockey League season, but he is expected to make a full recovery.
The wrist was cut by another player's skate. (AP)


Laser at South Pole to Track Ozone Depletion
A POWERFUL laser beam has begun to stab the sky above the South Pole, and scientists expect that it will illuminate many vital details about the depletion of the global ozone layer.
Working under uncomfortable and primitive conditions, a team of scientists from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign completed preparations this month for operating the beam during the Antarctic winter, when darkness will prevail 24 hours a day and temperatures will drop below minus 100 degrees Fahrenheit.


Electronics Giants Set To Show Video Format
Three big consumer electronics companies are expected to join the Toshiba Corporation and Time Warner Inc. on Tuesday in announcing a new technology that could become the dominant force in the next generation of home video.
The companies -- the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, the Pioneer Electronics Corporation and Thomson S.A. -- will help demonstrate the technology that has been developed by Toshiba in cooperation with Time Warner, which owns the Warner Brothers studio.


Thiokol Corp.(TKC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ARCO (ARC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nijinsky's Notebooks Are Published, Unexpurgated
On Jan. 19, 1919, just hours before he danced in public for the last time, Vaslav Nijinsky began scribbling furiously in a notebook.
Seven weeks later, Swiss doctors studied four notebooks full of his writings and promptly interned him in a sanitarium for the mentally ill.
Nijinsky was only 29 at the time, and while his fame as the greatest dancer of his time never faded, he lived the last 31 years of his life in seclusion and incoherence.
His notebooks contained his final words addressed to the world.
Until now, they have never been made public in a complete form.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Two industry shapers join forces in Fallon McElligott's expansion.
TWO advertising Wunderkinder of the 1980's who helped remake Madison Avenue will try again, this time together.
Under a letter of intent signed yesterday, Pat Fallon, chairman at Fallon McElligott, the iconoclastic agency with a reputation for clever campaigns for clients like Rolling Stone magazine and the Coca-Cola Company, will open its first office outside Minneapolis, its home since its founding in 1981.
The outpost, in New York, will be headed by Andy Berlin, 44, the brash strategist who rose to prominence at Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein in San Francisco.


Officer Shot Man in the Back, Medical Examiner Finds
A man who was killed by the police in Brooklyn on Sunday morning was shot in the back, not the chest as the Police Department originally reported, the Medical Examiner's office announced yesterday.
The victim, Anibal Carrasquillo, 21, was shot while being chased by two plainclothes officers from the 70th Precinct.
The police said the officers saw him peering into the windows of parked automobiles as if he were preparing to steal or vandalize them.
Department officials said that Mr.
Carrasquillo, who was unarmed, mimicked pointing a gun at the officers before they shot him in the chest behind a building at 950 Ocean Avenue in the Flatbush section shortly after midnight on Sunday.


Japan Leaders Criticized On Response to Quake
In a nation that was widely regarded as well prepared for earthquakes, something clearly went wrong last week in the city of Kobe.
And now, some people are saying the temblor also exposed what is wrong with the leadership of Japan.
Newspapers editorialists and other critics are complaining strongly about the response by the administration of Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama, who did not hear about the earthquake until he watched the morning news on television.


Scripps (E.W.) Co.(SSP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Israelis Mourn, But Rabin Says Talks Continue
One after another they were buried, an assembly line of misery and despair.
Death is no stranger here, but rarely does it come calling as ferociously as it did on Sunday when 19 Israelis were killed in a Palestinian suicide bombing, all but one of them soldiers barely old enough to vote.


Fighting Inflation Without Designated Paupers
To the Editor:
"Those Vital Paupers," Russell Baker's perceptive Jan. 17 column, displays the transparent vacuousness of the concept of the nonaccelerating inflation rate of unemployment, expressed by economists in the acronym Nairu.


I.B.M. Posts First Annual Profit Since 1990
The International Business Machines Corporation reported its first profitable year since 1990 yesterday, with fourth-quarter earnings more than tripling to a level well above Wall Street analysts' estimates.
But revenues from personal computers declined in the quarter, and that helped drive I.B.M.'s stock price down in heavy trading yesterday.


Glaxo Offers $14 Billion for Wellcome
Taking the steady consolidation of the health care industry to a new scale, Glaxo P.L.C. began an unsolicited $14 billion offer for Wellcome P.L.C. today, in a deal that would create the world's largest drug maker.
If completed, the deal between the two British companies would be the largest in a string of mergers and acquisitions among pharmaceutical companies, hospitals and other health care providers.
It would also rank among the two or three largest deals to date in any industry, behind the $30 billion merger of R. J. Reynolds and Nabisco completed in 1989 and neck-and-neck with the $14 billion combination of Time Inc. and Warner Communications in 1990.


Let's Move Past Stigma on Mental Illness; Arbitrary Standards
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal speaks about the anguish of people "because they do not know where their pain is coming from" (column, Jan. 17).
Neither do the high priests of the mental health movement know, but that does not stop them from drugging suffering civilians into submission.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies  Glaxo offered $14 billion for Wellcome.
A deal between the two British drug giants would be the largest in a series of mergers among pharmaceutical companies, hospitals and other health care providers.  [ Page D1. ]


Bergen Brunswig Corp.(BBC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Athlete Guilty of Felony Rejected by Seton Hall
Stressing the importance of preserving its integrity and delivering what it believes is the proper signal to women, Seton Hall University announced yesterday that it had rejected the admissions application of a high school basketball player it recruited because he has pleaded guilty to the felony charge of first-degree sexual abuse.
Richard Parker, a senior guard at Manhattan Center High School, was informed of the decision yesterday.
Parker had signed a letter of intent with Seton Hall last November, but his already controversial status grew more tenuous after he pleaded guilty in Manhattan Supreme Court on Jan. 13.
Yesterday, Parker quit his high school team, citing the heightened media attention surrounding his plea.


Japan Market Still Nervous Over Quake
The Tokyo stock market tried to recover today from a severe selloff brought on by last week's earthquake, as investors continued to fear that the disaster in Kobe would damage Japan's economy and businesses.
On Monday, Japanese stocks suffered their worst one-day loss in nearly three and a half years.
The decline in Tokyo pulled down other stock markets throughout Asia, especially in Hong Kong, as concern mounted that Japanese investors would pull their money out of these other markets to help pay for rebuilding at home.


An Ancient City Hopes to Reassure Tourists That It Is Safe to Visit
As if she did not face enough challenges becoming a geisha, what with endless training in the arts of teasing her hair and clients, Keiko Takada now must deal with an unexpected crisis that is affecting her job security.
The earthquake that devastated the city of Kobe, 40 miles to the southwest, did not at first do much damage in the ancient Japanese capital of Kyoto.
But since then the economic aftershocks have been rattling Kyoto without interruption, cutting sharply into tourism and myriad related businesses.


Is It a New Holocaust? Is It Paranoia? Is It Funny?
About halfway through the first act of Bruce Jay Friedman's newest fever dream of a comedy, "Have You Spoken to Any Jews Lately?" a man in the audience explodes more or less metaphorically, speaking words supplied by the playwright.
"This is a cheap commercialization of this century's most barbarous act," the man shouts to the actors.
"Have you no shame?"
Not really.


Unlikely Pair Confront A City's Budget Woes
As political partners eager to untangle the financial mess of the nation's capital, they could not be an odder couple.
With liberal spending and hiring practices during his previous terms as Mayor of Washington, Marion S. Barry Jr. had a hand in creating the city's $500 million deficit.
Representative Thomas M. Davis 3d, a Republican from Northern Virginia and head of the subcommittee that oversees city affairs, is part of the new Congressional majority eager to slash social spending and skeptical of Mr.
Barry's leadership.


The Rock of Rome; John Paul Seems Intent on Ending Any Notion of a Papacy in Decline
When people look back on the many trips of Pope John Paul II they may discern among them some defining moments: his 1979 appearance in Cracow that threw down the gauntlet against Communism in his native Poland, or his 1993 visit to Denver that conjured a vision of spirituality among the young people of America.
But his just-completed 63d trip, a 20,800-mile journey through Asia and the Pacific, may well be viewed as a turning point of a more personal kind -- an attempt by the 74-year-old Pope to shuck off the imagery of a papacy in decline and to project the idea that neither his health nor his age will deter him from injecting his moral vision into the world's business.


Treasuries Off in Price For 3d Day
Treasury prices fell yesterday for the third consecutive trading session and longer maturities once again took the brunt of investor uncertainty over the Mexican aid package, a weak dollar and coming sales of new Treasury securities.
Shorter maturities received some support from market investors who are moving to "safer" investments in reaction to downturns in overseas stock markets.


Observer; Is That Charles With a 'C'?
Reading too much Dickens lately.
Which reminds me of a Greenwich Village bookshop clerk.
A young man.
College age.
I asked for a copy of "David Copperfield."
"Who's the author?" he asked.
"Dickens," I said.
"What's his first name?" he asked.
Recalling that exchange, I'll start over:


Devils Break the Ice With Tie
Coach Jacques Lemaire breathed a sigh of relief moments after the opening game of the season for the Devils on Sunday night at Hartford.
"I'm glad it's over," Lemaire said after the 2-2 deadlock with the Whalers.
"At least now we'll have something to work on."


Israeli Premier Sees 'No Alternative'
Against a chorus of demands that he halt peace talks with the Palestinians, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said tonight that he would not let negotiations be disrupted by a wave of Islamic suicide bombings, including the one on Sunday that killed 18 Israeli soldiers and a civilian.
"We shall continue on the path of peace -- there is no alternative," Mr.
Rabin said in an unusual televised speech to a nation still reeling from one of the deadliest episodes in its history.
"We will achieve peace because that is the solution in the long run to the terrorist attacks."


Executive Changes
ANALOGIC CORP., Peabody, Mass., appointed Bruce R. Rusch president and chief operating officer.
CISCO SYSTEMS INC., San Jose, Calif., named Larry Carter vice president for finance and administration and chief financial officer.


Coach Simms? It Could Be
Phil Simms a National Football League head coach?
Not impossible.
And it is something the former Giants quarterback is seriously contemplating.
"I have thought hard about it, but I really like what I'm doing now," said Simms, an ESPN football analyst.
"This job is so much fun it would be hard for me to leave. But coaching is something I have definitely thought about."


Cardinal Health Inc.(CAH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Smiling Face Rankles From Above the Treetops
EVERY day, Bernie's big face smiles at thousands of people who want to punch it right out.
Commuters on Route 84 West, shoppers at the Buckland Hills Mall and motorists on busy Hale Road all complain that Bernie's face is defacing the landscape.
"Ugh," said Carla McDonough, glancing at the face with a shudder as she walked through the mall parking lot.
"Who would want that big giant face staring at them?"


Defector Says Bomb That Killed Underboss Was Meant for Gotti
It had all the trademarks of a brutal Mafia hit.
Frank DeCicco, then the second in command of the Gambino crime family, had just left a mob meeting in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, on a Sunday afternoon in 1986 and was opening his car door when a thunderous explosion killed him and injured another suspected mobster.


Account
*
Mercedes-Benz New England Independent Dealer Group to LCF&amp; L, New York, to handle its account, previously unassigned.
Billings were estimated at $1 million to $1.5 million.
LCF&amp; L also handles six other regional Mercedes-Benz dealer association accounts.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL REPORT
Monmouth
The Hawks (8-7) took the rematch of last year's Northeast Conference championship game with a 60-55 victory over Rider last Saturday night.
Monmouth, which is now 6-1 and in first place in its league, has gone 8-2 since getting the junior swingman Jack Gordon back from ligament damage in his left thumb.


Mitchell Kietzman, A Psychologist, 65
Dr.
Mitchell Kietzman, a retired psychology professor at Queens College, died on Jan. 9 at the Parkmont Rehabilitation and Nursing Center in Fremont, Calif.
He was 65 and had been a resident of Staten Island for 27 years until moving to Huntington, Calif., in 1989.
The cause was Lewy body disease, a neurological disorder, said Dr.
Karen Kietzman, his daughter.


The Pentagon's Trap Doors
As they start pruning the budget, Republicans in Congress ought to be straight with the American people about defense spending they have so blithely placed off limits from cuts.
It is not just that the defense budget is inflated far beyond the country's security needs, or that making it untouchable will inflict a disproportionate burden on domestic programs.
Less obvious is that the defense budget is full of trap doors set to spring open in the future with unpleasantly expensive consequences.
One of those trap doors is the deferral of major weapons purchases until 1998, which is designed to make current and near-term spending levels seem more reasonable and to hide the ultimate costs of new weapons already under development or soon to start.
Another is underestimating the cost of operating and maintaining those weapons.
The result is like projecting car expenses for a family budget over a period of years without listing the full cost of financing, insurance and repairs.


CHRONICLE
EVANGELINE BRUCE is a name revered in diplomatic circles and in the highest echelons of Washington society.
Now it is about to be emblazoned on dust jackets, when her book, "Napoleon and Josephine: An Improbable Marriage," is published, in March, by Lisa Drew/Scribner.
The work, long in progress, did not originate as a double biography or as the chronicle of a romance.


The State of the President
A State of the Union address is normally about policies and promises.
But at the center of President Clinton's speech last night lay a political question: Can this President, after a decent first year and a disastrous second, regain his standing with the American people and his own party?
What lent drama to this speech was not what it said about the future of America but what it would show about the future of one man.
Bill Clinton is plainly aware how hard it is going to be to regain his footing.
He cannot simply offer himself as a watered-down Newt Gingrich.
But as he acknowledged in his first sentences, he cannot ignore the forces, including dissatisfaction with government in general and with his vacillating leadership in particular, that swept the Republicans to power.


Focusing on History Through Interviews
As a journalist turned movie director, Claude Lanzmann writes with a camera.
In "Shoah" (1985), a nine-and-one-half-hour oral history of the Holocaust, and in "Tsahal," his new five-hour film about the Israeli army, he approaches a timely issue with a kind of subjective selectivity.
From the director's point of view, these films are not really documentaries; they are more dramatized reflections than factual reports, original films using no archival scenes.
A conversational collage is created almost entirely through Mr.
Lanzmann's probing interviews.
Without off-camera commentary, he encourages participants in significant events to reveal themselves and act as witnesses.
"These are real people," he says, "but they have to play themselves."


Moves Under Way in California to Overturn Higher Education's Affirmative Action Policy
At a meeting of the University of California Board of Regents here this week, Ward Connerly, a businessman from Sacramento, made a plea to his 18 co-Regents to consider the possibility that the affirmative action policies pursued in California over the last quarter century might be "unfair" and "inequitable."
"What we are doing is inequitable to certain people, and I want us as a university to begin thinking about what we are doing and to begin to change," Mr.
Connerly, who is black, told the board that governs the vast California university system, with its nine campuses, its 162,000 students and $10 billion annual budget.


Top Fidelity Executive Quits Fixed-Income Unit
Thomas J. Steffanci, who joined Fidelity Investments four years ago to head its fixed-income division, has resigned, Fidelity said yesterday.
Mr.
Steffanci, who is 50, is leaving Fidelity, the giant mutual fund company based in Boston, to become a principal at Alpha Select Investments Inc., a small broker-dealer in Portsmouth, N.H., that specializes in developing analytical tools for portfolio management.
His resignation is effective Feb. 28.


'Theme Park' Atmosphere Is Part of Proposal for Yankee Stadium
New York City, in its latest proposal to the Yankees, has offered to create what one official called a "theme park" atmosphere at Yankee Stadium with stores and restaurants around the complex and with new roads leading to new parking garages at the ball park, officials familiar with the plan said yesterday.
The proposal was presented on Monday by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to George M. Steinbrenner 3d, the team's principal owner, who had objected to an earlier plan because he said it failed to address traffic and parking problems that burden the stadium.


Ex-St. John's Player Accused of Assault
The former St.
John's University basketball player Lamont Middleton was charged with assault and resisting arrest yesterday when he hit a police officer after the car he was in was stopped for a traffic violation in the Bronx, the police said.
Middleton, 25, who played for St.
John's in the 1991-92 and 1992-93 seasons, was a passenger in a car driven by Marque Edwards, 24, of Green Pond, S.C.
Two plainclothes officers stopped the car for a traffic violation at 1:30 P.M. on the Edward L. Grant Highway in the Morris Heights section, said Detective Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


We Owe Veterans Their Good Medical Care; Widely Endorsed Care
To the Editor:
William Safire, in his zeal to attack veterans, distorts the facts about the veterans health care delivery system ("Sacred Cow, II," Jan. 19).
We do not spend $37 billion on care; the annual budget is $16.5 billion, which helps provide some 25 million annual episodes of care.


Recircling The Globe
On land!
On sea!
In the air!
Also in the sands, the jungles, the deeps and wherever else animals or humans can be photographed, you'll find a National Geographic camera team.
If you doubt it, have a look at "30 Years of National Geographic Specials," the brisk two-hour retrospective on NBC tonight.
This generous, thematically organized scrapbook begins with predators and prey: a young elephant versus young lions; lions versus hyenas, in merciless battle; a wasp versus a spider that turns itself into a wheel; a woodpecker versus a snake versus an alligator; a crocodile and a tiger, competing for a deer.
See a lizard walk on water!


Focus Festival Celebrates Webern and His Disciples
There is a horribly ugly word in German that captures the beauty inherent in the music of Anton Webern.
"Klangfarbenmelodie," a term coined by Schoenberg in 1911, describes a musical line in which isolated tone colors take the place of coherent melody.
Webern, far more than Schoenberg or even Berg, was the master colorist of the Second Viennese School.
A few string pizzicatos, low sustained tones on the woodwind, high muted cries from the brass, scattered notes on the harp or mandolin: these accumulate into a pointillistic picture of pure, shimmering sound.
Webern died 50 years ago, killed accidentally outside his Austrian home by an American soldier.
This year's Focus Festival at Juilliard celebrates both the composer and his musical legacy; the weeklong series began on Friday with a concert by the Juilliard Orchestra at Alice Tully Hall.
Thanks to Webern's famous concision, the festival will include nearly all of his works, excepting only a few early songs and brief unpublished orchestral pieces.
There is plenty of room left over for composers who felt his powerful influence.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A tobacco company identifies Texas firefighters as a cause.
THE United States Tobacco Company, under fire from anti-tobacco activists for what they fault as marketing misdeeds, is fighting fire with fire.
To be precise, with firefighters.
U.
S.
Tobacco, in a highly unusual step for a tobacco company, is joining a lengthy list of advertisers that have embraced a promotional strategy known as cause-related marketing.
In advertising by Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore that begins appearing today across Texas, and which will be supplemented by direct mail and public relations campaigns, the company will disclose details of a promotion to help raise money for a new Texas Firefighter's Emergency Relief Fund.


For Jobless Democrats, Tough Year, Good Chip
Will Mario M. Cuomo, munching on a handful of Doritos, turn to Ann Richards and say: "Mmmm. These are so good, I think I'll eat them liberally"?
The script remains a secret, but politicians and advertising executives said today that the former Governors of New York and Texas, both losers in their bids for re-election last year, will appear together in a commercial for Frito-Lay's Doritos that will be broadcast during the Super Bowl on Sunday.


Life Term For Soldier Stirs Britain
A British paratrooper serving a life sentence for killing a teen-ager at a Belfast roadblock in 1990 has become the focus of a nationwide amnesty campaign here, led by a powerful coalition of politicians, newspaper editors and some of Britain's most senior retired military officers.
Arguing that the paratrooper, Pvt.
Lee Clegg, 26, was a victim of misguided justice when he was convicted of murder while on duty with an army patrol in Northern Ireland, more than 70 members of Parliament today signed a petition urging the Government to bring about his "speedy release."


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
City Opera Hits the Road With 'Barber of Seville'  New York City Opera  National Company State Theater, New Brunswick, N.J.
Joseph Colaneri, the chorus master of the New York City Opera, is also the music director of the New York City Opera National Company, and it comes as no surprise that his performances are strong on ensemble work.
His production for the company's national tour this winter is "The Barber of Seville," seen for the first time on Thursday night at the State Theater here.


Merck &amp; Co. (MRK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clinton Orders Assets of Suspected Terrorist Groups Frozen
Seeking to underscore an American commitment to the fight against terrorism, President Clinton today issued an executive order intended to cut off the flow of funds from United States citizens to organizations suspected of terrorist activities in Israel and other countries.
Mr.
Clinton's directive orders American financial institutions to search for and immediately freeze any accounts held in the names of Hamas, Islamic Holy War and 10 other organizations, and 18 of their top leaders.


Iverson, On One Ankle, Brings St. John's to Heel
Things are going so badly for St.
John's these days that Georgetown point guard Allen Iverson needed only one good ankle tonight to show the Red Storm why he, and not Felipe Lopez, is the best freshman in the Big East.
Despite playing with a noticeable limp that kept getting worse as the game progressed, Iverson was more than the Red Storm could handle as he led the 14th-ranked Hoyas to an 88-71 victory before 12,081 at USAir Arena, giving St.
John's its sixth straight defeat.


Personal Health; Interstitial cystitis: help for a puzzling illness.
WHEN a disease has no known cause, no clear-cut diagnostic test and no cure, it is often hard to convince physicians that it is a real, organic disorder and not the invention of an emotionally disturbed mind.
So it has been for most of this century with interstitial cystitis, an extraordinarily painful and often life-disrupting disease of the bladder that primarily affects women.
With some medical texts until very recently calling the condition a rare disorder of hysterical postmenopausal women, with 90 percent of its victims being women and 99 percent of urologists being men, one of the most common recommendations from frustrated physicians to their desperate patients was, for a long time, to "see a psychiatrist."


The Public Must Demand Gas Pipeline Safety
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 19 news article on the National Transportation Safety Board's report on the Edison, N.J., natural gas pipeline blast last March tells only part of the story about sloppy and dangerous regulation of 1.7 million miles of natural gas and oil pipelines.
The public should feel no confidence that the recommended measures will be adopted or their safety will be protected.
Consider:


Rich Sauce Without The Cream
THIS creamy fettuccine was inspired by a high-fat version that called for cream.
A slice of crusty country bread completes the meal.
Creamy Fettuccine
16 ounces whole broccoli or 8 ounces ready-cut broccoli florettes (3 1/2 to 4 cups)  Pan spray  2 cloves garlic  2 cups canned crushed no-salt-added tomatoes  About 1/2 of a 4-ounce jar of roasted peppers, to yield 1/2-cup chopped  1 generous teaspoon anchovy paste  1/2 cup nonfat yogurt  2 teaspoons cornstarch  1/2 cup light ricotta  8 ounces fresh eggless fettuccine  1 1/2 ounces Parmigiano Reggiano, to yield about 7 tablespoons coarsely grated  Freshly ground black pepper to taste.
1.
Trim broccoli and cut florettes into bite-size pieces.
Steam for about 5 minutes, until almost tender.
2. Boil water for pasta in covered pot. Heat large nonstick pan, and spray.
3.
Mince garlic.
Add to pan and saute for 30 seconds.
Add the tomatoes; reduce heat and simmer.
4.
Rinse roasted pepper and chop fine; add to tomatoes, then add anchovy paste and broccoli.
5.
Stir a little yogurt into the cornstarch to make a paste; stir into remaining yogurt.
Blend yogurt and ricotta in food processor.
6. Cook fettuccine.
7. Grate Parmigiano Reggiano.
8.
Add yogurt mixture to pan with drained fettuccine.
Season with pepper; top with cheese.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving (with bread): 785 calories, 15 grams fat, 125 milligrams cholesterol, 865 milligrams sodium, 45 gram protein, 125 grams carbohydrate.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Young Men's Music In Persian Classical Tradition  Soheil Zolfonoun, setarist Washington Square Church
The setar is a modest-looking instrument with a long, skinny fretted neck attached to a body the size of a cantaloupe.
Its three strings, picked with the fingernails, produce a bright resonance akin to a banjo or a Japanese shamisen.
When played on Friday night by Soheil Zolfonoun, a virtuoso in the Persian classical tradition, the setar took on a multitude of voices, from thoughtful soliloquies to triumphal flourishes.
He was accompanied by Ehsan Hakim on the def, a circular hand drum.


Dow Falls 4.71 Points As Stocks Finish Mixed
The stock market closed mixed yesterday, the third session where the leading indexes have been virtually stagnant.
The lackluster day was perhaps a harbinger of the next five sessions leading to a Federal Reserve policy meeting that begins on Tuesday.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 4.71 points, to 3,862.70, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index rose 0.04 point, to 465.86.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index rose 3.69 points, to 763.20.


INSIDE
Republicans Lose Out
Defying the odds, Willie Brown carried out a bold strategy and was re-elected Assembly Speaker in a coup for California Democrats.
Page A10.
How About 'Yankeeland'?
In its latest proposal, New York City has offered to create what one official called a "theme park" atmosphere at Yankee Stadium.
Page B1.
Affirmative Action Debate
From universities and medical schools to high schools, affirmative action policies are under increasing attack in California.
Page B7.


3 Health Care Companies Report Big Profit Advances
Three big health care companies yesterday reported double-digit profit increases for the fourth quarter of 1994, helped by higher unit sales and a weaker dollar overseas.
Net income in the quarter increased by 14.7 percent at Merck &amp; Company and 12.8 percent at Johnson &amp; Johnson.
The Warner-Lambert Company said its net would have increased 16 percent, not counting a charge against 1993 earnings.


'Gone With the Wind' To Have Second Sequel
First there was "Gone With the Wind." Then Scarlett O'Hara returned in "Scarlett." Now a second sequel to Margaret Mitchell's 1936 classic is in the works, the rights to which were acquired yesterday by St.
Martin's Press for $4.5 million.
Not much is known about the novel, which is still untitled and scheduled for release in 1997, except that it promises to bring Scarlett and Rhett Butler back to the South from Ireland, where they ended up in "Scarlett." That book was written by Alexandra Ripley in 1991 and has sold 2.5 million hard-cover copies for its publisher, Warner Books.


Phelps Dodge (PD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


AT WORK WITH: Scott Adams; Yes, Dilbert's Dad Has a Cubicle of His Own
REGULAR readers of comics pages recently witnessed the retirement of Gary Larson's "The Far Side" and may now be braced for the departure of Berke Breathed's "Outland." But they may also have noted the presence of a relative newcomer named "Dilbert," about a mouthless and hapless techno-nerd shaped vaguely like a shaving brush who performs an unspecified task at an unnamed company.
"Dilbert," which first appeared in 1989, now runs in nearly 400 newspapers -- an amazing achievement for a medium in which breakthroughs are rare.
Recent additions to its lineup of papers include The Washington Post, The Boston Globe, The Los Angeles Times and The Daily News in New York.
There are now "Dilbert" books, T-shirts, coffee mugs and screen savers for sale.


Chrysler In Warning On Rates
Growth in new-car sales could slow this year and show little gain in 1996 if the Federal Reserve raises interest rates another half a percentage point, the Chrysler Corporation's chief economist said today.
"The Fed has already engineered a soft landing," said the economist, W. Van Bussmann.
"Now, a little bit can throw you."


Dresden Journal; Firestorm of '45: Combing the Ashes for Meaning
In the half-century since one of history's most devastating firebombing raids reduced Dresden to rubble, the city has been largely rebuilt.
Some of its most magnificent edifices, including the Baroque 18th-century Zwinger Palace and the stately Semper Opera, have been painstakingly restored and now look much as they appear in prewar photos.
Nine hotels are expected to open this year to accommodate the steadily increasing stream of tourists who come here to see the city and the treasures in its museums.


Union Official Ousted Over Funds
A key executive of the National Football League Players Association was dismissed this week for gross misuse of funds totaling between $80,000 and $100,000, according to several people with knowledge of union business.
And the official has not been heard from for more than two weeks.
The association would only say that the executive, John Walker, was dismissed.
The union's assistant executive director, Doug Allen, said, "It is an accurate statement that he has been terminated, but otherwise I have no comment." Allen later contended that Walker was not a key member of the players association.


Indians Issue Threats Over New Casinos
Representatives of an Indian-operated casino in eastern Connecticut told legislators today that the state would cease to receive annual payments of as much as $200 million the moment legislation is passed authorizing additional casinos.
At a hearing G. Michael Brown, the president of the Foxwoods Resort Casino in Ledyard, said, "No casino in the United States paid more to the state in which it is located than the Mashantucket Pequots tribe paid to the State of Connecticut." Citing a compact the tribe signed with Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., Mr.
Brown added that as soon as the "ink is dry" on legislation allowing another casino, "the payment of $10 million a month will stop."


N.B.A. Is Upheld On Salary Cap
National Basketball Association owners won another labor round in court yesterday when a three-judge Federal appeals panel in Manhattan upheld a lower court ruling that the league's salary cap, draft and right of first refusal were not violations of the antitrust laws, even though the collective bargaining agreement that spawned them had expired.


Combatting Pataki, Democrats Offer Own Tax Cuts in a Bid for Middle-Class Support
Seeking to recapture suburban and upstate voters for the Democratic Party, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver has proposed reducing state income, sales and property taxes by $2.3 billion a year by 1997.
The proposal today represents the Democratic alternative to Gov.
George E. Pataki's four-year plan to reduce state income taxes by $5.6 billion a year.
Mr.
Pataki, a Republican, has said his plan would offer the greatest benefits to middle- and working-class people.


Wherever The Ball Is, Watch Out For Seau
With controlled havoc, Junior Seau makes almost 20 percent of the Chargers' tackles.
All by himself.
"Textbook-wise, if you were reading about what I do, you'd have to question it," he said today.
"But if there's a football on the field, I have to be around it."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about criticism of the Japanese Government's response to the recent earthquake misstated Monday's reaction in the Tokyo stock market in some editions.
The Nikkei index fell 5.6 percent, not "nearly 1 percent."


No Headline
"I have learned again the importance of humility in all human endeavor. But I am also proud to say tonight that our country is stronger than it was two years ago." PRESIDENT CLINTON,  [ A1:6 ]


U.S. Companies Evaluate Outlook in Kobe Quake Area
Thirty seconds after his alarm went off at 5:45 A.M. last Tuesday, Glenn Spargo, general manager of Sea-Land Service, had the jolt of his life.
The earthquake that struck Kobe, where Mr.
Spargo was living with his family, knocked out the electricity and made it impossible to conduct normal business.
But Mr.
Spargo convinced a friend to lend him a tugboat and he went to inspect the pier.
There he got some bad news: His four cranes were damaged and the asphalt by the berths had sunk four to five feet.


Corrections
The Advertising column on the Media Business page yesterday, about the Fallon McElligott ad agency's new office in New York, included scrambled passages in some copies.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


Islanders Manage to Outlast Hextall
The game had been billed as a matchup between the brothers Lindros.
And Philadelphia's Eric did score twice, while his younger brother Brett, the Islanders' rookie right wing, made a number of nice hits.
But the real story turned out to be the homecoming, of sorts, of the former Islander goaltender Ron Hextall -- the man who was run out of town because of the Rangers' playoff sweep of the Islanders last spring.


A Wall Around Israel?
After the devastating suicide bombing that killed 19 Israelis on Sunday, an old word has re-emerged with new force in Israel's political vocabulary: separation.
It means that Israelis and Palestinians should go their different ways, and its leading exponent is Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
Since the latest deaths, mostly of young soldiers, he has made "separation" a clarion call and says his Government will start as early as next week to figure out how to do it.
He is determined, he says, that people living in Israel proper, his main concern, will no longer be "vulnerable to terror" from the Gaza Strip and West Bank.


Capstead Mortgage
Shares of the Capstead Mortgage Corporation, a real estate investment trust based in Dallas, dropped sharply after the company reported a 30 percent decline in fourth-quarter profit and a dividend cut.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the quarterly earnings of five oil companies referred incorrectly to the Exxon Corporation's profits from chemical operations.
Exxon earned $181 million in the fourth quarter, compared with $84 million a year earlier, from operations in the United States, not worldwide.
It earned a total of $414 million from chemicals in the quarter, compared with $134 million a year earlier.


Evert: Game, Set, Match, Hall
Five years after she finished her Hall of Fame tennis career, Chris Evert has been named to the International Tennis Hall of Fame.
In an election that had all the suspense of one of her patented two-handed backhands, Evert, who won 157 singles titles in 18 years, including 18 Grand Slam championships, was named on every one of the 100 or so ballots cast by a panel of 185 international tennis writers and broadcasters, making her only the fourth player to be selected unanimously in the hall's 40-year history.


Funds for Arts Under Attack In the House
Conservative critics of the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities found a receptive audience in Congress today when they attacked the two Federal agencies as intellectually corrupt and biased against what one called "mainstream American values."
But the actor Charlton Heston, who has supported many conservative causes and candidates, pleaded with Congress to spare the agencies.
"Art is the bread of the soul," he said, and he went on to quote Prospero's final lines in Shakespeare's "Tempest": "As you from crimes would pardon'd be, let your indulgence set me free."


WNET Braces For Cuts Or Worse
For WNET, the public television station serving New York, the debate in Congress over continued Federal spending for public broadcasting is "a matter of life and death, at least in terms of the institution as we know it," says William F. Baker, the president of the station.
Mr.
Baker must contemplate a future in which WNET (Channel 13) will lose the millions of dollars it receives each year from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.
Many influential Republicans in Congress, including the Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich, and Senator Larry Pressler of South Dakota, the chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee, have been pursuing a plan to "zero out" the corporation.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
A Crooner's Old Lines Spruced Up With New Jack  Tom Jones, vocalist Irving Plaza
Some musicians constantly strive to break new ground, others make a living with reprises of their old hits, but entertainers entertain: any way they know how.
When Tom Jones performed with a 10-member band on Friday night, he moved from past hits like "What's New Pussycat?" to new-wave cover songs like Yaz's "Situation," from soul nuggets to new-jack swing anthems.
Like a pickup artist, he knows his past hits are effective, so he uses them without shame.
But he also likes to add a few new tricks to his repertory to keep from seeming stale.


Accidents Of Fate And Faith
August Wilson's on a roll.
That was made boisterously clear on Monday night at the opening of his big, fine, tragicomic new melodrama, "Seven Guitars," at the Goodman Theater here.
From its mysterious and funny opening scene, which is actually a prologue, until its haunted conclusion, the play runs approximately three hours.
Yet "Seven Guitars" seldom loses momentum.
It displays a narrative sweep and an almost biblical richness of language and character that distinguish Mr.
Wilson from virtually all other contemporary American playwrights.
His most singular gift: the ability to astonish his audiences and to find laughter in tales that, you know from the start, are not funny at all, at least in terms of conventional theater.
In the past, this Pulitzer Prize-winning dramatist ("Fences," "The Piano Lesson") has been compared to Eugene O'Neill and Arthur Miller.
Now "Seven Guitars" suggests something of Elmer Rice's "Street Scene" and Sidney Kingsley's "Dead End."


Film Doesn't Deserve Obscenity Prosecution
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 18 review of Pier Paolo Pasolini's "Mama Roma" mentions the director's last film, "Salo," as well as the Cincinnati obscenity prosecution of a bookstore and its employees for renting a videotape of "Salo." You permit the implication that the prosecution of "Salo" is understandable, given the film's "excesses."


Fault Lines and Class Lines in Japan
To prowl the wealthy neighborhoods here in the Beverly Hills of Japan, where $5 million ranch-style homes peek from behind stone walls, is to see that it was not just luck that determined who lived and who died in the devastating earthquake last week.
Money also played a role.
While nature was democratic, in that the tremblor rattled rich neighborhoods as well as poor ones, its consequences were not.
Frequently, it was the poorer people's homes that collapsed and buried them in rubble.


Sanchez Vicario Advances to Semifinals
Scant hours after an exhausted Pete Sampras walked off the Flinders Park court, two far less hotly contested matches produced the final two semifinalists for the women's field.
Top-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario remained on target for this title, and the top ranking, by outhustling Japan's Naoko Sawamatsu, 6-1, 6-3.
And an unseeded Californian, Marianne Werdel Whitmeyer, the baseball wife who six years ago thought about giving up this sport and heading back to Stanford, found herself in the semifinals after a 6-1, 6-2 demolition of 96th-ranked Angelica Gavaldon.


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ
A Guitarist Collects His Thoughts to Improvise  Pat Martino Bottom Line
About halfway through his first set on Friday night, the guitarist Pat Martino collected his thoughts and started constructing logical solos.
His playing, always linear, flattened out as if the punctuation had been taken out of it, and the flow itself became almost hypnotic.


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI RESTRICTS PRISONER WORK RELEASE
Gov.
George E. Pataki signed an executive order that would prohibit violent felons from participating in prison work-release programs, forcing an estimated 1,300 inmates to sleep in double bunks in already crowded prisons.
A1. 15-YEAR-OLD IS YOUNGEST SCIENCE WINNER
When Aleksandr Khazanov, 15, submitted a paper to the Westinghouse Science Talent Search, the Stuyvesant High School coordinator for contest entries, Stan Teitel, called Westinghouse officials to ask whether they had someone advanced enough to understand his paper.
"I'm telling you, this kid is way above the rest of us," Mr.
Teitel said.
Westinghouse apparently agreed.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  JUDGES UPSET OVER CHOICE OF SUPERVISOR
A group of judges in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn are so upset with the way their new supervisor was selected that they plan to complain to the state's Chief Judge, judges in the courthouse say.
B3.
In exchange for a pledge to keep more than 4,000 jobs in New York City for at least 20 years, the CS First Boston Corporation, a major financial company, will receive breaks on city taxes worth more than $50 million.
B3.
CORRUPTION INVESTIGATOR FACES CHARGE
A police sergeant who supervised internal investigations into corruption was arrested and charged with perjury for falsely testifying that he had been the victim of a carjacking.
B3.
The city's continuing fiscal problems forced it to pay higher interest rates on its sale of $658 million in debt.
Business Day, D1.
REGION  INDIANS ISSUE CASINO THREATS
Representatives of an Indian-operated casino in eastern Connecticut told legislators that the state would cease to receive annual payments of as much as $200 million the moment legislation is passed authorizing additional casinos.
B4.
INQUIRY PLANNED IN AIRPORT BLACKOUT
The New Jersey State Board of Public Utilities voted to hold hearings into the construction accident that closed Newark International Airport and stranded thousands of passengers.
B4.
DEMOCRATS OFFER THEIR OWN TAX CUTS
New York State Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver proposed reducing state income, sales and property taxes by $2.3 billion a year by 1997.
B5.
U.S.
STEPS UP BOND INVESTIGATIONS
The Securities and Exchange Commission and the United States Attorney's office in Manhattan are investigating ties between Joseph Salema, once a senior aide to Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey, and Robert Jablonski, the former chairman and a current member of the New Jersey Highway Authority.
Business Day, D1.
Will Mario M. Cuomo, munching on a handful of Doritos, turn to Ann Richards and say: "Mmmm. These are so good, I think I'll eat them liberally"?
B5.
Christine Todd Whitman, Governor of New Jersey, was the woman of the moment in the state and in the hearts of the Republican Party.
A16.
Neediest Cases B2  Chronicle B2  About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3


Testimony on USAir Crash Centers on Movement of Rudder
The rolling dive of USAir Flight 427, which crashed near here on Sept. 8, can be explained by a full swing of the rudder to the left, and not by anything else that inspectors have come up with so far, a Federal Aviation Administration test pilot told the National Transportation Safety Board today.
But there is still no direct evidence that the rudder moved before the crash of the plane, a Boeing 737 en route from Chicago.
All 132 people on board were killed.
In the wreckage, the rudder was found in a nearly straight position.


In Bold Move, Willie Brown Wins Again
Defying all political odds and outmaneuvering the Assembly's new Republican plurality, Willie L. Brown Jr. executed the boldest move of his long career in Democratic politics late Monday night to claim the post of Speaker for a record eighth two-year term.
After seven weeks of deadlock in which the Assembly's 40 Republicans, 39 Democrats and one independent wrestled over who would be the Speaker for the term that began in December, Mr.
Brown engineered the expulsion of a Republican, Richard Mountjoy, on the ground that Mr.
Mountjoy was elected to both the Senate and the Assembly in November and could not legally serve in both.


We Owe Veterans Their Good Medical Care
To the Editor:
William Safire calls health care programs for veterans "the most wasteful special interest spending in Washington" (columns, Jan. 12, 19).
We disagree.
These programs fulfill a contract and an obligation to those who served our country.
We support quality care for veterans, while recognizing that it must be cost effective as well as "health effective."


Can You Read This?
THESE days, the handwriting on the wall can't be read.
People are writing less and less, and legible handwriting is becoming as rare as the quill pen.
Grown men and women are resorting to printing in order to make themselves understood.


Judges Are Said to Be Upset Over Choice of Supervisor
A group of judges in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn are so upset with the way their new supervisor was selected that they plan to complain to the state's Chief Judge, judges in the courthouse say.
A delegation of judges from the court is scheduled to meet tomorrow with Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye to voice their grievances, which stem from a selection process that some discontented judges have termed a charade.


American Home Plans To Cut 4,000 More Jobs
The American Home Products Corporation said yesterday that it would eliminate 4,000 more jobs this year, including 550 across New Jersey, as it absorbs American Cyanamid and continues cost-cutting in every division.
Since January 1994, American Home Products has announced plans to eliminate 8,600 jobs.
A company spokesman said the latest reductions would be spread across all divisions and evenly divided between domestic and overseas operations.


Quake Recovery Doesn't Equal a Boon
To the Editor:
"Through Kobe's Rubble, an Economic Rainbow" (news article, Jan. 18) cites experts claiming that the earthquake in Japan could give a boost to an economy struggling to recover from a long recession.
The economist Henry Hazlitt has passed on, but I imagine that he would have said, There you go again using the "broken window fallacy."


Ulysses and Sirens Defined the Genre
SEDUCTION  A Book of Stories
Edited by Tony Peake
224 pages. Serpent's Tail. Paperback, $11.99.
The title has us: are we to be lured, enticed, persuaded against our judgment but not against our wishes, tricked, beguiled or consensually overpowered?


Head of the F.B.I. In New York Resigns
After a year as the head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's New York office, William A. Gavin said yesterday that he was leaving for an executive post with a medical-care company.
Mr.
Gavin, 53, said he would retire in March as a deputy assistant F.B.I. director to join U.S.
Healthcare, in Blue Bell, Pa., one of the country's largest health-maintenance organizations.
The F.B.I. has a mandatory retirement age of 57.


U.S. Steps Up Municipal Bond Investigations
The Securities and Exchange Commission and the Justice Department have begun to harvest the first fruits of their broad two-year campaign against possible political corruption and influence-peddling in the nation's municipal bond market.
On Monday, the S.E.C. and the United States Attorney's office in Pensacola, Fla., jointly accused a former utility authority official and an executive of Stephens Inc., a securities firm in Little Rock, Ark., of engaging in a scheme in which the official accepted bribes from the executive for steering bond business to Stephens.


Canada Ends Top Regiment After Charges
An elite Canadian paratroop regiment that shocked the nation with the disclosure of gruesome hazing rituals, racial incidents and the torture killing of a Somali teen-ager during a 1993 peacekeeping mission is being disbanded.
In announcing the unusual action, Defense Minister David Collenette said on Monday that the 600-man regiment, the Canadian Airborne, known by its maroon berets and once regarded as Canada's version of the Green Berets of the United States Army, had lost the confidence of Canadians.


At School, Black Pride In a Seafarer's Exploits
AT the heart of this tale of fate and redemption and the sea lies Hell Roaring Mike Healy, as true a hero as ever plied the icy waters of the Bering Strait, but then, too, there are the schoolchildren in South Ozone Park who, 90 years after the black seaman's death, are seeking to restore him to honor and to repair a reputation tarnished by rivals and teetotalers.
"Mike Healy was an absolute hero," said Chioma Uziogwe, one of the students at Junior High School 226 in Queens who have taken on his cause.
"He was the son of a slave, a great American, a great Afro-American, and when a Coast Guard admiral came to our school for a picnic, I told him the Government should name a vessel for him and I gave him a letter from all of us asking him to do that."


Executive Changes
REEBOK INTERNATIONAL LTD., Stoughton, Mass., appointed Roberto Muller chief marketing officer and co-president of the Reebok brand.
Mr.
Muller joins John Duerden, co-president and chief operations officer of the Reebok brand, in a two-member office of the president.


Corrections
A theater review yesterday about Bruce Jay Friedman's play "Have You Spoken to Any Jews Lately?" at the American Jewish Theater misidentified the actor who plays Danny.
As listed in the adjoining credits, he was Stephen Singer; Richard M. Davidson appears in several other roles.


Innocence Departs As Show Biz Finds Its Way to Sundance
"Exactly how I became so fond of film is quite mystique," said a letter from a young man attending this year's Sundance Film Festival.
The letter wound up in my mailbox, though it was computer-printed and addressed "Dear Sir." "I remember walking outside my house very early in the morning to ponder my thoughts when I was encompassed with a feeling so paramount that it left me stunned for several hours as I stood contemplating the thought it had bestowed upon me. It was a feeling of direction, a feeling which cast in me an awareness that, without a shadow of a doubt, film was my chosen destiny."
The writer, a college student looking for a summer job, happened to capture exactly what this festival used to stand for: extreme, aching earnestness and no great excess of sophistication or spark.
But if Sundance started out as the eat-your-vegetables event of the film world, it has exploded in all sorts of glittery, unmanageable ways.
The films are wittier and more unabashedly entertaining.
The bottled water has Gap labels.
The note pads at press headquarters carry the Mercedes-Benz logo.


G.O.P. Senators Seek Inquiry on Commerce Secretary's Finances
A group of 14 Republican senators today tried to expand their inquiry into the business dealings of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown.
They asked Attorney General Janet Reno if she planned to take steps to determine whether he had failed to disclose financial interests, avoided taxes or misled Congress.
The senators' letter came a day after Representative William F. Clinger Jr. of Pennsylvania, the chairman of the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee, accused Mr.
Brown of misleading Congress about his links to a television company that defaulted on a loan owed to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.


Corrections
An article on Monday about strategy in the O. J. Simpson murder trial misspelled the surname of a defense expert in DNA testing.
He is Dr.
Kary Mullis, not Mullins.


Perjury Charge for Investigator of Police
A police sergeant who supervised internal investigations into police corruption was arrested and charged with perjury yesterday for falsely testifying that he had been the victim of a carjacking in the Bronx, the Police Department announced.
Sgt.
Kevin P. Sweeney, 35, had testified before a grand jury that on March 24, 1993, while he was off duty, he was approached by a carjacker, jabbed in the back with a hard object that felt like a gun and ordered to hand over his car keys.
But police investigators found that the sergeant, who is in the Internal Affairs Bureau, was nowhere near his car when it was stolen.


Chevron Corp.(CHV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accounts
*
Air South, Columbia, S.C., to McFarland &amp; Drier, Miami, as the first agency to handle the airline's Florida advertising account.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.


Taking Over the Concerto for Dancers
The concerto was the New York City Ballet's favored musical form over the weekend.
George Balanchine's "Stravinsky Violin Concerto," danced dazzlingly on Sunday night at the New York State Theater, remains the masterpiece of the genre.
But sophisticated variations on the model were seen in two ballets created for the Diamond Project last spring: Peter Martins's "Mozart Piano Concerto" and Miriam Mahdaviani's "Correlazione," set to Corelli's music.
The Martins ballet, one of the best from the company's artistic director, illustrates perfectly why the concerto structure holds such appeal for choreographers.
With its built-in contrast of mood and rhythm, this kind of musical composition gives equal time to both principals and groups.
The slow section is invariably used for a pas de deux, a quiet adagio framed by the ebullience of the ensemble's allegro in the first and third sections.


Murder Scene That Stuns Courtroom
The jury, the victims' families and the press that crowded into Courtroom 9-307 had all been warned that, inevitably, the moment would come when grisly photographs from the death scene would be shown.
But few, it seems, were prepared for the sight of the brutally slashed body of Ronald L. Goldman as it was flashed on the huge video monitor.
There was a sharp gasp from spectators, then choked sobbing.
Frederic Goldman, the victim's father, lowered his head, pulled his glasses from his face and softly moaned.
His wife, Patricia, grasped his shoulder, her face also tearful, trying to comfort him.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ELECTRONIC ARTS, San Mateo, Calif., an entertainment software developer, completed the purchase of Bullfrog Productions Ltd.
Surrey, England, a video game writer, for an undisclosed amount.
ELI LILLY &amp; CO., Indianapolis, in a parterniship with the largest drug company in India, Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd., will invest $90 million in joint ventures in the United States and India.


Russia and China Pressed Not to Sell A-Plants to Iran
Worried that Iran is seeking to develop nuclear weapons, the Clinton Administration is stepping up its efforts to discourage Russia and China from selling atomic reactors to Teheran that might help it become a nuclear power.
Ignoring pleas from Washington, Russia has signed an $800 million contract to finish two large reactors in Iran, while China is negotiating to sell reactors to Iran.


Sports of The Times; Groza, Beard Linked In Sadness and 'Stigma'
RALPH BEARD dreaded the death of Alex Groza the same way he shudders every autumn in the Commonwealth of Kentucky, when basketball starts all over again.
The death of his friend, last Saturday in California, would revive what Beard calls "the stigma," the way they are remembered.
History is cold-blooded; history latches on to one thing and obscures the rest.
This is something for young people to ponder.
Do something today and people might remember it 50 years from now.
"Our lives are intertwined," Ralph Beard said the other day.


An End to Feud Over New Videodisk?
In a statement that hints at a possible end to a standards battle over a promising new consumer-electronics product, the Sony Corporation said today that it would "seriously evaluate" a rival system proposed by Toshiba, Time Warner and several other companies.
The statement was issued after the Matushita Electric Industrial Company, Hitachi Ltd. and the Pioneer Electronic Corporation endorsed the Toshiba digital videodisk system at a news conference here, at which the new system was demonstrated.


The President's Address: 'We Heard America Shouting'
Following is President Clinton's State of the Union Message last night, as recorded by The New York Times:
Mr.
President, Mr.
Speaker, members of the 104th Congress, my fellow Americans, again we are here in the sanctuary of democracy.
And once again, our democracy has spoken.


PATAKI PROHIBITS VIOLENT CRIMINALS FROM OUTSIDE JOBS
Gov.
George E. Pataki signed an executive order today that would prohibit violent felons from participating in prison work-release programs, forcing an estimated 1,300 inmates to sleep in double bunks in prisons that are already severely crowded.
The order, which fulfills a promise made by Mr.
Pataki during his campaign, is the latest move by the Governor to change the direction of New York's criminal justice system.
In his first month in office, Mr.
Pataki has placed a high priority on negotiating a death penalty bill with the Legislature, has sent a double-murderer, Thomas J. Grasso, to Oklahoma to await execution and has promoted a loosening of the laws enacted by Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller that require jail time for low-level drug dealers.


Pippen Has Early Good Night As Bulls Work Late, but Lose
Spurs 104, Bulls 102
Scottie Pippen threw a chair across the United Center court after getting ejected in the first half last night, and David Robinson and the San Antonio Spurs took advantage of his absence to beat the Chicago Bulls, 104-102, in overtime.


Ex-St. John's Player Accused of Assault
The former St.
John's University basketball player Lamont Middleton was charged with assault and resisting arrest yesterday when he hit a police officer after the car he was in was stopped for a traffic violation in the Bronx, the police said.
Middleton, 25, who played for St.
John's in the 1991-92 and 1992-93 seasons, was a passenger in a car driven by Marque Edwards, 24, of Green Pond, S.C.
Two plainclothes officers stopped the car for a traffic violation at 1:30 P.M. on the Edward L. Grant Highway in the Morris Heights section, said Detective Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


CHRONICLE
Rarely are a raffle prize and its winner so well matched: CALVERT DeFOREST, an actor, won a trip to London to see "Sunset Boulevard" at a party held by the Drama League Monday night to celebrate the centenary of the births of Lorenz Hart and Oscar Hammerstein 2d.
The raffle was part of an evening of entertainment by performers including Barbara Cook, Madeline Kahn, Shirley Verrett and Donna McKechnie.


Rates Rise On New York City's Bonds
New York City's continuing fiscal problems forced the city to pay higher interest rates yesterday on its sale of $658 million in debt.
The offering, which included 30-year bonds, was intended to help the city avoid further cuts in its $31.8 billion budget.
It will cost New York millions of dollars in extra interest payments compared with other similarly rated municipal bonds as Wall Street continues to worry that the city's problems will make it more difficult to finance its needs.


Saying Farewell to Kennedy Matriarch


Virginia and North Carolina Put Killers to Death
Kermit Smith Jr. was executed today for raping and murdering a college cheerleader in 1980.
The execution was the second of a white person for killing a black since the death penalty was allowed to resume in 1976.
Mr.
Smith, 37, chose to die by a lethal injection of a muscle relaxant, the alternative to North Carolina's gas chamber.
The injection was administered at 2:01 A.M., and he was pronounced dead by prison officials 11 minutes later.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  ISRAELI SEEKS A PARTING  News analysis: Israel's Prime Minister has revived the concept of greater separation between Israel and its Palestinian neighbors since the latest suicide bombing.
A1  U.S.
ANTI-TERRORISM MOVE  President Clinton took steps to cut off funds from American citizens to groups suspected of terrorism in Israel and other countries, including freezing their assets held in American banks.
A9


Agassi, the Demolition Man
Treating the Australian Open like his own personal demolition derby, Andre Agassi advanced to the semifinals with alacrity this afternoon by whipping 10th-seeded Yevgeny Kafelnikov, 6-2, 7-5, 6-0.
Agassi needed just 83 minutes to stun the 20-year-old Russian into submission with steady serves and blistering angled ground strokes delivered with equal facility from either side.
By the third set, Kafelnikov made no pretense of fighting back and surrendered in 19 minutes to the bandana-topped Agassi.


Cable Ad Concerns Agree to a Merger
National Cable Advertising in Boston and the Cable Media Corporation in New York, both cable advertising sales representative companies, are merging to form National Cable Communications.
The new company, the largest of its kind, will be half-owned by the Katz Media Corporation, which owns Cable Media, and half-owned by the four operators of National Cable Advertising: Continental Cablevision, Cox Enterprises, Comcast and Time Warner.
There will be 13 offices and 185 employees in three operating divisions -- spot sales, program sales and software application -- working for cable systems with more than 27 million subscribers.


Capstead Mortgage Corp.(CMO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tax Breaks Help Persuade Financial Company to Stay
In exchange for a pledge to keep more than 4,000 jobs in New York City for at least 20 years, the CS First Boston Corporation, a major financial company, will receive breaks on city taxes worth more than $50 million, city officials announced yesterday.
With its decision to stay in New York, CS First Boston plans to consolidate operations in a 1930's limestone building on East 24th Street owned by the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.
CS First Boston has 3,700 employees in four sites in the city.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Goin' Down to Florida To Hear Me Some Secrets  'The Sugar Bean Sisters' WPA Theater


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in the City section on Sunday about the Giuliani administration's decision to reduce the number of AIDS patients in single-room-occupancy hotels on the Upper West Side misstated the planned method.
It is attrition, not relocation.


Government Urges Testing for Pacemakers With Wiring Problem
The Food and Drug Administration today advised patients with pacemakers that have potentially defective wiring to undergo X-ray examinations to detect possible fractures in the wires that could lead to severe heart injury or death.
The agency said all patients with the suspect pacemakers should have fluoroscopic exams as soon as possible and, if a wiring break was detected, decide with their doctors whether to leave the lead wires in place or remove them.


Brawn, Sweat and Tears: Sampras Storms Back
Long before he won this tortured passion play that masqueraded as a quarterfinal match at the Australian Open, Pete Sampras, the event's defending champion and the world's No. 1 player, had already done the unthinkable.
He broke down in tears under the spotlight on stadium court.
And the instant this 3-hour-58-minute tear-jerker ended in a 6-7 (4-7), 6-7 (3-7), 6-3, 6-4, 6-3 post-midnight comeback against the ninth-seeded Jim Courier, the traditionally stoic Sampras was again overcome by sobs.


It's Prime Time On Miami Stage
Most players are getting a rental car for the week at Super Bowl XXIX.
Maybe a Ford or a Chevy.
Nothing wrong with that, of course, but San Francisco 49ers cornerback Deion Sanders isn't going to be coasting around the beaches in a Taurus.
Uh-uh.
He bought himself a Lamborghini.
Just for the Super Bowl.
"The Lamborghini," he said, "was a gift from me to me."


Formal Inquiry Is Set on Airport Blackout
Before the lights went out at Newark International Airport two weeks ago, state law may have been broken at least once.
That is the suspicion of the State Board of Public Utilitites, which voted today to hold formal investigative hearings into the Jan. 9 construction accident that closed the airport and stranded thousands of passengers.


Sports of The Times; Seton Hall: Blame And Shame
BY a few minutes after 11 yesterday morning, his team's game-day shoot-around just about done, P. J. Carlesimo had not yet seen the newspapers dispatching news of the latest big-time college sports debacle.
He sure knew all about it, though.
"They had a dinner last night -- I was with George and Father," Carlesimo said, referring to his coaching successor at Seton Hall, George Blaney, and the school's chancellor, the Rev.
Thomas R. Peterson.


Brute Strength Couldn't Save Kobe Structures
Many elevated expressways, bridges and buildings collapsed in the earthquake in Kobe, Japan, last week because of fundamental flaws in engineering design, two American experts who inspected the damage said yesterday.
The Japanese rely on brute strength in structural engineering, the experts said.
Support columns, especially those used to hold up roadways and train tracks, tend to be huge and brittle.
When the ground shakes, the columns are meant to stand firm and resist collapse.


Davis Named Coach at Miami
Butch Davis, a Cowboys assistant coach for the past six years and the defensive coordinator for the last two, today became the fourth Miami coach since 1983, signing a five-year package believed to be worth $375,000 annually.
Despite the turnover, the previous three coaches won four national championships among them.
Unlike Howard Schnellenberger, Jimmy Johnson and Dennis Erickson, Davis, 43, arrives with no head-coaching experience above the high school level.
Davis has spent 15 of his 22 coaching years working with Johnson, including five years at Miami.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.38
5.47
3.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.79
5.80
2.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.23
6.24
3.13
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.84
7.82
5.73
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.92
7.90
6.34
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.78
8.75
7.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.81
6.80
5.51
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Sane Baseball Owner
It does not take a genius to guess what would happen if, say, the automobile manufacturers conspired to withhold their best cars from the market and offered wrecks instead.
Their image would be demolished.
Enter Peter Angelos, owner of the Baltimore Orioles, making the same point about the major-league baseball strike and the owners' plan to begin the season with impostors in uniform.
Last year, failed labor negotiations truncated the season and canceled the playoffs and the World Series.
The owners -- all except Mr.
Angelos -- are planning to open this season with replacement players.
One of the "hot" prospects is the retired pitcher Phil Niekro, age 55.
Photographs of last weekend's open tryouts featured players who appeared to waddle around the bases.
The Trenton Times recommends that teams made up of bogus players call themselves by names like the Philadelphia Phollies and the Texas Strangers.


TRW Inc. (TRW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Woman of the Moment And a Speech's Evolution
It was Sunday at the governor's mansion, and there were two speeches in the works.
In the library and on the porch, the Governor's chief counsel, the chief of staff and various State House speech writers were working on the annual budget message.
In the little parlor to the right off the main hall, a media consultant and a speech writer up from Washington were pecking on laptops, piecing together what has come to be called "the national speech."


Hedge Funds Still 'Steaming Ahead'
The wisdom on Wall Street in recent months has been that the private investment partnerships known as hedge funds have lost their luster.
In fact, many shined in 1994.
Despite the well-publicized losses of Wall Street's most famous hedge funds last year, many others did well.
And many new funds are popping up, attracting both new talent and investors.


Reynold Burch, 80, Physician Who Led Newark Youth Group
Dr.
Reynold Edward Burch, a physician to two generations of Newark residents whose babies he delivered and whose adolescents he sought to guide, died on Jan. 17 at his home in Silver Spring, Md., where he was living in retirement.
A former resident of Newark and Montclair, N.J., he was 80.
The cause was heart failure, according to the family.


Offending Portrait Succumbs To Black Lawmakers' Protest
Led by Representative John Lewis of Georgia, a hero of the civil rights movement, nine Democratic members of the Congressional Black Caucus marched into the hearing room of the House Rules Committee this afternoon and demanded that a recently hung portrait of Howard W. Smith, an ardent segregationist, be removed.
The committee's chairman, Representative Gerald B. H. Solomon of Glens Falls, N.Y., who had the picture hung after Republicans won control of Congress, was conducting a meeting of the panel and told the protesters he would "take your views under consideration."


Some Mexican Bonds Go Unsold
With American loan guarantees for Mexico unresolved, the peso weakened again today and the Mexican stock market drifted.
Interest rates on the latest sale of key Government bonds soared above 26 percent.


Cutting Terrorists' Support
The United States took steps to prevent the flow of funds from Americans to terrorist groups in Israel and elsewhere.
Page A9.


Administration Defends North Korea Pact
Defense Secretary William J. Perry said today that the United States had considered and dismissed the idea of bombing a nuclear reactor in North Korea last year to cripple its ability to develop nuclear weapons.
Defending the nuclear agreement with North Korea against a wave of Republican attacks, he told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that the Administration had considered "going in and taking out the nuclear reactor" before deciding that economic sanctions were the best way to put pressure on the North to abandon its nuclear arms program.


The Rangers Suddenly Find The Stretch Drive Is Here
Soon after a team meeting with Coach Colin Campbell, the Rangers practiced today with playoff-like intensity.
They chased loose pucks furiously, goaltenders were focused, and bodies collided.
After their first three games, including Monday night's 2-1 loss to the Boston Bruins at Madison Square Garden, the Rangers (1-2) have not looked like the defending Stanley Cup champions.
In this strike-shortened season, there is no time to slump, which is why the Rangers are looking at Wednesday night's home game against Pittsburgh as a must-win situation.


CHRONICLE
CHRISTINA AQUINO, a daughter of CORAZON C. AQUINO, the former President of the Philippines, appeared on television Monday to plead with her mother for a reconciliation, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
The two women have not spoken since November, when Ms.
Aquino, 23, moved in with Philip Salvador, a 41-year-old married actor, by whom she is now pregnant.
Their estrangement deepened when she conducted an interview last week with Ferdinand Marcos Jr., son of the man suspected of masterminding the 1983 assassination of Ms.
Aquino's father, Benigno Aquino Jr.
She added fuel to the fire by kissing him on the cheek after the interview.


Children's Drug Labels Reconsidered
OF the more than 2,000 prescription drugs now on the market with approval by the Federal Food and Drug Administration, 80 percent have never been tested for safety or efficacy in children.
But since doctors may legally prescribe these drugs for children anyway, they have been in the position of having to "blindly grope" for a child-size dose that is both safe and effective, said Dr.
Gloria Troendle, a medical reviewer in the endocrine and metabolism division of the administration
Last month the agency issued long-awaited regulations for such labeling, allowing companies to publish information about dosages for children without doing full-scale testing if the disease runs the same course in both children and adults, as strep throat does, for instance, and if the medication approved for it works similarly in both.


At the Nation's Table: Davenport, Calif.; A New-Age Juice Intended For Women
Ten miles north of Santa Cruz, Calif., up the Pacific Coast Highway in Davenport, is the headquarters of Odwalla, a fruit-juice company with New Age twists.
It has massages for its truck drivers, a medical plan that covers midwifery and a chief financial officer, Stephen Williamson, who speaks of the need to "respect the living nature of our product."
So it is not a surprise to find that Odwalla has been producing what it calls a feminist drink, Femme Vitale, since August.
Based on the recommendations of 12 women who met last spring to consider women's health needs as they relate to osteoporosis and premenstrual syndrome, Femme Vitale is a mixture of fresh apricot, apple, orange, cranberry and raspberry juices, plus added calcium, iron, B-vitamins and the herbs vitex (chasteberry), nettles, passion flower, raspberry leaf and dong quai.
Odwalla, a 15-year-old company, now has 350 employees.
Among its other vitamin-packed drinks are those called C Monster and Mo' Beta.


Johnson &amp; Johnson Inc.(JNJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A War of Applause Reflects the 2 Sides of Clinton
The 1,200 people crammed into the House chamber tonight seemed to represent the warring sides of Bill Clinton, the old Democrat, and Bill Clinton, the new Democrat.
When Democrats rose in standing ovations, Republicans were glued to their seats.
But just as often, Mr.
Clinton gave Republicans something to cheer about, and Democrats only reluctantly joined in.


Palestinian 'Martyrs': Defiant and So Willing
If Abdel Rahim Sukar felt any grief today, he wasn't showing it.
His older brother, Anwar Sukar, was a suicide bomber from the Islamic Holy War group who blew himself up on Sunday in a crowd of Israeli soldiers, killing 19 Israelis and wounding more than 60.


Visiting Angkor Wat
To the Editor:
My heart goes out to the families of Susan Ginsburg Hadden and her guide, who were killed Jan. 15 by Khmer Rouge guerrillas or bandits while traveling to Banteay Serey, a small temple beyond the main Angkor Wat temple complex in Cambodia (news articles, Jan. 17, 18).
This tragedy should not deter people from visiting the main temple complex.


Open Positions on Short Sales Decline at Nasdaq
Short interest in smaller stocks continued to fall, just as they have for the stocks on the New York Stock Exchange and the American Stock Exchange.
The uncovered short sales of Nasdaq stocks declined by 4.8 percent for trades settled on Jan. 13, reflecting trades through Jan. 6, according to the National Association of Securities Dealers.
Last week, the Big Board reported a decrease of 2 percent and the American exchange reported a decline of 4.6 percent for the same period.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Named Mike Gellinger manager of Sarasota in the Florida State League; Mike Rojas manager of Hickory in the South Atlantic League; Dewey Robinson, pitching coordinator; Don Cooper pitching coach of Nashville; Tom Spencer, outfielding coordinator; and Dallas Williams, base running coordinator.


Centennial for Union Settlement


The Suburban Cowboys Of the Mild, Mild West
Booms in the West invariably seem to spawn mythic symbols.
During the cattle drives of the late 1800's, it was the wild shoot-'em-up cowboy, despite the reality of the typical wrangler, who mostly fought boredom on the lonely trails.
During the oil bonanza of the 1970's, it was the flamboyant wheeler-dealer in a 10-gallon hat, probably up from Texas, a caricature that grew all the more vivid after the energy bust.
For the last four years, the symbol of boom times in the Rockies, the fastest-growing region in the country in the 1990's, has been the wealthy Californian.
Thousands upon thousands of people called equity exiles are said to have sold their houses in Los Angeles for $300,000 to $400,000 or more, and fled that seemingly cursed urban sprawl for the pristine, wild-grass stretches of the mountains, where they can trot horseback across their new ranch ettes, untethered to congested America, except by fax and modem.


Wine Talk
FIRST came phone calls, then faxes.
Le Monde, a television station in Bordeaux, a newspaper in Toulouse, even chateau owners were asking: What was all this about a major Bordeaux wine tasting in California?
The answer was simple.
Gordon Getty, the oil fortune heir, who is a wine buff, was fulfilling an old dream: taking a long, hard look at all the most famous wines of Bordeaux.
To help the project, which he said would cost as much as $170,000, he had invited 10 wine experts from around the world.


Foreign Affairs; Helping Mexico Help Us
There is an old saying among bankers that when someone owes you $1,000 that's his problem, but when someone owes you $1 million that's your problem.
That bit of wisdom is good to remember as you listen to the demagogues opining that Mexico's debt crisis is Mexico's problem.
Mexico owes us $100 billion.
That's our problem.
That is frustrating for a lot of people to acknowledge.
And they are right to feel frustrated.
The $40 billion rescue package that President Clinton has proposed for Mexico is a crazy cross between highway robbery and self-help -- a joint venture by Pancho Villa and Robin Hood.
But on balance we have to go through with this bailout, because in today's intertwined global economy we can't save ourselves without saving Mexico, and we can't bail out the little guy without bailing out the billionaires as well.


Motion for Delay of L.I.R.R. Trial Planned
A motion to delay the murder trial of Colin Ferguson pending a ruling on moving the trial out of Nassau County is to be filed on Wednesday in the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, a lawyer who is assisting Mr.
Ferguson said today.
Mr.
Ferguson is accused of shooting six people to death and injuring 19 others aboard a Long Island Rail Road train in 1993.


As Simpson Trial Opens, State Tells Jury of Long Blood Trail
A trail of blood leading from the site of his former wife's death to his own bedroom and even to a pair of socks found at the foot of his bed proves that O. J. Simpson is a murderer, prosecutors in the case charged today.
While most of that blood demonstrably was Mr.
Simpson's, they said, it was mixed with the blood of his two victims, Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.
As the long-delayed and long-awaited opening statements began, prosecutors labored to convince 12 jurors that Mr.
Simpson is not just the good natured, jovial fellow known to most American households but also a jealous, possessive man whose abusiveness reached a peak last spring when Mrs.
Simpson finally resolved to leave him once and for all.


Beyond Wool And Down
THE gaggle of grumpy old ice fishermen, looking mummified in untold layers of drab wool dating from the Eisenhower Administration, began making fun of my blindingly bright, state-of-the-art winter sports clothes as soon as I stepped onto the 14-inch-thick ice covering Lake Minnetonka just outside this city.
The sunfish weren't biting that moment in subzero January, so my father's angling buddies took a timeout from their fishing holes to critique my outfit.
I was testing the latest synthetic winter wear in the direst of circumstances -- in Minnesota, also known as the nation's icebox.
So there I was, looking like an extra from "Plan 9 From Outer Space," as they began their fashion review by laughing at my lightweight, waterproof three-fingered lobster gloves by Pearl Izumi ($40; all prices given here may vary from store to store).
The gloves, designed with a synthetic called Entrant to provide the protection of mittens with the flexibility of gloves, locked my hands in a permanent Mr.
Spock greeting.
I was a nightmare in neon, not a properly dressed fisherman, my father's friends suggested, and I hid from sight the gloves' stitched-in terry-cloth nose wipe.


Iranian Preserved Calm in Hostage Era
To the Editor:
Mehdi Bazargan of Iran, who died on Jan. 20 (obituary, Jan. 21), was the Prime Minister with whom I dealt as chief of mission of the American Embassy in Teheran before the embassy was seized by student terrorists on Nov. 4, 1979.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 20
Jan. 13
Jan. 21
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.7
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.3
3.1
Gasoline stocks
212.7
211.5
230.2
Distillate stocks
139.6
141.2
128.9
Crude imports, daily
6.5
6.7
5.4
Product imports, daily
1.5
1.6
1.5
Crude stocks
321.7
327.9
328.7
Crude production, daily
6.7
6.7
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
90.7
92.8
90.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Veterans' Memorial on L.I. Vandalized


Warner-Lambert Co.(WLA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Investigations have been stepped up in the municipal bond market, with the S.E.C. pursuing more than a dozen cases involving possible political corruption and influence-peddling.
And Federal prosecutors are preparing criminal cases.  [ Page D1. ]


Prostate Test Appears Reliable In Detecting Deadly Cancers
RESEARCHERS today reported the first strong evidence that a widely used blood test for prostate cancer accurately detects a significant majority of cancers that will later grow, spread and become deadly.
The news should ease nagging doubts about the test that have troubled many doctors and patients.
The test was also found to have a low false-positive rate, cases in which cancer is detected in men who do not have it, leading unnecessarily to further tests and treatment.


Crops Holding Promise Beyond Food
Most of the crops America's farmers raise each year are eaten.
But the country's agribusiness is hoping that the small portion that is not consumed can be turned into a new wave of profitable nonfood agricultural products.
Many of the recent innovations, like corn-based golf tees and biodegradable pens, are relatively inconsequential novelties.
But others, like new lubricants, fuel additives, and inks, make up the advanced guard of products that could eventually earn billions of dollars annually for farmers and agribusinesses while benefiting the environment.


Chrysler's Warning Against Higher Rates
Chrysler's chief economist warned yesterday that growth in auto sales could slow this year and hit a plateau in 1996 if the Federal Reserve raises interest rates again.


Northern Telecom Ltd.(NT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prisons Chief Quits, Citing Family Issues
Correction Commissioner Anthony J. Schembri, under investigation following allegations that he did personal business on city time, resigned yesterday, saying family pressures prevented him from meeting the city's residency requirement.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani praised Mr.
Schembri in a letter he read aloud at the end of a City Hall news conference on other issues, saying the Commissioner had worked "effectively and diligently to reform the department." But in response to questions, the Mayor also said that he believed Mr.
Schembri, who had been in office 10 months, had "made the right decision."


Republican Leaders Express Wariness of President's Conservative Embrace
Republicans presented President Clinton tonight as a reluctant convert to the cause of a smaller, cheaper government more attuned to the needs of the middle class.
Casting themselves as the authentic agents of change, the Republicans also suggested that Mr.
Clinton's actions would not match his conservative words.
"While at times tonight some of the President's ideas sounded pretty Republican, the fact remains that he has been opposed to the balanced budget amendment, he proposed even more Government spending and he imposed the biggest tax increase in American history," said Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey, on behalf of her party.
She referred to the 1993 budget package that raised income tax rates for the upper middle class and the rich, eliminated various deductions and increased the amount of Social Security benefits subject to tax.


O'Neal Is Chargers' Speaker of the House
The way Leslie O'Neal sees it, his father fought the toughest battle of all.
When O'Neal was a child, his dad was injured in a truck accident and broke his hip and both knees.
He lived most of the late years of his life hospitalized and in piercing pain; he died in 1992.
The way Leslie O'Neal sees it, his battle with a career-threatening injury to his left knee as a rookie defensive end in 1986 was won partly because of the strength he gained from the courage his father had displayed.
The way Leslie O'Neal sees it, his San Diego Chargers deserve to be big underdogs in Super Bowl XXIX against the San Francisco 49ers.
The Chargers have not won enough, he said.
They don't deserve much respect yet, he said.
And he said that is the reason the Chargers are here -- to win this Super Bowl and to earn that respect.


FMC Corp.(FMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mr. Solomon's Portrait Gallery
It took a principled protest yesterday by a hero of the civil rights movement, Representative John Lewis of Georgia, and eight other members of the Congressional Black Caucus to clear Representative Gerald Solomon's head.
Belatedly, Mr.
Solomon, an upstate New York Republican and the new chairman of the House Rules Committee, abandoned his embarrassing decision to hang a portrait of former Representative Howard (Judge) Smith of Virginia in the committee room.
Mr.
Smith, one of Congress's most notorious bigots, used his chairmanship in the 1950's and 60's to impede civil rights legislation.
Mr.
Solomon had taken down a portrait of the late Claude Pepper, a noble Florida legislator, to clear the way for a man whose memory is without honor in his own region.
Mr.
Solomon's elevation of this arch-segregationist was more than poor judgment.
It was an insult to Mr.
Solomon's constituents and New York's role as a leader in civil rights.


The Neediest Cases; Enduring a Lifetime of Depression
Time has whittled her voice to a whisper, and sadness has settled over her like a cloak.
But the past still resonates in Erika B.'s mind and dominates her solitary days.
She was born in a German village, and when she was 7, her father died in prison.
The year was 1935.
He had been jailed because he was Jewish.
His death brought on a long-term depression.


At the Nation's Table: Nationwide; Cooking Students Major in Recycling
Student chefs may be learning the latest in cutting-edge cuisine, but cooking schools report that they are also learning the fine art of recycling and composting.
"Recycling is an essential part of a chef's education for the next century," said John Dranow, the chief operating officer of the New England Culinary Institute in Montpelier, Vt.


Food Notes
New Bread on Columbus
Breads like those wonderful-looking examples that have been tantalizing the neighborhood from the window of Columbus Bakery, 474 Columbus Avenue (83d Street), are finally for sale to retail customers.
The bakery, owned by Ark Restaurants, opened to the public yesterday afternoon.
For the last couple of months, it has sold bread wholesale.
There are rich brioche loaves, rosemary rolls, domed onion rolls suitable for hamburgers, multigrain breads and handsome crusty sourdough rounds.
The bakery has an espresso bar and cafe tables and will soon sell cakes, pastries and some savory dishes for carry-out.
Warm Crullers to Go
Sally Darr, who was the chef and a co-owner of La Tulipe, the restaurant on West 13th Street that closed in 1991, is now making French crullers.
Hers are traditional crullers made with pate-a-choux, or cream-puff paste, piped into a big figure eight and deep fried.
They are extremely eggy, airy confections, delicately browned and brushed with a light maple glaze.
She makes only eight dozen crullers a day, and they are still warm when they arrive at the stores that carry them: Jefferson Market, 455 Avenue of the Americas (10th Street), where they sell for $1.75 each, and Dean &amp; DeLuca, 560 Broadway (Prince Street), where the price is $2.
Soon, she plans to add raised brioche doughnuts and cake doughnuts to the line.
Beer Festival
The New York Chapter of the American Institute of Wine and Food will hold an international beer festival on Monday from 5:30 to 8 P.M. at Bridgewaters at the South Street Seaport.
Sample tastings of more than 50 beers from several countries will be poured and paired with food from 25 New York restaurants.
Tickets, $35 for the public, $25 for members of the institute and $15 for student members, must be purchased in advance by calling (212) 447-0456.
Tickets will be held at the door.
Members of the institute will be admitted starting at 5 P.M.
Bridgewaters is in the Fulton Market building at the Seaport, at Fulton Street.
Off the Menu Lundy's Redux
A. &amp; S. may soon disappear, but another famous Brooklyn enterprise, Lundy's in Sheepshead Bay, is coming back.
The vast Moorish seafood palace at 1901 Emmons Avenue (at Ocean Avenue), which closed in 1979 after 45 years, is expected to reopen by the summer.
Built in 1934 at a cost of $600,000 (half-financed by the city, because of its owners' connections), F.W.I.L.
Lundy Brothers Restaurant replaced a dockside seafood restaurant that was started in 1920 by Frederick William Irving Lundy, (known as Irving), a millionaire who, following personal tragedies, became a recluse.
Frank Cretella and members of his family have signed a lease for Lundy's and have also acquired the rights to the name.
They have started work on the landmark building, which used to be able to accommodate 2,800 seafood lovers at one time.
Mr.
Cretella, whose company, the Tam Restaurant Group of Staten Island, runs the Boathouse Restaurant in Central Park, said that the restaurant will serve seafood, steaks and chicken.
He is bringing back the renowned biscuits, clam bisque, shore dinners and the clam bar.
As for desserts, he said he is not sure.
"Some people remember the Jell-O, and ask if we are going to have it." But he plans some changes, including an open kitchen and private dining rooms.
Brooklyn Longing
Nostalgia for Brooklyn can be found in Manhattan.
Sheldon Fireman, an owner of Trattoria dell'Arte, plans to open the Brooklyn Diner U.S.A. at 880 Seventh Avenue (at 57th Street) in the spring.
Designed to replicate an Italian neighborhood diner, the 96-seat restaurant will have a mural of Ebbets Field covering one wall.
Smokin'
Match, 160 Mercer Street (near Prince Street), is opening a branch at 33-35 East 60th Street.
Match Uptown is expected to be ready for business by April.
At a time when no-smoking rules are about to go into effect in the city, there is an increasing number of restaurants whose names suggest smoking.
Along with the Matches, there is Cafe Tabac, Lucky Strike and Viceroy.
Chili + Super Bowl
For effortless Super Bowl entertaining, the Manhattan Chili Company, 1500 Broadway (at 43d Street), will deliver an array of appetizers, a choice of chilis with up to eight toppings, rice and bread for $10.95 a person, for a minimum of four people.
Delivery will be free in Manhattan.
Orders must be placed no later than Friday: (212) 730-8666.
Tavern's Valentine
Tavern on the Green has planned quite a surprise for Valentine's Day.
Warner LeRoy, the owner of the restaurant, has combined the resources of Borden, the maker of Cracker Jack, and Bulgari, the jeweler, to come up with this one.
Every woman who dines in the restaurant on Valentine's Day will receive a box of Cracker Jack, compliments of Borden.
In one of the boxes the usual plastic prize will have been replaced with a red ribbon that can be exchanged for a $10,000, 1.5-carat Bulgari ruby ring set in 18-karat gold.


Words, Words, On and On
Although White House officials had predicted that last night's State of the Union address would last only 45 minutes, President Clinton actually took 81 minutes to deliver it, 19 minutes longer then last year's and 27 minutes longer than he took in accepting the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1992.
The lack of brevity was not lost on Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey, who had been chosen to provide a Republican response.
Before beginning her 10-minute reply, she said, "Before I begin, let me assure you I am not going to ask for equal time."


Of Salary Caps and Television Stars
Carmen A. Policy, the president of the 49ers, is weary of criticism from other teams about his ability to creatively squeeze the salaries of players like Ken Norton Jr., Rickey Jackson, Deion Sanders and Gary Plummer under the National Football League's salary cap of $34.6 million.
"At first we wrote it off to frustration by other teams," he said today.
"But when it continued, we resented a good deal of it. We don't criticize other organizations."


British Airways' Review Under Way
British Airways P.L.C. said yesterday that it had named four agencies to compete for its worldwide account, with billings estimated at $95 million.
The account has been handled for the last 11 years by the London office of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide.
Earlier this month, in reaction to the ouster of Maurice Saatchi as chairman of the agency's parent, the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company P.L.C., the airline announced a review.


Albertis S. Harrison Jr., 88, Dies; Led Virginia as Segregation Fell
Albertis S. Harrison Jr., who served as State Attorney General and Governor as Virginia made its last stand against racial integration, died on Monday at his home in Lawrenceville, Va.
He was 88.
The cause was a heart attack, the Governor's office in Richmond said.


Knicks' Symphony Stops Strickland's One-Man Band
A determined team performance by the Knicks overcame a spectacular individual performance by Rod Strickland.
Withstanding a career-high 36 points by Strickland, the former Knicks point guard, New York erased an 11-point third-quarter deficit to beat the Portland Trail Blazers, 105-99, last night at Madison Square Garden.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the trial misstated the surname of the Los Angeles Chief of Police in some editions.
He is Chief Willie L. Williams, not Wilson.


Virginia and North Carolina Put Killers to Death
Kermit Smith Jr. was executed today for raping and murdering a college cheerleader in 1980.
The execution was the second of a white person for killing a black since the death penalty was allowed to resume in 1976.
Mr.
Smith, 37, chose to die by a lethal injection of a muscle relaxant, the alternative to North Carolina's gas chamber.
The injection was administered at 2:01 A.M., and he was pronounced dead by prison officials 11 minutes later.


Moving, Eventually


Russians Both Virtuosic and Enterprising
It's a funny old world.
When Mikhail Pletnev first visited New York in 1979, a year after he won the gold medal for piano at the Tchaikovsky Competition, he told an American reporter that he was shocked to see musicians busking on street corners.
Such things, he said, were unthinkable in the Soviet Union, where the Government rewarded artistry.
But a decade later, Mr.
Pletnev saw in the collapse of Communism an opportunity to emulate, of all things, the Western music world.
An aspiring conductor, he proposed starting an orchestra that would rely entirely on private support, some of which would be raised abroad.
And by 1990 he had lured some of the best players from Moscow's ensembles to join his new Russian National Orchestra.


D.M.B.&amp; B. Official's New Assignment
Richard V. Hopple, vice chairman for corporate strategic development at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York, yesterday was named president of the agency company's North American operations.
Mr.
Hopple, 47, succeeds Clayton E. Wilhite, 49, who will take new responsibilities as a vice chairman, developing new technologies.


The Pop Life
Stevie Wonder's Politics
Talking to Stevie Wonder, it sometimes seems as if there's little distance between pop music and social issues.
Speaking recently by telephone from his Los Angeles home, Mr.
Wonder, one of pop's most enduring performers and writers of love songs, concluded his comments about Boyz II Men with the non sequitur, "I just want to ban handguns: that's my thing." And when talking about the House of Blues club in Los Angeles, he stopped his anecdote short to muse about Newt Gingrich.
In addition to having a musical career that dates back to when he was a 12-year-old signed to Motown records, Mr.
Wonder, who is 44, has a long resume as a political crusader.
So it makes sense that Mr.
Wonder's latest tour (his first in the United States since 1988) is not to promote a new album, but a new charity.
The tour, a benefit and food drive for the Charge Against Hunger campaign of American Express, was at Madison Square Garden last night and will return tonight.
The concerts are sold out.


We Owe Veterans Their Good Medical Care; Alzheimer's Patients
To the Editor:
William Safire should drive up to Canandaigua, N.Y., to observe the Alzheimer's wing of the local veterans hospital (column, Jan. 19).


American Brands Inc.(AMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Death That Gave Life to Others; Parents of L.I.R.R. Shooting Victim Donated Her Organs
The mother who gave away her daughter's heart first met the mother who received it on a CNN talk show.
"They wanted to capture the moment," said Arlene Locicero, whose daughter, Amy Federici, died in the 1993 Long Island Rail Road shootings.
"I would have preferred that we had some time alone before the show," said Theresa Caravella, 60, of Islip, a mother of seven, who received Amy's 27-year-old heart.
Still, the meeting was momentous.


The Virulent E. Coli Found in Salami
E.
COLI, the bacteria found mostly in hamburger, which killed four children in 1993 and have made thousands of others ill, sickened 23 people in California and Washington State last month.
This time, though, the bacteria were found in salami, a product that had never before been connected with an outbreak.
The outbreak calls into question the safety of all such dry-fermented sausages, which include pepperoni, Lebanon bologna and summer sausage.
Dr.
James Marsden, the senior scientific adviser to the American Meat Institute, a trade association of packers and processors, said, "The elderly, very young children and people with H.I.V. need to be very concerned about anything that is not pasteurized." Most of these sausages are not.


Saving the City's Backyards
When a bus or a subway breaks down, its passengers know it.
But the decline of a park or a playground is far more subtle.
It takes a while to notice that the grass is thinning, the soil drying and the trees dying.
It may even take a while to notice the crunch of crack vials underfoot, or the fact that half the children's swings are broken.
But noticing is a necessity now, because many of New York City's 905 playgrounds and 479 parks, their maintenance staffs pared to the bone, are in sad decay.
Last week, Parks Commissioner Henry Stern offered an idea first touted by the nonprofit Central Park Conservancy.
He proposed a modest tax on people living near Central Park.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani promptly shot it down.
Though small, the tax was an unfair hit on one group of New Yorkers and a slap in the face to others.
It is tempting to set up a park-improvement district in neighorhoods that can afford one.
But what about neighborhoods that cannot?


Market Place; Kellogg investors are worried about profit-eroding discounts in the battles of the breakfast foods.
SINCE the Kellogg Company reported fourth-quarter earnings on Friday, investors and analysts have been spooked by the "bogos."
No relation to the bogyman, bogo is food-industry shorthand for "buy one, get one free." And investors and analysts are afraid that Kellogg might be forced to adopt such discounting measures to defend its market share, weakening its profit margins.
The company's announcement of its earnings signaled to some that their fears might be realized.


CLINTON, WITH BOW TO G.O.P., REAFFIRMS HIS THEMES OF '92 AND ASKS NEW COOPERATION
President Clinton tonight sought to build a rationale for the second half of his term, at once defending his record and embracing many ideas backed by the new Republican Congressional majority, but amending them to suit the brand of centrist Democrats who elected him.
In a State of the Union Message that was by turns conciliatory and studded with pointed delineations of difference, Mr.
Clinton pledged his cooperation in shrinking the Government, cutting taxes, overhauling welfare and cracking down on illegal immigration.
But he repeatedly veered away from endorsing specific Republican proposals for dealing with those issues, instead presenting his own ideas as sensible, humane alternatives to more extreme courses of action.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
It's a weekday afternoon at 3.
Senior citizens are leaving the day's first showing of "Pulp Fiction" at the Chelsea Cinemas on West 23d Street.
In the ladies' room I meet a downstairs neighbor.
"Did you enjoy the picture?" I ask, still sorting out the film's gripping, hilarious bloody segments.


A Deflated Presidency
A year ago, the polls showed President Clinton in good political shape, buoyed by an improving economy.
So he waved a pen at Congress and the nation.
Give me a health care plan that covers everyone in America, he demanded; if you resort instead to half-measures, I will veto them.
In the end, of course, Congress gave Mr.
Clinton no health care legislation at all, and the electorate gave him a swift punch in the nose, in the shape of sweeping Republican triumphs at the state, local and national levels.


Rose Kennedy Is Lauded For Her Faith
Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy's church, children and grandchildren today celebrated the enduring Catholic faith of the founding mother of a political dynasty at funeral services in the church where she was baptized 104 years ago.
Her last living son, Edward M. Kennedy, eulogized the mother of a President, two Senators and an Ambassador and the grandmother of two United States Representatives and the Lieutenant Governor and a state representative in Maryland, saying, "She was ambitious not only for our success, but for our souls."


Excerpts From Eulogy by Sen. Kennedy
Following are excerpts from the eulogy delivered today by Senator Edward M. Kennedy at the funeral for his mother, Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy:
On my office wall, there is a note from Mother, reacting to a comment I once made in an interview.
"Dear Teddy," she wrote in the note, "I just saw a story in which you said: 'If I was President. . . . ' You should have said, 'if I were President. . . . ' which is correct because it is a condition contrary to fact."


Congress to Act on Overdue Tort Reform
To the Editor:
Re "Juries Are Just Saying No" (Op-Ed, Jan. 16): Russell F. Moran has got it wrong.
Now is precisely the time for tort reform.
And the 104th Congress will address it.


Ousted German Executive Sues Nation's Biggest Bank
Thirteen months after Metallgesellschaft A.G., the giant German metals, futures and oil trader, was bailed out to the tune of more than $2 billion, fresh recriminations are flying in a bitter court battle that pits the company's former chief executive against its current management and Deutsche Bank, Germany's biggest financial institution.
In a case that could shed new light on the events that caused Metallgesellschaft's liquidity crisis in December 1993, its former chief executive, Heinz Schimmelbusch, filed a $10 million suit in New York Supreme Court last Friday, contending that Deutsche Bank used the company's troubles to profit financially and needlessly brought it to the point of bankruptcy.


Martin Marietta Corp.(ML,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gov. Christine Todd Whitman's Response to the State of the Union Message
Following is Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's response to President Clinton's State of the Union message, as transcribed by The New York Times:
Good evening.
Before I begin, let me assure you I am not going to ask for equal time.
I'm Christie Whitman, Governor of New Jersey, and I am addressing you tonight from the historic legislative chamber in Trenton, one of the oldest in the nation.
Speaking to you this evening is a tremendous honor for all of us here in New Jersey.


Warriors Keep Close, But the Nets Don't Fold
There is something unusually consistent about the Nets this season, an anomaly that has helped keep them a few light years away from the upper tier of the Eastern Conference.
It is this horrible penchant for giving bad teams confidence, enough so that by the time Kenny Anderson, Derrick Coleman and friends collectively exclaim, "All right, that's it, time to play ball," it is usually too late.


Region News Briefs; 3 Youths Held In Rape of Girl, 3
Three children have been charged with raping and sodomizing a 3-year-old cousin this month in Brentwood, the Suffolk County police said today.
Lieut.
Gerard Pelkofsky of the police said the mother of the victim called the police after her daughter had complained of being injured.
He said investigators trained in interviewing children had determined that she had been sexually assaulted.


At 15, Westinghouse Finalist Grasps 'Holy Grail' of Math
The bedtime stories Aleksandr Khazanov's father told him in Russia were of multiplication tables and long division.
When Aleksandr was 14, and living in Brooklyn, his math teacher at Stuyvesant High School felt the boy was so advanced that he could learn more studying on his own.
Last summer, at 15, Aleksandr passed qualifying exams for Pennsylvania State University's doctoral program in math.


RESULTS PLUS
MEN'S BASKETBALL  Alabama Upsets the No. 9 Razorbacks  In Fayetteville, Ark., Eric Washington scored 7 straight points to stop Arkansas's only run and then made two big 3-pointers as Alabama defeated No. 9 Arkansas, 88-70, to end the Razorbacks' home winning streak at 26 games.
Alabama (12-5, 4-3 Southeastern Conference) led by 16 points at 3 minutes 30 seconds into the second half, but Arkansas narrowed the score to 56-48 with 8 straight points. (AP)


Dumplings, for a Lucky Year of the Pig
NEXT week, as the Year of the Pig is ushered in, the Chinese will observe age-old rituals: firecrackers will be lighted to scare away evil spirits, and bright banners will be hung from gates and door posts.
And dumplings, often in the shape of coins, will be devoured in hopes they will bring good fortune in the new year.
Although every family has a favorite New Year's delicacy, these dumplings -- or jiao-zi (pronounced JOW-dze) -- are most synonymous with the holiday.
Chinese dumplings are believed to be more than 2,000 years old.
In their earliest form, they were plain, doughy crescents simply stuffed with pork or lamb and served in a broth.
Traditionally, they were prepared at the time of the winter solstice and offered as a sacrifice to the heavens.
Many believe that lamb dumplings aid the body in warding off winter's ills.


Bay State Gas Co. (BGC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Comdisco (CDO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Synagogue's Struggle for a New Life
Congregation Kneses Israel has the shopworn look of many urban synagogues that try to hang on long after their members have moved away.
Behind a nondescript door lies a ramshackle sanctuary where floorboards peek through torn carpeting, bookshelves hold a smattering of old Hebrew prayer books and broken windows are boarded up.
Although the Orthodox synagogue effectively closed in the 1970's, a few elderly Jews sometimes drop in for companionship and free food provided by what remains of a once-thriving social service program.
Empty and threadbare, Kneses Israel is barely an echo of its former self, a relic of the Jewish heyday in the Soundview section of the Bronx, a neighborhood that once boasted more than a dozen synagogues.


Corrections
The listing of lottery results yesterday misstated the Connecticut Daily and Play 4 numbers for Tuesday.
Corrected entries appear today on pageB4.


80 Lawmakers Demand Ouster Of Director Of Air Museum
More than 80 Republican and Democratic members of the House of Representatives have demanded the dismissal of the director of the Smithsonian's National Air and Space Museum over a disputed exhibit about the plane that dropped the first atomic bomb on Japan in 1945.
In a letter sent on Tuesday to the secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, I. Michael Heyman, the lawmakers called for the ouster of the director, Martin O. Harwit, because of his "continuing defiance and disregard for needed improvements to the exhibit."


Corrections
The obituary of Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy on Monday referred incorrectly in some editions to the year her husband, Joseph P. Kennedy, died.
It was 1969.


Louisiana-Pacific Corp.(LPX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On Morning After, the White House Is Back on the Defensive
The day after he outlined his new vision of government, President Clinton found himself back on the defensive.
His aides were soft-pedaling an important element of Mr.
Clinton's speech to Congress on Tuesday and struggling to explain how the address had become an 81-minute marathon.
Even as the President's motorcade carried him past flying flags and welcoming signs along the main street of this Pennsylvania Dutch town, White House aides faced queries like whether he would actually seek an increase in the minimum wage -- which he advocated in the speech -- and whether he would extend to his own legal defense fund the ban on lobbyists' gifts that he asked Congress to adopt voluntarily for itself.


Fletcher Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kids or Conspirators: How Hackers Got Caught
MASTERS OF DECEPTION The Gang That Ruled Cyberspace By Michelle Slatalla and Joshua Quittner 225 pages.
HarperCollins Publishers. $23.
It's difficult to feel much besides amused admiration for the computer hackers spotlighted in "Masters of Deception: The Gang That Ruled Cyberspace," by Michelle Slatalla and Joshua Quittner, a married couple who are reporters for Newsday.
After all, what mainly characterizes the gang of adolescents they write about is high intelligence, infinite resourcefulness and boundless curiosity.


Women Alone Will Bear Brunt of Welfare Cuts
To the Editor:
The Republican plan to deprive teen-age unwed mothers of welfare benefits (news article, Jan. 21) punishes young women and children while the men involved in these pregnancies get off scot-free.


First Financial Management Corp.(FFM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Market Place; S.E.C. Delays New Nasdaq Trading System
The Nasdaq stock market, already reeling from bad publicity stemming from a Justice Department antitrust investigation and from academic studies that questioned whether individual investors got a fair shake, took another blow yesterday as the Securities and Exchange Commission turned aside a Nasdaq proposal for a new electronic trading system.
That system, called N-Prove by Nasdaq, was billed as an improvement that would make it possible for investors to trade at better prices than they now get.
Had Nasdaq proposed it a few years ago, it might have sailed through, but in the current atmosphere of suspicion, the S.E.C. appears to have focused on the possible negatives in the proposal.


Subway Metrocard Gives Us High Tech Without Advantages; Sub-Talk, Refined
To the Editor:
Re "Now Hear This" (editorial, Jan. 22): The unintelligibility that emanates from New York City subway speakers is partly caused by antiquated and damaged equipment, but the "mumbling by the subway staff" will not be improved by an overhaul or replacement of the public address system.
We will just hear the mumbling more clearly.


GENERAL DYNAMICS CORP. (GD,N)
The General Dynamics Corporation said yesterday that fourth-quarter profits from continuing operations rose 13.7 percent, largely because of cost cutting.
The company, a military contractor based in Falls Church, Va., said earnings from continuing operations rose to $58 million, or 92 cents a share, from $51 million, or 81 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.
In the 1993 quarter, a one-time gain of $13 million, or 20 cents a share, from the closing of certain armored-vehicle contracts resulted in net income of $64 million, or $1.01 a share.


Federal Signal Corp.(FSS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Beckett's Earliest Play To Be Issued
The ending was in some ways as Beckettian as the dispute itself.
Two years ago, a trans-Atlantic argument erupted over whether a New York publisher could print Samuel Beckett's first play, "Eleutheria." Beckett's family and French publishers said no; the Irish playwright had considered it a failure.
But Beckett's longtime friend Barney Rosset, an American to whom the playwright had given a copy of the play before he died, said yes.


Defense for Simpson Attacking Prosecutors' 'Rush to Judgment'
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson began their attempt today to convince jurors that he is not a murderer but the victim of a sloppy police investigation and a rush to judgment by overzealous prosecutors.
In the first three hours of his opening statement, Mr.
Simpson's chief lawyer, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., described his client as a flawed but reformed husband, a conscientious father, a public-spirited citizen.
He said the case against Mr.
Simpson was precisely what the opposing lawyers said it was not: character assassination and a tabloid prosecution.


One Injury Too Many For Ex-Syracuse Player
In the end, it was DAN CONLEY's good knee -- the one that wasn't operated on 11 times -- that forced him to retire from football.
The former Syracuse linebacker tore the anterior cruciate ligament of his left knee Sunday in the Hula Bowl college all-star game.


Currents; Spinning Straw Into Gold
IN the late 1700's, farmers in Aargau, Switzerland, began braiding rye straw into hats for their own use.
Extras were sold to peddlers, who took them to customers in other towns and cantons, and by the late 19th century this cottage industry was employing 60,000 people and exporting intricate hats, brooches, collars and fashion accessories -- all made of straw -- around the globe. (A lace sample book and hat ornament are shown at right.)
Politics also helped helped make straw goods chic, said Carin Kuoni, a curator of an exhibition of Swiss contemporary art and traditional crafts at the Swiss Institute.
Before the French Revolution, only peasants wore straw.
In the revolution's egalitarian aftermath, "humble materials became more acceptable," she said.


Blantyre Journal; Foes Gather to Jeer Fallen African Founding Father
During three decades of eccentric, regal despotism, Life President Hastings Kamuzu Banda usually had a red carpet unfurled before him when he ventured out into his realm.
So there was a ghoulish curiosity in the crowd that gathered outside the High Court of Malawi the other day, hoping to see the fallen ruler and his confederates endure that humbling ritual of accused celebrities, the perp walk.


A House With a View As Well as a Conscience
JAMES CUTLER doesn't have the maniacal ego of Howard Roark.
But then, "The Fountainhead" is probably among Mr.
Cutler's least favorite books.
Working on Bainbridge Island near Seattle, he is one of a new breed of architects with little tolerance for fellow professionals who still spout old-fashioned rhetoric about conquering the environment.
The world is too fragile for such master-of-the-universe myopia, he says.
Today's architects must take the lead in building in ways that harmonize with nature.
The industry will follow.


COMPANY BRIEFS
RENTRAK CORP., Portland, Ore., which distributes videocassettes to retailers, said its Image Inc. unit would acquire Fan Fair Development Corp. and Merle Harmon Enterprises for an undisclosed amount.
WESTERN NATIONAL GROUP, Orange, Calif., which owns and operates apartment complexes, plans to merge with Santa Margarita Co., San Juan Capistrano, Calif., and sell stock in an initial public offering.
Terms of the merger were not disclosed.


2 Bell Atlantic Executives Promoted to Vice Chairmen
The Bell Atlantic Corporation promoted two senior executives to vice chairmen, setting up an eventual competition to succeed Raymond W. Smith, the company's chairman and chief executive.
The shuffling will elevate two men with distinctly different personalities.
Lawrence T. Babbio Jr. has been the company's blunt-speaking chief operating officer and one of Bell Atlantic's key deal makers, having headed its cellular telephone business and expansion into new markets like computer maintenance.


Setback for Andretti
Although MARIO ANDRETTI will still try to win the 24-hour race at Le Mans this June, his warm-up run in the Daytona 24-hour race on Feb. 4 and 5 ended abruptly yesterday when his Porsche-powered car was withdrawn because of a rule change made on Tuesday.
BOB CARLSON, a spokesman for Porsche Cars North America, said that his company had withdrawn its two Porsche-powered cars from Daytona because the sanctioning body, the International Motor Sports Association, added 100 pounds to the cars on Tuesday along with a restriction to the engines that Porsche engineers say will subtract about 80 horsepower.
LYNN MYFELT, an association spokeswoman, said the restrictions were added to keep the competition equal.
But such restrictions, Carlson said, would mean the Porsches would be too slow to race with the Ferraris at Daytona.


A Vagabond Finds A Perfect Fit
TEN months ago, I gave birth to a baby.
Shortly thereafter, I gave birth to a house.
It was my second baby.
It was my first house.
Our love for both baby and house was instantaneous.
But the house's delivery was protracted, and the labor pains are continuing.
There is something humbling about settling into a house for the first time when you are about to turn 40.
No matter how much you throw away, everything moves with you.
And every bare wall, empty room and naked window is a sweet, savage exercise in self-definition.
There ought to be a book, "My Sofa, My Self."


Anne Campbell, 50, Adviser to Democrats
Anne D. Campbell, an official of the Democratic National Committee in Washington, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 50 and had homes in Washington and Manhattan.
The cause was heart failure, according to Steve Selby, a Washington business associate.


Amplicon Inc.(AMPI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Calendar: Folk Art And Talks
One Collection, Split  Paine Webber Gallery, 1285 Avenue of the Americas (51st Street); (212) 713-2885, and the Queens Museum of Art, New York City Building, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park; (718) 592-5555.


Currents; By the Light Of Lady Liberty
BERNARDAUD'S dome-shaped bisque votive-candle holders have etched designs that glow when lighted from within: the Statue of Liberty (below), Parisian landmarks, sailboats, roses and, for romantic dinners, rollicking cupids.
They are $50 each at Bernardaud, 777 Madison Avenue (at 67th Street); (212) 737-7775.


Hydraulic Fluid Is Focus Of USAir Crash Inquiry
Federal investigators today questioned whether a microscopic speck of dust in the hydraulic fluid of USAir Flight 427 could have thrown the 58-ton Boeing 737 into a corkscrew dive that ended in the deaths of 132 people on Sept. 8.
The third day of hearings by the National Transportation Safety Board focused on the power control unit, an assembly of pistons, levers, cranks and shafts that has been used on the 737 for nearly 30 years to control the rudder, the vertical steering mechanism in the tail.
Recently, rudders on some 737's have been found to perform erratically now and then.


Allergan Inc.(AGN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Matchup Is No Contest: Round 1 Goes to Iverson
There should be several more games where the heralded freshmen Allen Iverson and Felipe Lopez compete on the same floor before the lure of the National Basketball Association takes them away from the Big East.
And while those future games will offer Lopez a chance at redemption, one thing is clear at this early stage of their careers: Iverson can carry Georgetown, but Lopez isn't yet capable of carrying St.
John's.
It was Iverson who dominated with 19 points that helped the Hoyas earn an insurmountable 51-30 lead at halftime.
Georgetown eventually emerged with an 88-71 victory Tuesday night in Landover, Md., handing the Red Storm its sixth straight defeat.


Suspect Slain in Car Ring Tied to Officers
A suspect in a car-theft ring -- arrested 13 days ago with his sister and brother-in-law, both New York City police officers, and his father, a retired officer -- was shot to death Tuesday night as he sat in his car outside a pool hall on Staten Island, the police said.
Minutes later, a New Jersey man whose red sports car matched the description of a vehicle seen speeding from the scene was arrested.
The police found a 357-magnum revolver in the man's waistband and charged him with criminal possession of a weapon.
They said the gun had been sent to a laboratory for ballistics tests to see if it had been used in the slaying.


Kotite Keeps Mann as Coach
Richard Mann has become the only holdover Jets coach in the new Rich Kotite regime.
Mann, who joined the Jets last season, is returning as the receivers' coach.
That position had been assigned to Richard Wood, who instead will take over the running backs, a position he had under Kotite in Philadelphia.


International Technology (ITX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Olin Corp.(OLN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SCI Systems Inc.(SCIS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


AK Steel Holding Corp.(AKST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Close Ones Are Going Against Rangers
The Rangers have opened their season with four games in six nights and they have lost three of them, all by one goal, all at home.
In view of their obvious fatigue, their loss of key face-offs in their zone, the squandering of home-ice advantage and the grumbling of 18,200 customers, is it time to push any buttons?


Cadmus Communications Corp.(CDMS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A wacky campaign pushes the envelope for abrasive humor.
THE characters are just this side of obnoxious, but funny.
And more important for the advertiser, they sell.
The characters are the almost-abrasive men and women in the television commercials for Staples, the national chain of office-supply superstores.
Sales for Staples in the fiscal year ending Saturday are expected to rise 67 percent, to $2 billion, in no small part due to the advertising campaign of Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners of New York.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The bank, in talks over the terms of another Government bailout package, should get what it seeks.
But its vision of serving as the financial backbone of France and of Western Europe has been largely shattered.  [ D1. ] Markets  Stocks were mixed.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D1. ] How real is the so-called bright side of the Kobe earthquake?
The reconstruction should help to power Japan's economy from its worst recession in decades.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ] A campaign by Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners for Staples, the office-supply retailer, feature a winning lineup of characters just this side of obnoxious.
Advertising.  [ D20. ]


Diagnostek Inc.(DXK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rise in Public Workers' Pensions Advances
Both houses of the Legislature voted today to raise pensions for retired state and local workers, sending Gov.
George E. Pataki a bill that is popular with unions and expensive for municipalities, especially New York City.
Mr.
Pataki has strongly suggested that he will use his veto power for the first time to reject the bill.
The Governor agrees with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani that the pension increase would constitute an unfunded mandate imposed by the state on New York City and that it is unaffordable given the fiscal problems facing the state and city governments.


In Congress, A Wave Of Humbleness
After months of depicting Washington as a den of spoiled scamps, the 86 newly elected members of the House of Representatives have made an alarming discovery: they have to live here.
Suddenly, looking like a Washington outsider is dreadfully inconvenient.
Living near the Capitol is key.
Long hours are unavoidable.
So the freshmen, faced with the grim realities of legislative life, are nearly collapsing on themselves to show that their spiritual roots are still back in their districts.
And they have dingy, gloomy, tiny digs in Washington to prove it.


Franklin Resources Inc.(BEN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BOEING CO. (BA,N)
The Boeing Company reported yesterday that fourth-quarter profits fell 48 percent, citing declining deliveries of its jet airliners, rising costs and lower investment income.
The company earned $157 million, or 46 cents a share, compared with earnings of $304 million, or 89 cents a share, in the comparable period a year earlier.
Revenue dipped 10 percent, to $5.12 billion from $5.66 billion.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Two Short Plays by Beckett, As He Specified and Not  'Eh Joe' and 'Cascando' La Mama


Nets Show Some Rare Spunk Before Stumbling in Overtime
The road show continued tonight, replete with nothing one has come to expect from the Nets in visiting arenas this season.
Perseverance and execution.
Clutch shots and huge rebounds.
Derrick Coleman putting his indelible stamp on the game in the final moments.
A victory? Well, one can only go to the well so often.


The Route From Victim to Victimizer
CBS News hauls out its big guns for tonight's three-hour prime-time tour of violence, "In the Killing Fields of America." Ed Bradley, Dan Rather and Mike Wallace travel to streets, prisons, hospitals, cemeteries and homes across the country, meeting criminals and victims, police officers and doctors, parents and community organizers, with particular attention to inner-city streets where boys and young men, especially minorities, are killing and being killed.
It's a mosaic of mayhem.
You've heard much of it before, about single-mother families, drugs, dropouts, gangs and guns, but attention must be paid.


Compuware Corp.(CPWR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Transparent Task


Essay; Responding to Terror
The reaction of peace processors in Jerusalem and Washington to the Beit Lid massacre, in which Islamic suicide bombers wiped out a score of Israelis, has been shock, anger, sorrow -- but a determination that terrorist attacks not be allowed to stop the peace process.
That is based on this widely held premise: Because extremists do not want negotiations to succeed, it follows that the way to foil their tactics is to press on with negotiations no matter what atrocities they perpetrate.
In that way, goes the logic, moderate Palestinians (who profess to want only the West Bank and East Jerusalem) will triumph, and extremist Palestinians (who demand no less than the destruction of the Zionist entity) will be defeated.


That Manila Envelope Causes a Stir Again, but Remains a Mystery
A manila envelope that has been a mysterious part of the O. J. Simpson case since last July surfaced prominently today during opening statements by the defense, but the contents remained a mystery.
Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., the lawyer who is giving the opening statement for Mr.
Simpson, interrupted a recitation of defense exhibits by calling for a colleague to bring him something.
It was the envelope.


Prof. Edward Shils, 84, Is Dead; Researcher on Intellectuals' Role
Prof.
Edward Shils, a theoretical sociologist noted for his research on the role of intellectuals in the formation of public policy and the exercise of power, died on Monday at his home in Chicago.
He was 84.
The cause was cancer, according to the University of Chicago, where he held the title of distinguished service professor.


CHRONICLE
MAGIC JOHNSON is a father again.
The former basketball star and his wife, COOKIE, adopted a 3-week-old girl, Elisa, last week in Michigan, Mr.
Johnson's agent, Lon Rosen, told The Associated Press yesterday.
The couple also have a 2 1/2-year-old son, Earvin Johnson 3d.
Mr.
Johnson's son from a previous relationship, Andre, 13, lives with his mother in Michigan.


Freeport McMoRan Resource Partners Ltd. (FRP,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Smith's Food &amp; Drug (SFD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Latest Round in Orange Juice Wars
What could possibly be healthier than orange juice?
New improved orange juice, of course.
In yet another mass-market concession to America's health obsession, a major combatant in the juice wars, Tropicana Products Inc., yesterday introduced a new line of chilled orange juices fortified with calcium, fiber and vitamins.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
A Klezmer Orchestra Stretches the Definition  Andy Statman Klezmer Orchestra Merkin Concert Hall


GATX Corp.(GMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
The topic is "The Artist as Citizen," and the speaker is certainly an artist and outspoken citizen: BARBRA STREISAND.
The singer-actress-producer-director will give an address at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University on Feb. 3.
"Typical speakers here are Cabinet members, heads of state, Presidential candidates," RICHARD CAVANAGH, the executive dean of the school, said yesterday.
"But every once in a while we have someone not in the mainstream of diplomats and politicians, someone we think is unusually accomplished who has high impact on politics and public affairs."


Albert Hessberg 2d, Albany Lawyer, 78
Albert Hessberg 2d, a prominent Albany lawyer who served on many civic boards, died on Tuesday at the Albany Medical Center.
He was 78 and a lifelong resident of Albany.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Caroline Smedvig of Boston.


Rohm &amp; Haas Co.(ROH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


IBM Canada reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; San Diego's Secretary Of Defense
IF the Pittsburgh Steelers had scored a touchdown in the final seconds of the American Conference championship game, they would be here now for Super Bowl XXIX.
But as Neil O'Donnell's fourth-down pass hummed toward Eric Green near the goal line, linebacker Dennis Gibson lunged and batted it away from the tight end.
And the San Diego Chargers are here instead.
"That was Dennis's assignment," Bill Arnsparger was saying.
"He was right where he was supposed to be."


Roadway Services Inc.(ROAD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reclaiming the Past -- A special report.; Poland Reawakens to Its History As Communism's Mirror Shatters
Digging through Polish Communist Party archives for a study of farm collectivization, Dariusz Jarosz, a 35-year-old scholar, realized that he had struck historical gold: a cache of reports by secret-police informers on the mood of ordinary country folk.
"There was no social history allowed in the Communist years," Mr.
Jarosz said.
"It would have showed that people always rejected Communism." And that, to his delight, is precisely what the records revealed.


AMP Inc.(AMP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Q.&amp; A.
Southern Cover
Q.
I'm planning to rent a condominium in Florida and would like to grow flowering ground covers in a sunny spot where grass is too much trouble.
What will work? -- Phyllis Mateo, Pittsfield, Mass.


Richfood Holdings Inc.(RCHF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 7


ARCO (ARC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Duke Power Co. (DUK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Protest Against Japan
America's Cup challengers and defenders are taking a break from racing this week, but their politics ashore is heating up.
Team New Zealand filed a protest yesterday against the Nippon team, accusing the Japanese of violating the America's Cup two-boat limit.
The restriction prohibits any cup team from building more than two of the new $4 million craft.


Aid to Mexico and Immigration Are Linked
In an effort to generate support for a package to aid Mexico in its economic crisis after the devaluation of the peso, top Administration officials said they had asked Mexico to prevent illegal immigrants from crossing into the United States and control its economic policy strictly.


Stevens to Hong Kong
GARY STEVENS, the third-leading jockey in the United States last year with earnings of more than $12 million, will ride in Hong Kong for the next four and a half months.
Stevens said yesterday that he would leave for Hong Kong on Feb. 1 after continuing to ride at Santa Anita through Sunday.


Pittston Services Group (PZS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 104TH CONGRESS: THE VOTERS  Some Who Like What They Heard but Are Sure They've Heard It Before; 'His Ideas Are Great But Don't Seem Possible'
In the last two years, Albert Gigato has been mugged once and his car stolen twice.
He says he has now given up on a few things: driving, walking on the street at night (he rides a bicycle instead) and hoping that crime can be brought under control.
The same pessimism swept Mr.
Gigato as he watched the President's address.
Mr.
Clinton said the right things as usual, Mr.
Gigato said, but his troubles getting his ideas enacted seem as unrelenting as car thefts.


Subway Metrocard Gives Us High Tech Without Advantages
To the Editor:
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority's Metrocard is new, different.
But what real advantages does it give us?
Citizens of upper Manhattan have been hoping for years for a card system that would allow them to transfer from the subway to the bus so they could get across town while still uptown without paying double fares.
Everyone would be interested in a convenient weekly or monthly subway pass covering all travel for that period.


Suburbs' Public Schools Vie for Paying Pupils
Unlike many other middle-income parents living in New York City, Cynthia Stinziano decided to send her child to public school.
But the school she chose is not in her Bronx neighborhood or anywhere else in the city.
Instead, Mrs.
Stinziano pays about $4,300 a year so that her 9-year-old daughter, Nicole, can attend a public elementary school about 15 miles north, in the affluent Westchester town of Harrison.


CDW Computer Centers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Injury Fells A Dancer In Mid-Solo
Molissa Fenley was dancing the last of the three premieres she choreographed for her opening on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater when she collapsed and folded up, lying with her back to the audience.
A stagehand ran out of the wings and the curtain came down.
The performance did not continue and the rest of the season, scheduled through Sunday, has been canceled.
Ms.
Fenley suffered "an acute cartilage and ligament injury to her left knee," said Dr.
Donald J. Rose.


Murphy Oil Corp.(MUR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Women Alone Will Bear Brunt of Welfare Cuts; Domestic Abuse Impact
To the Editor:
Re "Beaten, Then Robbed" (Op-Ed, Jan. 13): Martha F. Davis and Susan J. Kraham highlight the devastating impact state residency requirements have on a woman's ability to flee a violent relationship.


S.E.C. Chief Assails Bill Restricting Litigation
In a speech aimed at both lawyers and legislators, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission warned yesterday that changes in the securities litigation process envisioned in the House Republicans' Contract With America would seriously impair the nation's securities regulation system.
"Our markets are the best in the world, partly because our securities laws are the best in the world," said Arthur Levitt Jr., the S.E.C. chief, in an address to a securities law conference in San Diego.
"We tamper with the securities regulation system at our peril."


INSIDE
Museum Dismissal Sought
More than 80 House members demanded the dismissal of the head of the Smithsonian's Air and Space Museum over an exhibit on dropping the atomic bombs on Japan.
Page A12.
Pitches Draw Inquiry
Sonny Bloch, the host of a long-running financial radio show, faces a lot of unwanted questions and unhappy investors.
Page D1.
Malawi's Fallen Founder
Malawi is showing a ghoulish curiosity in the fall of Life President Hastings Kamuzu Banda, facing trial for ordering political murders.
Page A4.
Advantage, Americans
Headed by Pete Sampras and Andre Agassi, four American players make up the men's semifinals at the Australian Open.
Page B9.


Celebrities Spurn Divided Arts Center
The rose garden at the Northern Westchester Center for the Arts here is named after the late Lucille Ball.
But Ms.
Ball's daughter, Lucie Arnaz, and her husband, the actor Laurence Luckinbill, say they won't go near the place.
They are among the celebrities and artists in northern Westchester who have long been associated with the center but have turned away since Bira Rabushka, its founder and executive director, was dismissed last month.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday with an article about hedge funds, comparing a sample of individual funds, misstated the net return to investors in Steinhardt Partners for 1993.
Investors received a net return of 49 percent, not 38.4 percent.


HBO &amp; Co. (HBOC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No Headline
"We're not wanting vengeance in this matter. We're not even wanting to use it as a political issue. But according to the laws of Malawi, you kill, you are tried." PRESIDENT BAKILI MULUZI of Malawi, explaining his predecessor's murder trial.  [ A4:3 ]


Ball Corp.(BLL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


S.E.C. Starts Bausch &amp; Lomb Inquiry
Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc. said yesterday that the Securities and Exchange Commission had begun an investigation of its contact lens marketing operations.
Disclosure of the S.E.C. investigation, the latest in a string of negative developments to hit the eyewear manufacturer over the last eight months, was part of a quarterly earnings report that showed an unexpected loss of $62.9 million.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about worries in the Mexican financial markets over a United States aid package misstated the percentage change of the peso against the dollar on Thursday.
The peso fell 1.8 percent against the dollar, not 4 percent.


Logicon Inc.(LGN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Guilford Mills Inc.(GFD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Philip Morris Net Showed A Sharp Rise in 4th Quarter
Fueled by strong gains in its domestic and international tobacco operations, the Philip Morris Companies reported soaring fourth-quarter earnings yesterday.
Net income rose sharply to $1.09 billion, or $1.27 a share, from $339 million, or 38 cents a share, for the last quarter of 1993.
However, as a result of an after-tax restructuring charge of $457 million, or 52 cents a share, for the company's worldwide operations during 1993, the adjusted net rose 37 percent.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Gilbert and Sullivan Jab At the Women's Movement  'Princess Ida' Symphony Space


Developments in Congress
HOUSE -- Clamping down on one of its own, the Republican-controlled House disciplined Representative Robert K. Dornan of California and banned him from floor debate for 24 hours after he unleashed a scathing personal attack on President Clinton.
Although Mr.
Clinton stood up forcefully in his State of the Union address for the ban on assault weapons, members of the House, including more than two dozen Democrats, are ready to repeal the ban as soon as possible.
"I think that is inevitable," said Speaker Newt Gingrich.


2 F.B.I. Agents to Help New Orleans Police Force to Police Itself
A police department that is widely regarded as historically unwilling to police itself will get help from the Federal Bureau of Investigation in cleaning up corruption.
Richard J. Pennington, the new Superintendent of Police here, said the F.B.I. was lending his department two agents to work in the new Public Integrity Unit, which replaces an Internal Affairs Division that critics say has done little to uproot corruption in the city's 1,500-member department.


Empty Promise for Legal Immigrants
The House Republicans' "Contract With America" promises to eliminate legal immigrants from the welfare system.
This punishing provision, which deprives these residents of a safety net their own tax dollars helped build, did not sit well even with many Republicans.
So Nancy Kassebaum, head of the Senate committee overseeing welfare, and several House G.O.P. members have come up with a novel way to avoid internal party squabbling: Congress would turn the whole issue over to the states, letting them decide which poor residents deserve assistance.
Their solution, unfortunately, is not really a solution at all, however benign it may appear on the surface.
The reason is that in time the states themselves may decide to let legal immigrants fall through the net.
In addition, the solution makes no sense in terms of the normal division of labor between states and the Federal Government.


METRO DIGEST
FOR PUBLIC SCHOOLS, OUTSIDERS PAY Urban parents are increasingly being sought out by suburban public school systems that have decided to take in children from outside their district and charge them tuition in an effort to raise money.
School administrators say the programs have become increasingly important as state and Federal aid to local schools declines and budgets tighten.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  SUSPECT IN CAR-THEFT RING IS SLAIN A suspect in a car-theft ring -- arrested recently with his sister and brother-in-law, both New York City police officers, and his father, a retired officer -- was shot to death as he sat in his car outside a pool hall on Staten Island, the police said.
Minutes later, a New Jersey man whose red sports car matched the description of a vehicle seen speeding from the scene was arrested.
B3.


Muldoon Bought By 2 Executives
The Muldoon Agency, a unit of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York specializing in catalogue direct marketing, was bought yesterday by two longtime direct marketing executives.
The terms were not disclosed.
The executives are Bill Sutherland, a former president at Chapman Direct Advertising, a New York direct marketing shop also owned by Y.&amp; R., and Rosemary O'Brien, general manager at Muldoon.
They become partners in Muldoon: Mr.
Sutherland, 53, will be chief executive and Ms.
O'Brien, 43, will be president.


Meredith Corp.(MDP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Conservative Abstentions Give Italian Premier His First Victory
Italy's new Prime Minister, Lamberto Dini, won his first vote of confidence in Parliament today, thanks to abstentions by hundreds of lawmakers of the conservative coalition led by his predecessor, Silvio Berlusconi.
The 270 abstentions in the Parliament's 630-seat lower chamber allowed the new Government to win with a technical majority of 302 "yes" votes.
But that was far short of the broad mandate Mr.
Dini had sought and will probably need as he pushes through a program of economic and political reform.


Shaw Industries(SHX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Homebody Who Spins a Simple Art
The shuttered exterior of Antoni Tapies's home in Barcelona says a lot about the 71-year-old Catalan painter.
"I live an isolated life," he said in the quiet of his sitting room, surrounded by Asian and African art and works by Picasso, Miro and Klee.
"I like to stay home. Perhaps I spend more time than others painting."
Indeed, most mornings he can be found working in his studio, a glass-roofed room lined with large canvases, many exhibiting familiar black crosses and powdered marble surfaces.
Then, during three months each summer, he retreats still further to a country home.
"That's when I do the most work," he said.
"I do nothing except meditate and paint, meditate and paint."


Freeport-McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc.(FCX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Consolidated Edison Co. of New York (ED,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Proposal Worth Fighting For
On three separate occasions during his State of the Union address, President Clinton declared that he and the Republicans must work to "build the middle class and shrink the underclass." He said too many Americans had been left behind by the economy's recovery, and he offered several remedies.
One was new -- raising the minimum wage.
One was old -- cutting taxes on the middle class.
The others consisted mainly of limp warnings to Republicans not to pass irresponsible welfare programs or constitutional amendments.
The minimum-wage proposal is worth fighting for.
It would fulfill the President's campaign pledge to make work pay -- by which he meant that full-time workers should earn enough to raise their families out of poverty.
Mr.
Clinton said he would let Congress write a minimum-wage bill and decide how much the rate should be raised, a strategy reaffirmed by his aides today.
He needs to be more assertive and shoot for a $5-an-hour minimum.


Cummins Engine Co. (CUM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clinton Back on Defensive
President Clinton faced hard questions about his stands on political contributions and raising the minimum wage.
Page A19.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
On a Grand Scale, Whirling in Gusts of Joy  Ballet National du Senegal Brooklyn College


Northern States Power Co.(NSP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Brooklyn Union Gas Co.  (BU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Executive Changes
CVS, Woonsocket, R.I., a unit of Melville Corp., named Charles Conaway executive vice president and chief financial officer.
RHONE-POULENC RORER INC., Collegeville, Pa., named Michel de Rosen, its president, to the additional position of chief executive, succeeding Robert Cawthorn, who continues as chairman.


Kemet Corp.(KMET,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Driving Basket by Hurley Brings Seton Hall Victory
Seton Hall 72, Pittsburgh 70
Danny Hurley hit a driving shot from just inside the foul line with 8 seconds left and Adrian Griffin finished with 23 points to lead a second-half comeback as visiting Seton Hall beat Pittsburgh, 72-70, last night.
Hurley, who scored 14 points, tied the game by making 1 of 2 free throws with 25 seconds left, then got the chance to make the winning basket when Andre Alridge double-dribbled 8 seconds later.


Allegheny Power System Inc.(AYP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Currents; The World Under Glass
"I FIND the cutting edge of ideas is in the architectural milieu rather than the art world," said Brian Clarke, a British stained-glass artist whose speciality, grand public installations, requires no easel to be appreciated.
For a pedestrian-only street in Leeds, England, for example, Mr.
Clarke installed a stained-glass roof with patches of yellow, red, blue and green that skirts the rooftops (above).
The same colors were fashioned into stained-glass ribbons for the glass facade of a building near St.
Paul's Cathedral in London.
An exhibition of Mr.
Clarke's works is at the Tony Shafrazi Gallery in SoHo through Feb. 11.
It includes glass panels, floor mosaics, paintings and maquettes of projects, one of them a building in Vienna that he is designing with the London-based architect Zaha Hadid.


Bailing Out France's Biggest Bank
During the 1980's, the advertising slogan at Credit Lyonnais was "The Power to Say Yes." These days, as the big state-owned bank claws out from under a huge pile of bad loans and ill-fated investments, the French taxpayers who are footing most of the cleanup bill can only wish that it had more frequently said no.
With auditors just now getting a handle on the scale of the problem at the bank, which is the world's largest outside Japan, Credit Lyonnais' chairman, Jean Peyrelevade, is deep in negotiation with the French Government on the terms of yet another bailout package.
The Government last year put up $4.4 billion in fresh capital, loan guarantees and other aid to keep Credit Lyonnais afloat, and industry executives said the tally this time would be at least as much again.


UNION CARBIDE CORP. (UK,N)
The Union Carbide Corporation said yesterday that its earnings nearly quadrupled in the fourth quarter, buoyed by price increases, strong sales and a gain from the sale of a manufacturing plant.
Earnings rose to $157 million, or $1.01 a share, compared with $44 million, or 26 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year ago.


No Headline


Trying to Help Aid Plan, U.S. Asks Mexico for Border Crackdown
In an effort to overcome Congressional opposition to a proposed emergency aid package for Mexico, top Clinton Administration officials said today that they had asked Mexico to help prevent illegal aliens from crossing into the United States and to place strict controls on its economic policy.
The proposed conditions for the bailout package would effectively give the United States enormous influence in how Mexico deployed its police along the countries' border, battled narcotics and managed its economy.


Pittston Minerals Group (PZM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; N.F.L. Players Union Is Now a House Divided
PERHAPS because longevity largely depends on strength of body, sticking together has not been a strong suit of professional athletes, football players in particular.
The element of "get it while you can" is prevalent.
"Players are selfish," said Toi Cook, a defensive back for San Francisco and the 49ers' players representative.
"That's the nature of the business; everything is 'Me, me, me. I, I, I."


League to Test Public Acceptance
No doubt the advent of Title IX is partly responsible for the number of girls involved in high school athletics increasing from 200,000 in the 1970's to 2 million today.
No doubt this increased participation has trickled down into elementary schools, neighborhoods and summer leagues.
By next summer, America may learn if it's ready for a trickle-up effect.
For the six-team Women's Professional Fastpitch league is scheduled to begin play in June, with a series of 15 to 18 exhibition games, some to be televised on ESPN2.
By the summer of 1996, the W.P.F. will inaugurate a full 70-game regular championship season and post-season playoffs.


Kansas City Southern Industries Inc.(KSU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Schools Brace for Impact of State Budget
New Jersey's mayors and school officials sounded dismayed but not surprised today as they got their first peeks at how much state aid they can expect under Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's 1996 budget.
In general, the officials knew what to expect.
In her budget address Monday, Governor Whitman made it clear that municipal aid would remain relatively flat while school financing would increase dramatically for the state's poorest districts but only slightly, if at all, for all others.


Interep to Open Shop for Shamrock
Shamrock Broadcasting in Burbank, Calif., and the Interep Radio Store in New York said yesterday that they had reached an agreement for Interep to open an advertising sales representative company that would sell commercial time solely for Shamrock's 18 radio stations.
The duties of selling an estimated $35 million worth of commercial time annually on those stations had previously been divided among five other sales representative companies.


Bridge
Players who climb voluntarily into the no man's land between game and slam have good reason to be nervous: If they fail, they have suffered a disaster without anything to be gained.
An example is the diagramed deal played recently at the New York Regional Stratified Open Pairs.
North and South were Robert Ryder of Caldwell, N.J., and Jay Korobow of Princeton, N.J., who climbed to four no-trump as shown.
North was too strong to bid three clubs, which would have suggested a final contract, but he might have considered three hearts, since his previous bid had denied a four-card heart suit.


Southern New England Telecommunications Corp.(SNG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Southern Pacific Rail Corp.(RSP,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Bank Buys Building Where the Ball Drops
The building at 1 Times Square, where a lighted ball drops to signal the start of a new year, was sold at a foreclosure auction on Monday to the Banque Nationale de Paris.
The bankruptcy sale, in the rotunda of the State Supreme Court building at 60 Centre Street, drew about 50 spectators and "three or four" serious bidders, said Alan Berman, counsel to the bank and chairman of the real-estate practice of the law firm of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene &amp; MacRae.


Infant Found on Front Step
Suffolk County police are searching for the mother of an infant boy found early this morning on the front steps of a house in Bay Shore.
Detective Sgt.
Albert J. Grammatico said residents of the house, at 59 Frederick Avenue, said they heard a knock on the door at 2:20 A.M. but did not answer.
Several minutes later, they received a telephone call from a woman telling them she had just left a child on the steps.
The caller said the baby was born on Sunday and was named Tyrell, the detective said.


Public Television and 'Elitism'
When the new Congress swept into Washington, budget axes at the ready, the Public Broadcasting Service became a prime candidate for the chopping block.
PBS was an "elitist" enterprise, the ax-men said, a frothy confection of opera and animal programs, aimed at the rich folks up East.
But a poll conducted this month by the respected Opinion Research Corporation of Princeton for PBS finds broad, bipartisan support for the very system that many in Congress seem bent on dismantling.
The poll, which sampled 1,005 Americans age 18 and above, reveals an especially deep concern about the declining quality of programming on commercial television; 82 percent believed that commercial television was too violent, especially for young chilren.
Nearly 85 percent of the respondents said Congress should either maintain public television's funding at current levels or increase it -- with nearly half of those who responded advocating an increase.
Support for public television was broadly bipartisan, reaching 80 percent among Republicans, 86 percent among independents and 90 percent among Democrats.
Nine in ten respondents disputed the charge that public television is "elitist," saying that PBS programming offered something for people from just about all backgrounds, regardless of education and income.


CHRONICLE
For 19 years, PIERRE COSSETTE, the Broadway and television producer, has given a Super Bowl party for 500 at Chasen's in Los Angeles.
For this year's game, he had decided it was time to move the celebration to New York -- long before he knew that two California teams would be the opponents.
"I made a deal with Sardi's before the season ever started," said Mr.
Cossette, who produces the Grammy Awards show and has a home in Manhattan.
"I have become half a New Yorker, so I thought, 'Why not do the party here?' "


Cyprus Amax Minerals Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Freeport McMoRan Inc.(FTX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Some Who Like What They Heard but Are Sure They've Heard It Before
Frank Faruggia's family and half a dozen friends, frequent guests in a household that always seems to be bustling with them, sat watching the State of the Union address on a television set in the Faruggias' kitchen on Tuesday night.
As President Clinton spoke of coming "to this hallowed chamber two years ago on a mission," admitted that he had made some mistakes since then but told too of the lower unemployment and inflation the country had experienced under his stewardship, Mr.
Faruggia just stroked his beard.


Journal; Eating Her Offspring
As Marcia Clark showed a jury an incriminating trail of blood on Tuesday afternoon, another mystery of sorts unraveled at a House subcommittee hearing on Capitol Hill.
Lynne Cheney, the Reagan appointee who ran the National Endowment for the Humanities for more than six years, loudly argued for its death -- as punishment for a project she deplores called the National History Standards.
The mystery?
This project was originally financed and guided by none other than Mrs.
Cheney, who called it her "single most important legacy" and her "favorite grant" before leaving the N.E.H. after the '92 election.
Now that her husband, Dick Cheney, has dropped his Presidential bid, has she turned against her former agency so she can play her own starring role in the culture war that the far right hopes to ride to the White House?


Outsider Art Comes In
WHEN Calvin and Ruby Black settled in the California desert in the 1950's, they opened a rock and crystal shop.
To attract attention to it, they carved child-size dolls from redwood and sugar pine, then costumed them and set them outside, even on the roof.
These figures came to be known far and wide as the Possum Trot dolls.
Fewer than 60 dolls were ever made.
But four of them now live in Gael and Michael Mendelsohn's house overlooking a golf course in Westchester County.
"There's Gina, on the left, and that's Jan," Mrs.
Mendelsohn said, "and then there's Muffins. I think the Blacks thought of her as their own child."


Gore Rules Against Merger of A.I.D. and Others Into State Dept.
The Administration has rejected proposals by the State Department to consolidate three major independent agencies under the department's authority, senior Administration officials said today.
Vice President Al Gore made the decision not to consolidate the three -- the Agency for International Development, the United States Information Agency and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency -- after asking the State Department three weeks ago to come up with suggestions for streamlining the foreign-policy apparatus.


Black 'Sisters' Support Daughter of Malcolm X
In an emotional news conference shrouded in history and loss, the daughters of some of the nation's most prominent civil rights leaders gathered in New York yesterday to announce their support for Malcolm X's second-oldest daughter, Qubilah Shabazz, who was charged two weeks ago with plotting the murder of Louis Farrakhan, the minister of the Nation of Islam.
The daughters, grown women now, some with children of their own, said that they did not believe the Federal Government's allegations against Ms.
Shabazz and that they planned to raise money across the United States for her legal defense.


New Jersey Resources (NJR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Separate Auschwitz Services Highlight Jewish-Polish Dispute
After weeks of rancor between the Polish Government and Jewish organizations over how the 50th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz should be commemorated, two separate ceremonies are planned on Thursday and Friday that will tend to stress their bitter differences.
Angered that the Government would not give what it considered the appropriate Jewish dimension to the official ceremony on Friday, the European Jewish Congress has organized a religious observance for Thursday at Birkenau, 45 miles southwest of here, where Auschwitz inmates were gassed.


Cooper Industries (CBE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Return to the Old Prussian Virtues?
To the Editor:
I never thought I would see the day you would publish an editorial with friendly words about Prussia ("What Ever Happened to Prussia?" Editorial Notebook, Jan. 20).


Riley Hits Motivational Soap Box
It is an obvious situation for a letdown.
The Knicks (25-13) have been playing their most consistent basketball of the season.
They have won five straight games, 13 of the last 14.
Their next opponent is the Los Angeles Clippers, the worst team in the National Basketball Association.
How will the Knicks avoid looking past Thursday night's home game against the Clippers?
Sounds like a perfect time for some Pat Riley motivational techniques.


Securities Given Lift By Auction
Prices of Government securities rose yesterday for the first time in five sessions following a surprisingly successful Treasury auction.
Also helping bond prices were hints in the Senate testimony of Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, that the Fed might be nearing the end of its yearlong round of interest-rate increases.


Deluxe Corp.(DLX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ServiceMaster L.P.(SVM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics L.P. (BCU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Diamond Shamrock Inc.(DRM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Occidental Petroleum Corp.(OXY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dow Jones &amp; Co. (DJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yanks Cut Prices for Replacement Games
The Yankees followed the decisions of many other major league teams and announced yesterday that they would cut ticket prices 50 percent for regular-season games in which they use replacement players.
"While we hope and expect the 1995 season to begin under normal circumstances, we feel an obligation to our fans to introduce a new ticket policy until the ball clubs and the Major League Baseball Players Association reach a new collective bargaining agreement," the team owner, George Steinbrenner, said.


A Fleet of Champions for Lukas
The road to the Kentucky Derby is about to unfold, and the line of march is already headed by those 2-year-old champions saddled last year by D. Wayne Lukas.
In the annual Experimental Free Handicap, an evaluation of horses by a panel of racing secretaries, the top spots were allotted today to Timber Country, the colt, and Flanders, the filly, who won their respective Breeders' Cup championships on Nov. 5.
Both horses are owned by William T. Young, both are trained by Lukas.


Johnstown America Industries Inc.(JAII,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ex-Giant Heartened By 49er Reception
Phil Simms, the quarterback turned media star, walked up to San Francisco 49ers center Bart Oates and it took about half a second before Oates began razzing his good friend.
"I'm surprised you recognized me, Phil," the center said.
Translation: Simms had taken so many snaps from Oates when the two were Giants teammates that Simms might not recognize the center from the front.


ISM Information reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Carolina Power &amp; Light Co.  (CPL,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Chargers' Seay Is No Stranger to Adversity
In only five months, Mark Seay has gone from wondering about making the Chargers' final cut, to suiting up for the opening game without even knowing all the plays, to starting in the Super Bowl against the team that cut him.
Yet he never worried about any of it.


The Neediest Cases; Finding Help After Family Dispute in a New Land
Looking at the family pictures she brought from Russia, Nina V. spoke of the hardships in her native land.
She told stories of instability, war and crime.
"I feared for the safety of my child," she said through an interpreter.
"In Russia, the young children are kidnapped and held for ransom."


Amdahl Corp.(AMH,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Chargers' Gilbert: Just Put Me In, Coach
It was no joke when Gale Gilbert was with Buffalo: four straight Super Bowls, four losses, although he never played a down.
Gilbert was the Bills' third-string quarterback, behind Jim Kelly and Frank Reich.
Now he is backing up Stan Humphries.


BJ Services Co. (BJS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rochester Gas &amp; Electric Corp.(RGS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-A11  RESISTANCE ON NUCLEAR TREATY  Washington is facing resistance in talks at the U.N. intended to extend a treaty that has limited the spread of nuclear weapons.
Some experts fear that a permanent extension of the treaty may be blocked.
A1  POLES TAKE NEW LOOK AT THE PAST  Polish historians have suddenly begun to savor the freedom to examine and write about their country's history as they see it, free from the distortions of the Soviet-era.
A1


Hi-Lo Automotive (HLO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Festival For Lovers Of Nordic Adventure
What winter cabin in the woods doesn't have a pair of cross-country skis laying against the porch?
Gliding across an open snowfield, after all, goes a long way toward adding a touch of contentment and a good bit of athleticism to a day's outing.
Or so a typical L. L. Bean winter's catalogue would have us fantasize.


EG&amp;G Inc.(EGG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


BCE Mobile Commun reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Haitian Tales, Flatbush Scenes
IT was the kind of dark, cold New York winter day that sun-drenched people from the Caribbean dread.
But Edwidge Danticat, a 25-year-old Haitian-American novelist who immigrated to Brooklyn a little more than a dozen years ago, would not let it dampen her spirits.
"You want some coffee, tea?" she said in a soft melodic voice, as if the liquids would warm the day.
"The tea is cannelle."


Quaker State Corp.(KSF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


All Eyes on Agassi in All-U.S. Semifinals
The clothes are straight from skateboard heaven, but the goatee adds a satanic touch.
The earrings and bandana have given him pirate power, and so far all five of Andre Agassi's Australian Open opponents have walked the plank at the briskest possible pace.
Here in Australia, where they are short on ozone, Agassi is in the zone.
The master of contradictions, the superstar who is wearing the Jolly Roger as this season's corporate logo, is making no bones about that.


DSC Communications (DIGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Block Drug Co.  (BLOCA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tabloid Themes for a Tabloid Trial
White woman versus black man.
Black man versus black man.
The images are stark, as if the producer of "The Saga of O. J.," which finally had its grand opening on all major networks this week after months of promos, previews and pilots, had chosen his major players to project the show's most highly charged elements.
In the courtroom, the lawyers are the stars and the opening days have featured Marcia Clark, the tightly strung lead prosecutor, for whom a smile seems an effort; the down-to-earth Christopher Darden, also speaking for the people, and Johnnie L. Cochran, the expansive, assured lawyer who has lately taken over at the command center of the crowded defense table.
They kept you watching.


Marion Merrell Dow (MKC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hannaford Brothers Co.  (HRD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Teachers' Salaries: Wrong Place to Cut
To the Editor:
As a former student in the Irvington, N.Y., Union Free School District, I am saddened to read that some residents are protesting school budget increases (front page, Jan. 18).
The question is not whether suburban teachers are paid too much, but why their urban counterparts are paid so little.


Sun Micro, Visa Deal Likely Today
Sun Microsystems Inc. and Visa Interactive are expected to announce on Thursday that the credit-card company has adopted Sun's computer hardware for a range of home banking services now being planned for the nation's banks.
Sun Microsystems, the Mountain View, Calif., maker of computer work stations, has achieved a headstart in a market that is predicted to grow to more than $1 billion by the end of the decade, analysts said.


Ferro Corp.(FOE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Third-World Quebec
To the Editor:
Re your Jan. 24 Business Day article on Canada's weak dollar: Such problems will continue as long as the Quebec elite persist in their quest for power under the guise of independence.
With companies just beginning again to invest in Canada, another referendum this year will renew the age-old doubt that may pull Canada back into recession.


Newark County in Red
The new County Executive in Essex County, N.J., which includes Newark, warned that the county was facing a deficit of nearly one-third of its operating budget.
Faulting his Democratic predecessors, the Republican Executive, James W. Treffinger, said he would not raise taxes but would control spending and lay off workers if necessary.
Article, page B1.


Ceridian Corp.(CEN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Musicland Stores Corp.(MLG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


World News Briefs; Haiti's Justice Minister Resigns Under Criticism
Facing increasing criticism because of a lack of progress in reforming the court and penal system, the Government of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide announced today that its Minister of Justice had resigned.
Prime Minister Smarck Michel said in a news conference this morning that Ernest Luc Malebranche, the head of the Government's efforts to overhaul the justice system, had sent a letter of resignation but that Mr.
Malebranche had offered no explanation for the move.
Mr.
Michel did not name a successor.


Music Notes
A Seventh Kochel Edition
The Kochel catalogue, the chronological, descriptive listing of Mozart's works that has long been indispensable to musicians, scholars and Mozart lovers, is about to undergo a thorough revision.
The New Kochel, as it is to be called, will be the seventh edition and the fourth major revision since Ludwig Ritter von Kochel published the original in 1862.
But it will be the first published simultaneously in English and German, and it is the first to have an American editor, Neal A. Zaslaw, a Mozart specialist who is a professor of music at Cornell University and the author of several works on Mozart.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Dec. 28 about the Mar-a-Lago Club in Palm Beach, Fla., which is owned by Donald Trump, referred erroneously to a transaction involving the Prince and Princess of Wales.
Mr.
Trump said yesterday that the Prince and Princess were offered honorary free memberships and that they had not responded to the offer.
They did not apply to join or pay an initiation fee.


Lin Broadcasting Corp.(LINB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


House Disciplines a Republican for Remarks About Clinton
Clamping down on one of its own, the House of Representatives today disciplined Robert K. Dornan and took the rare action of banning the California Republican from taking part in the floor debate for 24 hours after he made a personal attack against President Clinton over his State of the Union address.
Before Mr.
Dornan set off the commotion today, a succession of his Republican colleagues had gone to the microphone to comment on Mr.
Clinton's speech, many of them joking that he sounded more like a Republican than a Democrat.


Benjamin Weintraub, 89, a Fiscal Adviser
Benjamin Weintraub, an expert on bankruptcy and corporate reorganization who advised the City Council during New York's fiscal crisis in the 1970's, died on Jan. 14 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 89.
The cause was heart failure, said his son-in-law, Michael J. Crames of Scarsdale, N.Y.


Arkansas Best Corp.(ABFS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


When Cinderella Is a Teacher; Awards Are the Glass Slipper at the Annual Ball
It is back to the chalkboard for Beverly Davidman, an award-winning math teacher at Norman Thomas High School in midtown Manhattan.
But for a brief moment last semester, she was Cinderella.
There she was among celebrities in a gilded Washington theater as part of the televised American Teacher Awards presented by the Walt Disney Company.
Her glittery gold and black velvet dress was courtesy of Disney wardrobe, to be returned the next day.
A limousine took her from airport to hotel.
The actress Melanie Griffith asked for "the envelope, please" and announced Mrs.
Davidman as the country's outstanding teacher in mathematics.


COLLEGE HOCKEY LEAGUE
Five Stars
Jacques Joubert, Boston University's captain and forward, is the Hockey East player of the week after having registered three goals and three assists against Boston College.
The rookie of the week was Casey Kesselring, Merrimack's freshman center who had two goals and two assists, as the Warriors won twice on the road from Alaska-Fairbanks.
Colgate's Chris DeProfio is the ECAC player of the week with three goals, three assists, in the two victories over Cornell.


Jenny Craig Inc.(JC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Greenspan Remark Raises Stocks
Stocks followed other financial markets higher yesterday, after Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, made some ambiguous remarks about inflation that seemed to indicate to many traders that any increase in interest rates next week might be the last for a while.
But some analysts said a rally in the bond market, which helped lift stock prices, might have been caused in large part by technical factors.


Economic Scene; In the cloud of a natural disaster, some see a silver lining.
THE Kobe earthquake destroyed 10,000 buildings, closed one of Japan's major harbors and broke the back of the transportation system.
Look on the bright side, though.
The monumental effort of reconstruction will help to power the sluggish Japanese economy from its worst recession in decades.
Sound familiar?
You've heard it before -- and often from practitioners of what is called the dismal science.
But don't take it too seriously.
For, as any introductory textbook in economics will confirm, this quarter-truth drawn from the ideas of John Maynard Keynes begs to be qualified.
And who better to do the qualifying than Paul Samuelson, author of the first economics textbook to bring the ideas of Keynes into the mainstream?


Remembering Auschwitz
At its worst, this has been Satan's century.
In no previous age have people shown so great an aptitude, and appetite, for killing millions of other people for reasons of race, religion or class.
Nowhere else was this more grimly borne out than at the Auschwitz death camp, whose existence became universally known 50 years ago tomorrow.
Initially, even its Red Army liberators could scarcely credit what they came upon in southern Poland -- slave laborers thin as matchsticks, children chewed up in demented laboratory experiments, and the remains of four gas chambers and crematorium ovens that once claimed 20,000 victims a day.
The images of Auschwitz are scorched in memory: the bodies heaped like kindling, the 43,000 pairs of shoes, the piles of human hair.


Appeals Court Does Not Delay Slaying Trial
A state appeals court in Brooklyn declined yesterday to delay the Nassau County murder trial of Colin Ferguson, saying it was unclear whether Mr.
Ferguson's legal adviser was authorized to act on his behalf.
A motion to delay the trial was brought by Alton G. Rose, a lawyer who was appointed by a Nassau County Court judge to act as Mr.
Ferguson's legal adviser.
Mr.
Ferguson, who is serving as his own lawyer, is accused of killing six people on a Long Island Rail Road train in December 1993.


Likely Successor to Chief Is Picked at Merrill Lynch
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company named David H. Komansky, head of its institutional sales and trading business, president and chief operating officer yesterday.
The decision virtually guarantees that Mr.
Komansky will take over management of Merrill, the country's largest securities company, in 1997, when Daniel P. Tully, the current chairman and chief executive, has said he will retire.
"This gives Dave a couple of years to work closer with me," Mr.
Tully, 63, said in an interview yesterday.
In a statement issued earlier in the day, Mr.
Tully praised Mr.
Komansky, who he said had "proven himself an inspiration and effective leader in every position he has held."


Subway Victim's Kin Plans to Sue the City
A lawyer representing the family of a woman who was pushed into the path of a subway train in Manhattan earlier this month said yesterday that he planned to file a wrongful death suit against the city and state.
An escaped state mental patient, Reuben Harris, has been charged with the slaying.


Justice Dept. and F.D.I.C. to Review Commerce Secretary's Dealings
Responding to a flurry of Republican charges, the Justice Department and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation said separately today that they were beginning reviews of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown's financial dealings.
Attorney General Janet Reno today forwarded to the Justice Department's Criminal Division for review a recent letter to her by 14 Republican senators asking whether Mr.
Brown had avoided taxes or misled Congress.
Carl Stern, a spokesman for Ms.
Reno, said he expected the division to send the letter to its public integrity section.


Bethlehem Steel (BS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BMC Software Inc.(BMCS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bombay Co. (BBA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Nynex Deal Opens Door For Rivals
Taking a big step toward broader competition in New York State's local telephone market, the Nynex Corporation reached an agreement yesterday that would enable a rival to offer a full range of competing services.
The agreement with the MFS Communications Company could serve as a model for companies in other parts of the country.
It addresses two of the most intractable financial disputes that have made it difficult for new entrants to take on established telephone companies.


TV and Radio: Games With Replacements Do Not Rate
Like a software program that has not been debugged, major league baseball's plan to staff team rosters with replacement players of dubious skills has spawned myriad problems.
One of the biggest will be whether television and radio outlets will demand rebates to air the games -- or not carry them at all.
When major league players went on strike, rights fees were generally not paid to teams because no games were played.


DUPONT (E. I.) DE NEMOURS &amp; CO. (DD,N)
The DuPont Company said yesterday that its net income for the fourth quarter and the year reached record levels in 1994 as earnings growth from chemicals, fibers and plastics businesses offset a decline in petroleum earnings.
The company posted fourth-quarter net income of $646 million, or 95 cents a share, compared with income from operations a year earlier of $329 million, or 48 cents a share.


McKesson Corp.(MKN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Micro Warehouse Inc.(MWHS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stevie Wonder's World of Love
Until he performed at Radio City Music Hall on Tuesday night, Stevie Wonder had not played a full-length New York concert since 1988.
It was the first of two sold-out shows, and he wasn't a bit rusty; his ballads inspired mass hand holding, and he brought a thoroughly integrated crowd to its feet, dancing, for "Signed, Sealed, Delivered" and "Superstition."
For two and a half hours, Mr.
Wonder crisscrossed a repertory that stretches back to the 1960's.
While he squeezed some songs into medleys, he didn't get around to all of his hits.
He also played a few songs from his next album, "Conversation Peace" (Motown), which is due in March.


Baker Hughes Inc.(BHI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Compaq's Net Up but Stock Falls
Shares in the Compaq Computer Corporation plummeted yesterday in unusually heavy trading after the company released fourth-quarter earnings that fell a few pennies short of Wall Street analysts' expectations.
The slide by Compaq, the present leader in the personal computer marketplace, dragged many other technology stocks down as well.
Compaq shares closed yesterday at $37.375, down 12 percent, or $5, on volume of nearly 20 million shares -- far and away the most actively traded issue on the Big Board.
Hewlett-Packard was down $2.375, to $103; Dell Computer off $1.875, to $42.75, and I.B.M. down $1.625, to $72.375.


Georgia-Pacific Corp.(GP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 104TH CONGRESS: THE VOTERS  Some Who Like What They Heard but Are Sure They've Heard It Before; Liking the Message, Doubting the Messenger
When the President concluded his address, Gregg Minkoff sat up from his bean and cheese burritos and applauded.
But then, the more he thought, the more deflated he seemed.
"He's an outstanding communicator," said Mr.
Minkoff, a history major at the University of California at Los Angeles.
"He's intelligent. The words he used were very meaningful to me. But we've been down this road so many times. I'm leery; I'm very leery."


ATOM ARMS PACT RUNS INTO A SNAG
The United States has run into surprising resistance in negotiations here intended to extend a treaty that has limited the spread of nuclear weapons for a quarter of a century.
Leading arms experts say that influential nonnuclear nations may muster enough votes to block a permanent extension of the treaty against the spread of nuclear weapons, which was signed in 1968 and put into effect two years later.
Many attribute the flagging support partly to a lack of leadership on the issue from the Clinton Administration.


Corrections
A news analysis article yesterday about President Clinton's State of the Union Message rendered a word incorrectly in some copies in a quotation from the President.
He advocated making Government "leaner, not meaner"; he did not say "and" meaner.


Asarco Inc.(AR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


G.O.P. GAINS ALLIES IN MOVE TO REPEAL ASSAULT-RIFLE BAN
More than two dozen Democrats in the House are prepared to oppose President Clinton and join a band of Republicans who are about to undertake an early effort to repeal the nationwide ban on assault weapons that was passed by Congress and signed into law just last year.
Egged on by the National Rifle Association, rank-and-file members of both parties in the House want to include a repeal of the ban in anti-crime legislation that could be discussed in committee as early as Friday and could reach the House floor early next month.


As Kobe Comes Back to Life, Happiness Is a Bath
In a neighborhood where hearses and teetering buildings underscore the devastation of last week's great earthquake, the army has set up special tents that for many residents are the main landmark in the restoration of vital services.
The tents contain public baths, and the thrill they have aroused illustrates the way Kobe and neighboring cities are beginning the slog back to normality.
Japanese are among the most scrubbed people on earth, and their army may be the only one that travels with communal baths.


Leader Calls Essex County Debt-Riddled
The new Essex County Executive warned today that the county was facing a deficit of $161.5 million, or nearly one-third of its operating budget, accusing his predecessors of mismanaging the books so badly that he had been left with a pile of unpaid debts.
The County Executive, James W. Treffinger, a Republican who won office by painting the county government as corrupted by decades of Democratic rule, vowed that he would not raise taxes to make up for the deficit.
He said he would try to close it by selling assets, controlling spending and, if necessary, laying off some of the county's 6,000 workers.


Avnet Inc.(AVT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Bankrupting Terror
President Clinton's order to help curb terrorism by freezing the American assets of 30 Arab and Israeli groups and individuals raises two basic questions: will it work?
And if it is such a good tool, why was it never tried before?
The executive order, signed by Mr.
Clinton on Monday night and highlighted in his State of the Union Address on Tuesday, is intended to prevent terrorist groups and individuals or their supporters in the United States from using the American banking system or raising money to finance terrorism.


Wang Laboratories Inc.(WANG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ashland Coal I(ACI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Norfolk Southern Corp.(NSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accounts
*
Glamour Shots, Oklahoma City, to Puskar Gibbon Chapin, Dallas, to handle advertising for the retail fashion photography company, previously handled by Richards/Gravelle, Dallas.
Though billings were not disclosed, Advertising Age estimated them at $6 million to $8 million.


Lukens Inc.(LUC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Police in Israel Identify Two Gazans as the Suicide Bombers
As both Israeli and Palestinian security forces rounded up Islamic militants in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, the Israeli police said today that it had confirmed that two Gazans carried out the suicide bombing this week that killed 19 Israelis and wounded 65 others.
Until now, the authorities had said they could not tell from badly mutilated body parts if more than one bomber was involved, as announced by Islamic Holy War, the group taking responsibility.


Two Women Charged in Series Of Brooklyn Armed Robberies
At first glance, the series of robberies at a Brooklyn housing project had the trappings of typical holdups, the police said.
The robbers, wearing hats and masks, followed victims into elevators, put a gun to their heads and dashed away with money or jewelry.
But soon the police noticed two things that were unusual.
All the victims were women. So were the suspects.


British Royals' Antics Are Hardly New
To the Editor:
A footnote to "Britons Ask, Whither the Throne?" (Home section, Jan. 19): You leave an impression of respectability as the norm, disreputability as the exception.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed Lance Robbins, second baseman. National League
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Announced a one-year working agreement with the Campeche Piratas of the Mexican Summer League, effective Feb. 1.


Biogen Inc.(BGEN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Currents; Odes to the 60's
MARCH 1 is the scheduled publication date for "New York 1960" (Monacelli Press, $125), a 1,347-page salute to Manhattan's glass-box years, by Robert A. M. Stern, Thomas Mellins and David Fishman.
In anticipation, the Architectural League of New York will have lectures on Feb. 2, 6 and 9, with culture-quakers like Tom Wolfe and Philip Johnson, at Rockefeller University.
Tickets: $10; $25 for three.
Reservations: (212) 753-1722.


AMC Entertainment (AEN,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Age of Burials In Honduras Stuns Scholars
A laboratory analysis of material from a Honduran cave filled with human skulls and bones, which archeologists examined for the first time last September, has produced two potentially significant surprises.
People were burying their dead in the cave as long ago as 3,000 years, about the time King David was capturing Jerusalem and before the founding of Rome.
This was a considerably earlier time than previously estimated and means that the cave holds the earliest scientifically dated evidence for the emergence of complex society in Honduras.
It may be that only the Olmec society of southern Mexico is older in Central America.


Sensormatic Electronics Corp.(SRM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Radio Host's Pitches Draw Inquiry
Sonny Bloch calls himself a consumer advocate, financial expert and best-selling author.
He is also the host of a long-running financial radio show, dispensing investment advice to millions of listeners across the country, including thousands who tune in to WOR in New York.
But after 15 years on the air, this financial guru is facing a lot of unwanted questions on three fronts:


Schlumberger Ltd.(SLB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2 Management Shifts In San Francisco
The San Francisco offices of two agencies have announced changes in top management.
At Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Jack Boland, executive vice president and director of North American operations for the last four years, has been named executive vice president and general manager in San Francisco.
Mr.
Boland, 38, succeeds Richard Ward, 39, who has led the San Francisco office since 1991; Mr.
Ward will take a unspecified title with a new assignment in strategic planning and development.


One Boisterous Rookie, Bar None
William Floyd has said that he was the best fullback in the National Football League last year -- even while he was at Florida State.
Before the 49ers signed him, Floyd's agent said his client was the best fullback in football, "bar none."
The nickname stuck, and Floyd whips it out like a driver's license in case anyone doubts his credentials.
For a team that was once the model of professional football decorum, the end-zone-celebrating, trash-talking Floyd is the epitome of the new-model 49er.


First Data Corp.(FDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Public Service Co. of Colo.  (PSR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Power Play: Pierce and Sanchez in Final
In the uncharged atmosphere peculiar to matches that begin in the morning, long before the players or the spectators are able to conjure up peak competitiveness or fanaticism, the regal Mary Pierce reached her first Australian Open final with a 6-3, 6-1 upset of second-seeded Conchita Martinez.
And just after Pierce reached her second career Grand Slam final, the top-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario reached her seventh Slam final after dominating the unseeded Marianne Werdel Witmeyer, 6-4, 6-1.


Minnesota Mining &amp; Mfg.  Co.(MMM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Israel Permits New Building In West Bank
Hoping to dispel widespread confusion over its policy on settlements, the Israeli Government approved plans today for at least 2,200 new apartments this year on the West Bank near Jerusalem, but said it would slow the pace of construction.
Whether confusion has ended is not clear.


Two Military Chiefs Tell of Need for Money
The nation's two top military officials warned today that the armed forces' combat readiness would drastically suffer if Congress failed to approve $2.6 billion in additional Pentagon spending by March 31.
Defense Secretary William J. Perry and Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told the House National Security Appropriations Subcommittee that the Pentagon needed the additional money to pay for unplanned operations in Haiti, Bosnia, Cuba and the Persian Gulf.


Turning the Headlines Sideways Into Laughs
It seems only fair to point out that David and Amy Sedaris, the brother and sister who write plays under the name the Talent Family, aren't the first people to couch welfare reform in the terms of an idealistic 1930's movie.
That distinction belongs to Newt Gingrich, who famously suggested that Hillary Clinton watch "Boys Town" to learn something about the virtues of orphanages.
But even Mr.
Gingrich couldn't hope to emulate the manic verve of the Sedarises' "One Woman Shoe," a slashingly funny slums-to-stardom yarn at La Mama E.T.C.
Besides, Mr. and Ms.
Sedaris are obviously thinking more about other Mickey Rooney movies, the kind in which Mickey, with the stalwart assistance of Judy Garland, learned that putting on a show can provide a heaven-sent means of paying debts and bringing enemies together.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the budget proposed by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey misstated the name of a Democratic Assemblyman from Camden who criticized it.
He is Joseph J. Roberts Jr., not Joseph Rogers.


Proposal Beyond Politics
The House of Representatives today began debating a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced Federal budget, one of the most profound measures to come before Congress in years.
Set aside the claims and counterclaims about Democrats being profligate and Republicans wanting to destroy Social Security and bankrupt the states.
Those are political side issues.
What is really at stake is a fundamental and ostensibly permanent change in the way the American Government works.
Powerful arguments can be made for and against such a change.
Here is an examination of three of the strongest arguments for such a constitutional amendment and the way opponents are rebutting them.


Hilda Cole Espy, Writer, 83
Hilda Cole Espy, an author who wrote about her adventures in rearing five children after an early career as a publicity agent for Kate Smith and Fred Waring, died on Friday at the Pocono Medical Center in East Stroudsburg, Pa.
She was 83 and lived in Delaware Water Gap, Pa.
The cause was heart failure, said her daughter Freddy Espy Plimpton.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.45
3.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.76
5.79
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.17
6.23
3.12
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.89
7.84
5.71
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.87
7.92
6.30
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.74
8.78
7.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.81
6.81
5.50
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


GREENSPAN GIVES STRONG IMPRESSION RATES WILL CLIMB
Giving the strong impression that the Federal Reserve has not yet finished raising short-term interest rates, Alan Greenspan told Congress today that several harbingers of revived inflation required the Fed to remain "vigilant."
In an appearance before the Senate Finance Committee, Mr.
Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, avoided direct comment on the central bank's policy-making meeting next week, where Federal Reserve officials have long been expected to vote to raise interest rates again.
At the same time, Mr.
Greenspan said nothing to disabuse Wall Street of that notion.
In comments that echoed those of other Federal Reserve officials in recent days, he clearly implied that the economy remained too robust to count higher inflation out.


Saul Rogovin, 71, A Former Pitcher
Saul Rogovin, a Brooklyn-born pitcher who spent eight years in the major leagues and 12 as a high school teacher in New York City, died on Monday.
He was 71.
He had been suffering from cancer, his wife, Evelyn, said.


Devils Do Everything but Get a Victory
A verbal lashing by a coach can sometimes light a huge spark under a team.
Just ask the Devils.
Coach Jacques Lemaire gave them a lecture at practice Tuesday about their lack of concentration, and tonight they responded.
The Devils played with much more intensity against the Buffalo Sabres than they had in their first game of the season, a tie at Hartford on Sunday.
But neither the fire nor the focus were enough against goaltender Dominic Hasek, and the Devils were 2-1 losers to the Sabres.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
The Germanic Tradition With Russian Ferocity  Yevgeny Kissin, pianist
Carnegie Hall


Cordis Corp.(CORD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Blackhawks Blast Oilers  Joe Murphy snapped a scoreless tie midway through the second period, when Chicago outshot the Edmonton Oilers by 16-1, and the Blackhawks rolled to a 5-1 victory last night in their long-awaited United Center opener.
Chris Chelios had a goal and two assists and Keith Carney, Jeff Shantz and Bernie Nicholls also scored for Chicago.
It was the first victory after an 0-2 start for the Blackhawks, whose 65-year run at Chicago Stadium ended in the playoffs last spring. (AP) Canadiens 2, Capitals 0: At Montreal, goaltender Patrick Roy stopped all 33 shots against him in the Canadiens' shutout victory over Washington.
Both Montreal scores, by Yves Racine on the power play and by Benoit Brunet on an empty netter with 23 seconds left, came in the third period of the goaltending duel between Roy and Washington's Olaf Kolzig. (AP)


Currents; Embracing the Plastic Age
TO mark the 60th anniversary of its design collection, the Museum of Modern Art will show, on Feb. 16, some "Recent Acquisitions" -- about 40 objects, many made of materials that did not exist when the museum's design department was formed.
The objects include (clockwise from top right) Apple Computer's 1993 adjustable keyboard, Technics's 1988 SST-1 loudspeaker and Flos's 1992 hanging lamp by Achille Castiglioni.
The museum is also reissuing the 1934 catalogue from its first design show, "Machine Art." Key pieces from that installation (above left) will also be on display.


San Diego Gas &amp; Electric Co.(SDO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Albert W. Tucker, 89, Pioneering Mathematician
Albert William Tucker, a leading mathematician whose ideas and teaching influenced economics and business in the postwar era, died on Wednesday.
He was 89.
Professor Tucker was chairman of the mathematics department at Princeton University in the 1950's and 1960's, but effectively presided over it during World War II.
He died of pneumonia at the Presbyterian Home of Meadow Lakes, a nursing home in Hightstown, N.J., after a long illness, according to a spokeswoman for Princeton University.


Before the Artist Became a Mystic
By the time of his death in 1976 at the age of 67, Minor White had become one of the most paradoxical figures in photography.
Widely respected as a photographer and teacher, he was also increasingly the subject of distrust and even scorn from younger artists put off by his sweeping and often esoteric pronouncements about the nature of photography and creation.
With his flowing white hair, a circle of devoted acolytes, and often cryptic statements about such topics as Art and Spirit (usually at least implicitly capitalized), White lent himself to parody, and his celebrity overwhelmed his reputation as a photographer.
A small but well-selected show at the 292 Gallery in SoHo offers a chance to look again at White as an artist, before he became a guru.


Accounts
*
Renaissance Cosmetics Inc., Greenwich, Conn., and New York, has consolidated its account at McCabe &amp; Co., New York, which handles several of its fragrance brands like Chantilly and French Vanilla.
McCabe becomes the first agency for the company's Cosmar Inc. nail care products, and adds advertising and marketing responsibilities, previously handled in-house and on a project basis, for Dana Group, which was recently acquired by Renaissance, with fragrance brands like Tabu and Canoe.
The combined billings were estimated to exceed $20 million. *
Freezer Queen Foods, Buffalo, to Klein &amp; Solin, New York, to handle advertising for its Freezer Queen and Smart Cuisine lines of frozen meals, previously at Blattner/Brunner, Buffalo.
The billings were estimated to exceed $1 million.


Sonat Inc.(SNT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.63
5.46
3.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.76
5.76
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.15
6.17
3.11
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.74
7.89
5.67
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.83
7.87
6.26
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.70
8.74
7.18
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.79
6.81
5.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


German Bishops Cite Catholic 'Denial and Guilt' at Holocaust
In an unusually blunt admission, Germany's Roman Catholic bishops have stated that Catholics share responsibility for the Nazi Holocaust.
The bishops deplored the failure of German Catholics to act against Nazism, and asserted that they now bear a special responsibility to speak out against anti-Semitism.


Sexual Harassment Charged at Cornell
Based on sexual harassment complaints from four former students, a Cornell University ethics committee has recommended sanctions against James B. Maas, a prominent psychology professor known both for his research on sleep and for the dozens of educational films and television specials he has produced.
The four women, who graduated between 1990 and 1994, worked for Professor Maas in several capacities, acting as teaching assistants, nannies to his children and members of his film crew.
They charge that repeatedly, in the course of their work, he made suggestive remarks and kissed and hugged them.
The woman who graduated in 1990 also said he had once grabbed her breasts, leading her to run downstairs and lock herself into a bathroom for several hours to protect herself.


Centex Corp.(CTX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ryan's Family Steak Houses Inc.(RYAN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Standard Pacific Corp.(SPF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Glaxo to Acquire Affymax
Glaxo P.L.C. agreed today to acquire Affymax N.V., a drug discovery company based in Palo Alto, Calif., for about $533 million in cash.
Affymax said its board had approved the deal.
The agreement comes just days after Glaxo made an unsolicited $14 billion bid to acquire the drug company Wellcome P.L.C., which rejected the offer today.


Sony President May Leave Job
The president of the Sony Corporation hinted today that he would step down from his post in June.
In a meeting with reporters, Norio Ohga, who turns 65 this year, denied rumors that he would be leaving his job this month, saying he hoped his popularity as president would last until June.
Sony officials said that in June, at the annual shareholders meeting, Mr.
Ohga might become chairman, a less powerful post that was vacated in November by the company's co-founder, Akio Morita, who suffered a stroke last year.


Sports of The Times; Orioles Are the Pride Of America
IT'S nice to hear elected public servants talking about ending the baseball strike.
But how can we help them?
I have a suggestion.
Go out and buy a Baltimore Orioles baseball cap and wear it, day and night, until further notice.
Their black-and-orange insignia has become a symbol of resistance to scab baseball.


Bard (C.R.) Inc.(BCR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Merrill Lynch Will Merge Units Under One Executive
Only a day after naming a new president, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company said yesterday that it was merging its investment banking and debt and equity sales and trading divisions under a single executive.
Herbert M. Allison Jr., who has been the head of Merrill Lynch's investment banking business, will expand his responsibilities by taking over the company's corporate and institutional sales and trading group, the job vacated by David H. Komansky, who was named president and chief operating officer on Wednesday.


Haunted by Conspiracy
The allegation that Malcolm X's daughter Qubilah Shabazz conspired to murder Louis Farrakhan focuses attention on two crucial issues: the persistent role of conspiracy theories in contemporary black culture and the contradictory legacy of Malcolm X, assassinated in a Harlem ballroom 30 years ago next month.
The Shabazz case brings to the surface a submerged but powerful current of lingering suspicions toward the Government.
It is well known that for decades the Federal Bureau of Investigation carried out an aggressive campaign of monitoring and subverting black leaders and organizations.
From the Southern Christian Leadership Conference to the Black Panthers, from Paul Robeson to Jesse Jackson, black activists were subjected to a range of perverse tactics designed to distort their public image and undercut their influence.


Governor Whitman's Trade-Offs
The popularity of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's plan to cut New Jersey's personal income tax by 30 percent in three years cannot be disputed.
Her swift delivery on that promise has propelled her onto national television and high up the list of potential Republican nominees for Vice President.
But the publicity must not obscure the facts.
Mrs.
Whitman tells the nation that she and her party stand for smaller government, but the $15.9 billion budget she presented this week is $1 billion more than the last one by the previous Governor, Jim Florio.
What's more, her stunning record of income tax reduction has overshadowed its less welcome accompaniment: increases in other taxes in the name of fees and "closing loopholes," and postponement of state expenses through long-term borrowing and the delay of payments to public pension funds.


Chechens Say Russia Troops Commit Vengeful Brutalities
There is blood on the badly scarred walls of 38 Petropavlovskaya Street.
It has been there since Wednesday, neighbors said, when Russian special forces troops entered the courtyard and shot two brothers who had been accused of fighting against them.
There was no resistance, according to several residents of the charred building who said today that they had seen the shooting.
There was only rage and vengeance.
Residents of Grozny say Russian soldiers, part of a force that was badly mauled in its early attempts to seize the capital of the secessionist region of Chechnya, have turned increasingly brutal now that they control large tracts of the city.


Dr. Kenneth Sterling, Thyroid Specialist, 74, Dies
Dr.
Kenneth Sterling, a specialist in thyroid diseases whose research advanced knowledge of how thyroid hormones affect human metabolism, died on Jan. 12 at his home in Riverdale, the Bronx.
He was 74.
The cause apparently was complications from an aneurysm, his family said.


Keep in Mind
CHINESE NEW YEAR LION DANCES, starting tomorrow, with the Fu-Jow Pai Martial Arts troupe at 1 P.M. in front of the China Institute, 125 East 65th Street, Manhattan.
Free.
Featuring a Beijing opera demonstration and a face painting drop-in workshop at 2 P.M.
Information: (212) 744-8181.
Other lion dances are to be held on Tuesday, from noon to 6 P.M., in Chinatown, starting at 19 and 22 Mott Street; on Feb. 4 in Flushing, Queens, starting at 11 A.M., at 39-01 Main Street, and at 11 A.M., at Northern Boulevard and Main Street; on Feb. 5, from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., at various locations throughout Chinatown, and on Feb. 5, in Borough Park, Brooklyn, starting at noon, at Eighth Avenue and 52d Street.
Information: (212) 334-0726 or 334-0711.
"WALT DISNEY'S WORLD ON ICE," a $6 million extravaganza of "Beauty and the Beast" on ice, with the Howard Ashman and Alan Menken score and Russian skaters.
Today through Sunday at the Brendan Byrne Arena, Route 3, East Rutherford, N.J.; Jan. 31 to Feb. 5 at Nassau Coliseum, 1255 Hempstead Turnpike, Uniondale, L.I., and Feb. 17 to 26 at Radio City Music Hall, 1260 Avenue of the Americas, at 50th Street.
Various schedules.
Tickets: At Byrne and Nassau, $12.50 to $32.50; at Radio City, $17.50 to $35.
Ticketmaster: (212) 307-7171, (201) 507-8900, (516) 888-9000 or (914) 454-3388.


Gaylord ContainerCorp.(GCR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Table of Contents: College, College, College


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
While much of the Northeast remains in the doldrums, Massachusetts, the state hit hardest in the recession, is coming back.
But this recovery is different.
Big manufacturers like General Electric and Digital Equipment are on the sidelines.
Massachusetts is counting on small companies to provide jobs.  [ Page A1. ]


10 Years of Serrano, Both Involved and Not
The photographer Andres Serrano became prominent with a bang in 1989 when his image of a crucifix submerged in urine caught the attention of Senator Jesse Helms.
The dust-up that followed made Mr.
Serrano an instant political hero in some quarters and helped send Federal arts financing spiraling down the drain.
Overnight sensations usually look different in the cool light of day, and Mr.
Serrano is no exception.
The artist on view in "Andres Serrano: Works 1983-1993," a retrospective at the New Museum of Contemporary Art, is not a political firebrand; in fact, the issue-oriented work on view looks surprisingly sparkless.
What he is is an artist quick to tackle big themes while staying shy of their complexities, an impressive technician and a moralist whose roots lie less in contemporary theory than in the Roman Catholicism of his childhood.


Joseph Mruk, 91, Ex-Mayor of Buffalo
Joseph Mruk, a former Mayor of Buffalo and Congressman who took up as his cause the occupation of Poland by the Soviet Union, died on Saturday in the Furgala Nursing Home in Lancaster, N.Y.
He was 91 and lived in Cheektowaga, N.Y.
He health had been in decline for a number of years, said a spokesman for the Melvin J. Sliwinski Funeral Home in Cheektowaga.


Fremont General Corp.(FMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Molissa Fenley Benefit
Philip Glass, Anthony Davis, Diamanda Galas and Stephen Petronio are among the musicians and dancers who are to perform at 8 P.M.  tomorrow at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, in a benefit for Molissa Fenley, the choreographer and dancer.
Ms.
Fenley, who was to perform at the Joyce this week, sustained a serious injury to ligaments in her left knee on opening night and was forced to cancel her season.
The other performers to appear include Meredith Monk, Suzanne Vega, Peter Gordon and Sarah Skaggs.
Proceeds from the benefit are to go toward medical expenses and other costs.
Tickets are $50 and include a post-performance reception.
Information and charge: (212) 242-0800.


Henry Gladstone; Radio Newscaster, 83
Henry Gladstone, a newscaster on the New York radio station WOR for 32 years, died on Sunday in San Diego, where he moved after his retirement in 1977.
He was 83.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Seahawk Is Charged
LAMAR SMITH of the Seattle Seahawks was charged with one count of vehicular assault yesterday in the Dec. 1 accident that left teammate MIKE FRIER paralyzed.
King County prosecutor NORM MALENG said yesterday that Smith, a rookie running back, drank at least five beers and six and a half ounces of scotch during a three-hour period at two suburban Kirkland establishments before driving his 1992 Oldsmobile Bravada into a utility pole.


J. P. Morgan Says It Will Reduce Staff
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Company, the commercial banking concern that has also become a Wall Street securities firm, is now falling victim to Wall Street's roller-coaster cycles.
Morgan confirmed yesterday that it planned to lay off some of its staff in the next few months because of leaner times in most markets.
People close to the company said 5 to 10 percent of employees would be cut.


Trinova Corp.(TNV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


HOUSE APPROVES BILL TO MANDATE BALANCED BUDGET
The House of Representatives voted tonight to amend the Constitution for the 28th time in 203 years, to prohibit the Federal Government from spending more money than it takes in.
The vote was 300 to 132, with 3 Democrats not voting.
That is 12 more than the 288 votes, or two-thirds of the House members who were present, that is required to adopt a constitutional amendment.
Two Indiana Republicans, Representatives John Hostettler and Mark E. Souder, voted against the measure; 72 Democrats supported it.  [ Roll-call, page A16. ]


Art in Review
Shelby Lee Adams
O. K. Harris Gallery  383 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 4
Southern Gothic lives on in Shelby Lee Adams's photographs of poor people in the mountains of Appalachia.
Mr.
Adams's black-and-white images, taken with a large-format camera, record in lavish detail the squalid conditions in which some people in the region live.


Eastern Enterprises (EFU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31





Mexico Needs Vigorous Growth, Not Austerity; Free Trade as Welfare
To the Editor:
The collapse of the Mexican peso and the call for a $40 billion bailout are only two of the nasty side effects of the North American Free Trade Agreement that many of us predicted two years ago.
This is but the beginning of a process that will continue until Mexico is drained of natural resources and the United States is drained of jobs and money.


Sara Lee Corp.(SLE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wabash National (WNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Commerce Secretary Is Accused Of Failing to Disclose Income
A Republican Congressman charged today that Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown violated Federal financial disclosure requirements by failing to report $135,000 he received from a partnership in 1993.
The lawmaker, Representative William F. Clinger Jr., the chairman of the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee, made public copies of three checks Mr.
Brown received from the First International Communications Limited Partnership.
The existence of the partnership, a previously unknown corner of Mr.
Brown's finances, was disclosed on Monday by Mr.
Clinger.


Fishing Rights Ruling With Bounty of Anger
Chief Seattle, who is buried here within view of the city that was given his name, died more than 120 years ago.
But a treaty he signed with a simple "X" in 1855 continues to haunt ancestors of the Americans who claimed this land from the natives.
Citing a clause in that treaty giving 15 tribes in the region fishing rights, a Federal court ruling last month gave Indians the right to take up to half of the shellfish from Puget Sound, one of the nation's top producers of oysters, crabs and clams.


Driven to Comedy By a Life in Greenwich
JANE CONDON, The Housewife From Greenwich, stood in her kitchen explaining the local ways.
First, politics.
"Greenwich," she said.
"An old Indian word meaning 'Republican.' " Then, the usual fare.
"We have spaghetti, but this is Greenwich, so we call it pasta."
A Republican jab here, a cut to the upper crust there.
In this genteel suburb where the children grow up believing -- heck, knowing -- that they can be President some day, Ms.
Condon is making a career out of pounding on Greenwich.


Kotite's Master Plan
It was so shocking that the 49ers' owner, Edward J. DeBartolo Jr., bolted into the San Francisco locker room for a rare address to the team.
That's what happens when the 49ers are embarrassed.
The Philadelphia Eagles had just stomped them, 40-8, last Oct. 2.
It was the 49ers' worst defeat ever at Candlestick Park, their home field.


Medicaid Cuts to Private Nursing Care Will Inflict Real Pain; A Psychology Bargain
To the Editor:
Re "The Ugly Side of a Tax Cut" (editorial, Jan. 20): Your statement that the elimination of clinical psychology can be justified because it "would cause relatively little grief" is shortsighted.
It is unacceptable that patients treated by psychologists, most of whom have severe and chronic mental illnesses, be deprived of this essential service at a maximum reimbursement rate of only $36 per treatment session.


Study Finds Sharp Drop Last Year in Awards for Medical Malpractice Cases
Medical malpractice lawsuits reaped significantly smaller jury awards and settlements in 1994 than in the previous few years, a new study says, and malpractice lawyers attribute the change to the national dialogue on tort reform and soaring health care costs.
The study, by Jury Verdict Research, a research and publishing group in Horsham, Pa., also shows that juries hit hospitals much harder than doctors in malpractice cases.
Lawyers have long known that juries find it more difficult to return large awards against individuals than institutions, but some lawyers were surprised by the size of the gap.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a decline in penmanship misidentified the director of the Center for Excellence for Document Analysis and Recognition at the State University at Buffalo.
The director is Dr.
Sagur Srihari.
Dr.
Rohini Srihari, his wife, is a project manager there.
The article also misattributed a quotation about a computer that will help the Postal Service decipher addresses.
It was Sagur Srihari, not Rohini Srihari, who said, "Only certain words are possible for that ZIP code and street number, so the computer eliminates Bourbon because the street number doesn't correspond and selects Broadway."


Gannett Co. (GCI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Enron Corp.(ENE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM MAY EXPAND
The American Museum of Natural History, dogged by a reputation for stodginess despite recent renovations, is planning a major reconstruction and expansion intended to bring it into the realm of the latest generation of interactive science museums.
The centerpiece of the plan is a huge sphere that would replace the 59-year-old Hayden Planetarium.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Art in Review
Carl Andre  'Sand-Lime Instar'
Gagosian Gallery  980 Madison Avenue (near 77th Street)  Through Feb. 11
"Sand-Lime Instar" is a re-creation of an installation Carl Andre displayed at the Tibor de Nagy Gallery in Manhattan in March 1966.
Eight groups of off-white bricks form a series of plateaus and ridges on the gallery floor.
Mr.
Andre originally referred to the pieces as "Equivalents," since each rectangular group contains 120 bricks arranged two bricks high, with the length and width corresponding to various factors of 60: 3 bricks by 20, 4 by 15, 5 by 12 and 6 by 10.


Butler Manufacturing Co.  (BTLR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
The Peripherals column in Science Times on Tuesday about software for painting and drawing misidentified the program being replaced by Clarisdraw.
It is Macdraw, not Macpaint.


Dow Slips by 1.01 in Restrained Trading
The stock market ended another erratic session with little change yesterday in restrained trading, as traders awaited the Commerce Department's estimate today of fourth-quarter economic growth.
As such, the market continued on the trend that it has followed now for six straight sessions, in which it ended with little change but showed pronounced volatility during the day.


Sports of The Times; Steve Young's Tale About True Grit
THE quarterback's father is a devout Mormon, a strict disciplinarian of his five children, a regimented morning fitness nut.
His work is corporate law.
His nickname, earned at the age of 6, is Grit.
There is a story behind LaGrande Young's early transformation to Grit Young.
His wife, Sherry, was ready to share it one evening this week, but from a green leather chair in the Young's family room, he waved her off, saying, "Oh, that's not true."


Terra Industries(TRA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wellcome Rejects Bid By Glaxo
Wellcome P.L.C. today rejected the unsolicited $14 billion takeover offer made Monday by Glaxo P.L.C. as inadequate, but said it was putting itself up for sale in the hopes of attracting a better offer.
Acknowledging that it had no realistic hope of remaining independent since its largest shareholder, the Wellcome Trust, unexpectedly decided to sell its 39.5 percent stake, Wellcome instead sought to make Glaxo's offer the opening move in a bidding war among other pharmaceutical companies.


Chicago &amp; North Western Transportation (CNW,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Justin Industries (JSTN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On Stage, and Off
A Peek at 'How to Succeed'
A sneak peek this week in a Madison Square rehearsal studio at two numbers from "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying" showed how brave, or crazy, the director Des McAnuff has to be to take on a gray-flannel period piece that isn't able to pull the same cloak of nostalgia around it that a zoot-suit revival like "Guys and Dolls" can.
Desperate crapshooters are a hoot, but scheming executives ogling secretaries who are setting man traps are nowadays as likely to evoke litigation as laughter.
Has the show been updated for the times?
Well, in snapshot interviews after the numbers, it depended on whom you asked.
Hedy La Rue, the boss's floozy, is Luba Mason, who says she plays the role in a smarter, more sophisticated way than it was played in the 1967 movie, which she saw.
When the junior suits drool, Ms.
Mason fires a look that lets them know they're disgusting.
When things work out professionally for Finch and maritally for her, she gives him a thumbs-up to signal that they were cleverly in cahoots all along.


Defense Dept. Plans to Close Fewer Bases
Facing resistance from the military services, Defense Secretary William J. Perry today backtracked from a top Pentagon goal and said the round of base closings this year -- which had been expected to be the largest of four -- would be smaller than anticipated.
In a speech to the United States Conference of Mayors, Mr.
Perry said fewer bases would be ordered closed than in 1993 because "in previous rounds we closed those relatively easy ones."


Phillips Petroleum Co.(P,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Los Angeles Police Begin Inquiry Into Heiress's Death
The Los Angeles police have begun an investigation into the death of Doris Duke, the billionaire tobacco heiress, after a private nurse alleged that Miss Duke died from a lethal overdose of morphine administered by her doctor -- rather than from natural causes.
The Los Angeles District Attorney's office said yesterday that the nurse's statements, along with the allegations of other people who are contesting Miss Duke's will in New York City courts, had been forwarded to the Police Department.


In Narrow Focus, a Painter of Wide Ingenuity
The work of the Spanish artist Antoni Tapies has never traveled well, at least not to the United States.
In Spain, the 71-year-old artist is revered as the country's greatest living painter and eminence grise, an artist who weathered the cultural and political drought of the Franco regime without compromising his work.
A long list of museum retrospectives attests to the great esteem he inspires throughout Europe.
Mr.
Tapies, who was born and has lived nearly all his life in Barcelona, has exhibited regularly in New York City since 1953.
His big relieflike paintings, whose pocked and textured surfaces, built up with marble dust and incorporating incised words and symbols and sometimes found objects, suggest ancient urban walls.
They are well known here.
Yet his work has been overshadowed: by American Abstract Expressionism, by Pop and Minimalism, and also by a parade of his fellow Europeans, from Yves Klein and Joseph Beuys to newer arrivals like Sigmar Polke, Gerhard Richter and Georg Baselitz.


In Reversal, M.T.A. Chief Backs Merger
Yielding to pressure from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority yesterday dropped his opposition to a merger of the transit police with New York City's Police Department.
In a letter to Mr.
Giuliani, the chairman, Peter E. Stangl, said he would ask the authority's board to vote on a merger today, provided that the city continues to pay for policing the city's subways until the final details of a merger are worked out.
Mr.
Giuliani, who has threatened to cut off the city's financing for the transit police on Monday, readily accepted the condition yesterday evening.


Airgas Inc.(ARG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jazz Needs One More For the Road To Tie Mark
Jazz 120, SuperSonics 108
Utah won its 15th straight road game -- 1 short of the National Basketball Association record -- and 11th in a row over all, as the Jazz outscored Seattle by 12 points in the fourth quarter en route to a 120-108 victory over the SuperSonics last night at Tacoma, Wash.


After War in Chechnya, West Figures Russia Owes It Reform
With double-digit monthly inflation, the Chechnya war and some bizarre personnel appointments, Russia has dug itself a pretty deep hole with Western Governments and the International Monetary Fund, which is now debating a $6 billion loan Moscow is counting on.
The length and brutality of the Chechnya war, which is not over, have damaged Russia's reputation in the West and undermined political and economic stability here.
And the 1995 budget, which has just passed its second reading in Parliament, is based on outdated assumptions and has a big deficit that Moscow is counting on Western financing to fill.


Nicor Inc.(GAS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clark Equipment (CKL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Diner's Journal
Veggies With Grace
Leaving Hangawi, I felt cleansed and refreshed, as if I had come from a spa instead of a new vegetarian Korean restaurant.
This is partly because the experience of eating in that calm, elegant space with its smooth wooden bowls and heavy ceramic cups is so utterly peaceful.
And partly because even after a two-hour meal of many courses my body still felt buoyant.
Diners remove their shoes on entering and sit at low tables with their feet dangling comfortably into the sunken space beneath them.
They are surrounded by unearthly Korean music, wonderful objects and people who move with deliberate grace.
Everything here seems soft, slow and rhythmic.
And then the food begins to arrive.


Control Data Systems Inc.(CDAT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Surgery for Matthaus
LOTHAR MATTHAUS, the world player of the year in 1990 and 1991, underwent surgery yesterday to repair a torn Achilles' tendon in his left leg.


Homedco Group (HOME,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mexicans Deny They Would Order Border Crackdown in Return for U.S. Loan Guarantees
Mexican officials strongly denied today that they would agree to block migrants from crossing illegally into the United States or give American officials greater influence over their anti-drug efforts in return for $40 billion in proposed loan guarantees.
United States officials also backed away from suggestions on Wednesday that they would try to use the aid to win such concessions from Mexico.


INSIDE
For Mexico, a Record Loan
The I.M.F. tentatively agreed to lend Mexico $7.8 billion.
Mexico said it hoped that would boost its chances for American loan aid.
Page A10.
Changing Reality in Haiti
The United States will hand over its duties in Haiti to the United Nations in two months, and Haitians are finding it difficult to adjust.
Page A10.
Fewer Base Closings
The Secretary of Defense said 1995's round of base closings, expected to be the largest of four, would be smaller than planned.
Page A16.
Spy vs.
Counterspy
Officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation have finally discussed their setbacks in catching the C.I.A. turncoat Aldrich H. Ames.
Page A18.
No. 1 vs.
No. 2
Pete Sampras, the defending champion, will face second-seeded Andre Agassi in the men's final of the Australian Open.
Page B9.


United Technologies Corp.(UTX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


St. Paul Cos.(SPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Inside Art
A New Idea
What's a contemporary-art dealer like Larry Gagosian doing showing an Old Master like Rubens?
If Manhattan gallerygoers seem puzzled, the close-knit world of Old Master dealers has the answer: "It's a new idea in an art market that these days needs new ideas," said Julian Agnew, the London dealer.
"This is a way of making certain that contemporary-art collectors know what's possible in other fields. By lending a sketch, we're testing the waters."


Edwin M. Slote, 89, Bankruptcy Lawyer
Edwin Michael Slote, a lawyer who specialized in bankruptcy and corporate reorganization, died on Jan. 14 at his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 89.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


For Warhol, to Be Was to Be on Screen
Andy Warhol's statement that in the future everyone would be famous for 15 minutes was not just an idle remark.
The pop artist and film maker worked diligently to make that prediction come true in the movies he made during the 1960's.
In the early days of hisfilm-making career, just about anyone who wanted to be in a movie was encouraged to have a screen test at the artist's West 47th Street Factory in Manhattan.
According to Hollywood myth, Lana Turner was discovered sipping a soda at Schwab's Drug Store in downtown Los Angeles.
Many of those who flocked to be in Warhol's early films were Lana Turners in their own minds.
By the mid-1960's, the members of Warhol's constantly changing repertory company of bohemians, exhibitionists, narcissists and self-promoters were facetitously known as "superstars."


High-Rolling Auto Workers Make Good Fiction
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 20 news article about the strike by the United Automobile Workers at a parts plant in Flint, Mich., asserts that union workers for the Big Three auto makers earn $42 an hour in wages and benefits.


Upjohn Co.(UPJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mexico Needs Vigorous Growth, Not Austerity
To the Editor:
Ronald I. McKinnon's "Flood of Dollars, Sunken Pesos" (Op-Ed, Jan. 20) is one of the few accounts of Mexico's financial crisis that focuses on the devastating role of foreign investors.
But Mr.
McKinnon identifies only half of their fault.


Future Shop reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gillette Co. (G,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


N.B.A. Suspends Pippen for One Game
SCOTTIE PIPPEN, the star forward who wants to be traded from the Chicago Bulls, drew a one-game suspension and $6,000 fine from the National Basketball Association yesterday for a chair-throwing tantrum earlier in the week.
As a result of the suspension, Pippen did not make the trip to Orlando, Fla., for the Magic game last night and was also docked his one-game salary of $26,000.


Hawaiian Electric Industries (HE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Abroad at Home; Reform Or Wreck?
In 1960 the Food and Drug Administration received an application to market in this country a tranquilizer called Thalidomide, said to induce calm and sleep with no side effects.
Described as a miracle drug, it had been on sale in Europe for two years.
Dr.
Frances Kelsey of the F.D.A. was given the application to review.
She was cautious because Thalidomide had an unusual chemical structure.
She asked the Merrell Company, which wanted to market it, for more information.


Hudson Foods (HFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Strangers on a Train and Soul Mates for a Night
Richard Linklater, the director of "Slacker" and "Dazed and Confused," has an intoxicatingly romantic idea for his latest film.
In "Before Sunrise," which he wrote with Kim Krizan, Mr.
Linklater presents two attractive 20-something travelers who meet eagerly en route to Vienna and share a night of pure freedom there.
In this, the Eurailpass version of "An Affair to Remember," there's more than romantic love in the air.
There's also the exhilaration of making contact with a kindred spirit, of instant conversational intimacy between two strangers whose paths could lead them anywhere.
Along with the first blush of infatuation, there's the sense that life holds infinite possibility for characters who are still so avid and unencumbered.
When Celine (Julie Delpy) and Jesse (Ethan Hawke) recognize each other as instant soul mates, they talk about everything and nothing as if there were no tomorrow.


Caremark International (CK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rollins Inc.(ROL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Survivors Pray at the Crematories of Auschwitz
Against the backdrop of Crematory No. 2, Jewish survivors prayed today in the memory of the million Jews who perished at the hands of extraordinary evil here in the Auschwitz-Birkenau death camp.
In ceremonies commemorating the 50th anniversary of the camp's liberation on Friday, they emphasized that the sense of horror at the Nazi death camps should not be tempered by time.


U.S. Hurdle For Airtouch
The antitrust division of the Justice Department has complicated the plans of Airtouch Communications, the cellular telephone company spun off from the Pacific Telesis Group, by arguing that the company should still be subject to restrictions that apply to the Baby Bells.
The ruling means that Airtouch could be blocked from offering long-distance service, and it caught the company by surprise.
The primary reason for the spinoff was to free the cellular business from that prohibition, among others.


Rochester Gas &amp; Electric Corp.(RGS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


At the Bar; Where certitude often turns fickle: Determining what degree of doubt is reasonable.
Sometime this spring, after all the DNA experts have testified, after all the photos of Nicole Brown Simpson's bruises have been pored over, after all the witnesses have testified to when and where they saw the white Bronco, Judge Lance A. Ito will turn to jurors and tell them to decide the guilt or innocence of O. J. Simpson.
The judge will tell them that the standard upon which they must make their decision is whether the state has proved its case "beyond a reasonable doubt."


Suspect in L.I.R.R. Shootings Says Eyewitnesses Are Racist
In a courtroom drama that often bordered on the surreal, Colin Ferguson, who has been diagnosed as paranoid and delusional, presented his own opening statement at his murder trial today, insisting that eyewitness accounts of him killing six people on the Long Island Rail Road were wrong and were motivated by racism.
He said that his gun was stolen by the real murderer after he had fallen asleep on the train.
Speaking of himself in the third person, Mr.
Ferguson told the jury: "At the time, Mr. Ferguson, like any other passenger, dozed off. At that point, someone opened his bag, took the weapon out of the bag and proceeded to shoot. Mr. Ferguson was awakened by the gunfire and, amidst the confusion, sought to protect himself, sought to run for cover like any other person on that train."


Donnelley (R.R.) &amp; Sons (DNY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bending the Body to Straighten the Soul
ALMOST exactly a year ago, my college roommate and I agreed to rendezvous for a weekend at the Kripalu Center for Yoga and Health, which is one of those yoga spas with a spiritual edge that can be ignored if you'd rather have a sauna.
Set on 350 acres of wooded hills in Lenox, Mass., Kripalu was surprisingly cheap, peaceful and well-run, thanks to the disciples of the Yogi Amrit Desai, who did everything from cook the vegetarian meals to teach meditation and sweep the floors in order to follow in the guru's footsteps.


Executive Changes
APPLE COMPUTER INC., Cupertino, Calif., named Allen Olivo director of worldwide corporate advertising.
COLEMAN CO., Wichita, Kan., named Frederick J. Fritz president of its North American recreation unit.


Clinton Warns Major Leagues To Settle Strike
Warning that the major league baseball strike was trying Americans' patience and imperiling thousands of jobs, President Clinton today threw increased White House power behind efforts to force a mediated settlement.
Mr.
Clinton ordered a Federal mediator to bring baseball's players and owners back to the bargaining table, and he set a Feb. 6 deadline for them to make substantial headway toward ending the strike.
Otherwise, he warned, the Government would ask the mediator to propose a solution.


Help for Parents, Fun for Kids


A Russian Portrait, With an Aging Star
Nikita Dolgushin is not a household name, but to those familiar with the troubled course of Soviet ballet in the last three decades, his reputation as one of Russia's most talked-about classical dancers is well known.
He was part of Rudolf Nureyev's generation at the Kirov Ballet school in Leningrad, now St.
Petersburg, and danced with the Kirov from 1959 to 1961.
His concern with dramatic expression (Albrecht was his great role) rather than academic purity ended his career there and he starred later at the Novosibirsk Ballet, the Young Ballet and especially the Maly Ballet.


Score an Upset in Doubles
For the last two years, Gigi Fernandez and Natasha Zvereva, the defending doubles champions of all three major tennis tournaments heading into the United States Open, had their bid for a Grand Slam crown thwarted in New York.
They won't be facing that kind of pressure this year.
Today on the stadium court, where the roof was closed when showers struck at 4-4 in the third set, the top-seeded pair were upset, 6-3, 6-7 (3-7), 6-4, by second-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and Jana Novotna.


G.O.P. Senators Fire Away at Foreign Policy
The Republicans were isolationist on peacekeeping but expansionist on NATO, cooperative on counterterrorism but stingy on the peso.
Granted, a single hearing of the House Committee on International Relations is not a Republican Rorschach test.
But in their two-and-a-half-hour encounter today with Secretary of State Warren Christopher on the state of the world, the Republicans left no doubt that their approach to foreign policy would be more scattershot than strategic.


Mead Corp.(MEA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mets Reduce Ticket Prices
Anticipating the use of replacement players, the New York Mets yesterday cut spring training ticket prices 50 percent.
The prices of grandstand seats for the 13 games at Thomas J. White Stadium in Port St.
Lucie, Fla., were cut from $8 to $4, and bleacher seats were cut from $6 to $3.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Keenan's Blues Prevail  The St.
Louis Blues made a successful debut in their new home, before a crowd of 20,282 in the Kiel Center, and got two third-period goals from Brett Hull for a 3-1 victory over the Los Angeles Kings last night.
The victory gave the Blues a 3-1 record and made their new coach and general manager, Mike Keenan, a winner in both his road and home openers.
Keenan jumped to the Blues from the Stanley Cup-champion Rangers in July.


How the F.B.I. Finally Caught Aldrich Ames
One day in September 1993, four months after the F.B.I. had begun its espionage investigation of Aldrich H. Ames, the agents tracking him got their first chance to catch him in an act of spying.
But nothing went right.
Mr.
Ames eluded them twice, once by awakening uncharacteristically early to drop off a message to his Russian contacts and again, later in the day, by escaping a stakeout at the parking lot of the Central Intelligence Agency's headquarters in Langley, Va. -- driving off "like a bat out of hell," one official recalls now.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Even with a blowout on the field, companies buying Super Bowl spots see a victory.
AS advertisers and agencies put finishing touches on the commercials they will run on Sunday during Super Bowl XXIX, the babble about a blowout is approaching an intensity unmatched since the last big tire account review.
The conventional wisdom holds that the one-sided score by which the San Francisco 49ers are supposed to decimate the San Diego Chargers will cheapen the value of those commercials, particularly the spots running later in the game, as bored viewers switch channels faster than if ABC suddenly began broadcasting reruns of "My Mother the Car."


Whitman Takes to Television In a Statewide Town Meeting
New Jersey state government went on the road tonight, with Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's cabinet members visiting campus television studios up and down the state.
The Governor herself moderated a statewide televised town meeting intended to be a discussion of her week-old 1996 budget proposal.
Six studio audiences of students, faculty and community members questioned the Governor and her cabinet for three hours on the impact of the proposed $16 billion budget.


Alberto-Culver Co. (ACV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tecumseh Products Co.(TECUA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Potlatch Corp.(PCH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For Children
'Growing Up With Opera'
John Jay Theater  899 10th Avenue, at 59th Street  Clinton  (212) 769-7008  Recommended ages: 6 to 12  Tomorrow and Sunday
This weekend, children may hear a chamber-music piece and an opera written just for them.
This family program, which hopes to instill the beauty of classical music into young souls so they'll head to Lincoln Center for the rest of their lives, is a rare event.


Lafarge Corp.(LAF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31





A Champion of Fidelity In a Family of Affairs
The serious comedies of Woody Allen have inspired a number of entertaining homages, but none that matches "Miami Rhapsody" in thoughtfulness and emotional realism.
The first feature to be written and directed by David Frankel, a 35-year-old film maker from New York City with a background in television, the movie might be described as "Hannah and Her Sisters" with a "Thirtysomething" point of view.
In its matter-of-fact view of adultery in post-sexual revolutionary times, it feels utterly contemporary in a way that Mr.
Allen's movies do not.
From its opening credits, in which Louis Armstrong growls a jaunty "Just One of Those Things" behind glowing Art Deco titles, "Miami Rhapsody" proudly flaunts its reverence for Mr.
Allen's style.
Those touches, however, are the movie's only nostalgic elements.
The film's funniest joke and most blatant tribute is the casting of Mia Farrow in the role of Nina Marcus, a married upper-middle-class woman of around 50 who has a brief affair with a younger man.


Art in Review
Beth Haggart
Postmasters Gallery  80 Greene Street  SoHo  Through Feb. 4
Beth Haggart, known for making sculpture out of junk in general and old cardboard boxes in particular, is getting personal.
The junk that dominates her latest installation piece -- also her first solo show in New York City -- is entirely her own.
It fills almost the entire gallery, this big ratty pile of furniture, clothing, shoes, lamps, knickknacks, old photographs, battered luggage and much, much more.
Call it scatter-art run amok, or place it in a long line of autobiographical environments that begins with Lucas Samaras's exhibition of the contents of his West New York, N.J., bedroom at the Green Gallery in 1964.


Union Leader Defends the Often-Criticized Salary Cap
The National Football League collective bargaining agreement is good for the players and will help keep labor peace in the league until the year 2000, Gene Upshaw, executive director of the Players Association, said today in his annual state of the union address.
"Yes, I will defend this agreement because I agreed to it," Upshaw said.
"Yes, I will defend this agreement because it's best for the players."


Corrections
An article on the Health page on Wednesday about screening for prostate cancer misstated an affiliation of Dr.
Paul H. Lange.
He is at the University of Washington in Seattle, not Washington University in St.
Louis.


A Global Warming Resumed in 1994, Climate Data Show
Whatever happened to global warming?
The question was on many lips a year ago, when the northeastern United States suffered through its bitterest winter in years.
Now an exceptionally warm winter has whipsawed perceptions about the world's climate once again.
An answer has become apparent in annual climatic statistics in the last few days: global warming, interrupted as a result of the mid-1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines, has resumed -- just as many experts had predicted.


Coastal Corp.(CGP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Taste of Defeat: Got Any Salsa?
DEFEATED CANDIDATES
Mario M. Cuomo and Ann Richards PRODUCER
BBDO, New York City, for Frito-Lay Inc. VISUAL
With the mournful strains of Auld Lang Syne as background music, the scene opens with Mr.
Cuomo helping Ms.
Richards pack up her gubernatorial office.
As she tosses file folders into a cardboard box, they begin to philosophize about the nature of change.
When it becomes clear that the change they are discussing is packaging - of tortilla chips, not candidates - Ms.
Richards pulls out a newly designed bag of Doritos and Mr.
Cuomo begins to munch on a few.
SCRIPT
Ms.
Richards: "Mario, I haven't seen a change like this since I was knee high to a June bug."
Mr. Cuomo: "Ann, I was as surprised as you are."
A.R.: "Well, I should have seen it coming."
M.C.: "Maybe so, but now I think we ought to accept this change, embrace it, be positive about it, because change can be very exciting."
A.R.: "You're probably right, Mario. I guess I'll get used to Doritis' new bag."
M.C.: "There you go."
Anouncer: "This year's big change is Doritos. more great taste, brand-new bag."
M.C.: "Too bad about the Cowboys, Ann."
A.R.: "They always won when I was Governor." ACCURACY
It is true that both Mr.
Cuomo and Ms.
Richards are surprised by change.
Both thought until the last minute that they would win their elections on Nov. 8.
But as is her wont, Ms.
Richards is waxing a bit hyberbolic with her assertion that she has not seen such change since she was knee high to a June bug (a large scarab).
She has lived through the decline of the beehive hairdo, the Texas oil bust and the stunning emergence of salsa as America's biggest-selling condiment.
Mr.
Cuomo's advice that change should be embraced is equally suspect.
He is, after all, planning to write a book attacking Newt Gingrich's Contract With America as "plastic populism."
Ms.
Richards is trying to pull a fast one with her attempt to distance herself from the Dallas Cowboys' loss this year to the San Francisco 49'ers in the National Football Conference title game.
Her successor, George W. Bush, was not sworn in until Jan. 17, two days after the game.
But Mr.
Cuomo has lttle standing to rib Ms.
Richards about the Cowboys.
His team of choice, the Buffalo Bills lost the Super Bowl each year of Mr.
Cuomo's third term, including twice to the Cowboys.
SCORECARD
As polticians, these two were always better at belittling their opponents than themselves.
During last year's campaign, Mr.
Cuomo called the current Governor of New York a "liar", while Ms.
Richards referred to the current Governor of Texas as a "jerk." But defeat seems to have taught them a lesson, even if the lesson is that a big corporate fee makes self-depreciation far easier to swallow.
If this ad helps move Doritos, Frito-Lay may have found the talent it has searched for to replace Dan Quayle, the star of last year's Super Bowl ad for Wavy Lay's potato chips.
Expect to see Mr.
Cuomo extolling the virtues of "the family of Fritos" and Ms.
Richards reminding viewers that she was born with a silver chop in her mouth.
KEVIN SACK


Exide Electronics Group Inc.(XUPS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Queens, School Board Begins Inquiry Into Remarks on Blacks
A Community School Board in southeast Queens agreed last night to investigate the remarks of an assistant principal at an elementary school after parents said he disparaged black children and their ability to swim.
The parents, all board members of the P.T.A. at Public School 34 in Queens Village, complained that the assistant principal, Jeffrey Green, rejected a proposed student outing to a water park, saying that black children do not like to play in water and have poor swimming skills.


Small Companies Lead Way As Massachusetts Rebounds
The empty, unrented buildings along Boylston Street are beginning to fill with freshly painted shops and coffee bars.
Not far away, Fidelity Investments' new trading room, larger than a football field, juts into Boston harbor like a brilliantly lighted luxury ship boarding for its maiden voyage.
And along Route 128, the suburban highway where the now-shrunken computer giants of the 1980's got their start, new stars with names like Powersoft are emerging.
The signs of economic revival have been unmistakable for months.
While the rest of the Northeast remains in the doldrums, Massachusetts, hit harder in the last recession than any other state, is coming back.
But this recovery is different.
The state's big manufacturers like General Electric and Digital Equipment -- engines of growth in the past -- are on the sidelines.
Instead, more than ever, the people of Massachusetts are counting on small, little-known companies to give them work.


Judges Accept V.M.I.'s Plan For Women
The Justice Department today lost another round in its five-year fight to open the Virginia Military Institute to women when the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit endorsed the institute's plan for an alternate program for women at a nearby women's college.
"If we ordered V.M.I. to admit women, the program would be irrevocably altered, forever denying its unique methodology to both women and men," Judge Paul V. Niemeyer wrote for the 2-to-1 majority.
"There is a growing consensus in the professional community that a sexually homogeneous environment yields concrete educational benefits."


The Neediest Cases; A Devastating Loss, And Then Depression
Emilia B., a Mexican immigrant, and her five children had depended on the salary her husband earned as a mechanic.
But in 1992, a car he was working on crushed him to death.
Mrs.
B. was left to provide for the family, and she could not cope.
She could focus on nothing but her loss.
"All of the sudden, my husband was gone forever, and I was alone," she said, recalling the shock of the death.
"I felt so overwhelmed."


Clinton's Binding-Arbitration Club
When Peter Angelos, the owner of the Baltimore Orioles, last week proclaimed it a good idea for President Clinton to get involved in seeking an end to the baseball strike, Angelos was probably in the minority once again.
Oh, the owners and players all say hoorah when Washington's leading man looks their way, as he did yesterday when he prompted his hand-picked mediator, Bill Usery Jr., to drag both parties back to the bargaining table.


Medicaid Cuts to Private Nursing Care Will Inflict Real Pain
To the Editor:
In "The Ugly Side of a Tax Cut" (editorial, Jan. 20), you support the recommendation by Lieut.
Gov.
Betsy McCaughey of New York to eliminate reimbursement for private-duty nursing from Medicaid on the grounds that it "would cause relatively little grief and help New York State trim coverage that is now fabulously expensive."


Art in Review
Neil Welliver
Marlborough Gallery  40 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Feb. 4
Neil Welliver's latest paintings of untouched chunks of Maine landscape seek to revive the lagging tradition of landscape painting by grafting onto it the formal inventions -- the scale, robust surfaces and all-over edge-to-edge composition -- of the Abstract Expressionists.
This is not an uninteresting ambition, nor is Mr.
Welliver alone in pursuing it.
It is something Alex Katz has done, off and on, since the late 1950's; it could be said that Chuck Close has accomplished something similar for portraiture.


E-Systems (ESY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Paintings That Make Music of Color
THE Russian painter Vasily Kandinsky spent his life moving among the capitals of modern art.
He was in Munich with the Blue Rider group before World War I. He was in Moscow when Tatlin and the Constructivists were there.
Then he was back in Germany, teaching at the Bauhaus, and finally he was in Paris, where he died in 1944 at the age of 78.
You might think this made him into a Zelig, a cipher, but of course it didn't.
To be sure, the Theosophy of Madame Blavatsky and Rudolf Steiner intrigued him, along with Russia's pagan rituals, Schopenhauer's writings, Nordic mythology and Richard Wagner's theories, and Kandinsky's resulting philosophy of the world was a little loopy.
But as a painter he synthesized what he took in, and produced one of the most cogent oeuvres in modern art, not to mention one of the most influential.
He may not have invented pure abstraction, as he and his followers liked to claim, but the history of abstraction couldn't be told without him.


Urban Hospitals Lose Community Moorings
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 22 news article on New York hospitals' vying for patients overlooks the most significant issues confronting most urban hospitals in poor communities trying to survive in today's competitive market.


Schering-Plough Corp.(SGP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New U.N. Commander, Another Briton, Arrives in Sarajevo
The new British commander of United Nations peacekeeping forces in Bosnia arrived in the capital today with cool words for his predecessor and no peace for his 24,000 troops to keep.
The commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Rupert Smith, was visibly nervous as he strode from a United Nations Ilyushin aircraft.


Crash Investigator Says Boeing Withheld Data
The chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board, his frustration evident, complained today that the Boeing Company had not told the board everything it knew about incidents involving its 737 jets that might have had a bearing on the crash of USAir Flight 427 here in September.
The chairman, James E. Hall, admonished the company that the credibility of the investigation was threatened by such lapses.


No. 1 Sampras vs. No. 2 Agassi in Final
Andre Agassi, the swashbuckler in the pirate outfit who had yet to drop a set heading into his Australian Open semifinal against 45th-ranked Aaron Krickstein, today reached the final round when the underdog defaulted with Agassi leading, 6-4, 6-4, 3-0, in the third set.
The victory sent Agassi, the world's No. 2 player, against the defending champion and No. 1-ranked Pete Sampras, whose road to this first-ever all-American Australian Open final has been as fraught with difficulty as Agassi's has been a cakewalk.


Market Place; A theory says even the Dow doesn't like San Diego's chances.
POOR San Diego.
Even the stock market seems to be forecasting that the Chargers will lose the Super Bowl.
That forecast comes from a theory that says the performance of the stock market in the two months leading to the Super Bowl can indicate which team will win.
It makes no sense, of course, but it has worked well during the last two decades.


Treasuries Up in Price For 2d Day
Prices of Treasury securities were up yesterday for the second consecutive day after Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, told the Senate Budget Committee that the "torrid growth is slowing down."
In a clear sign that investors are confident the Fed will not quickly raise interest rates again if it nudges them up next week, as expected, prices of Government securities rose in all maturities.
While Mr.
Greenspan, in a second day of Congressional testimony, warned of a possible rise in inflation in the near term, he said it "can be contained by the Fed."


Delta Air Lines Inc.(DAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Chance to Rewind and Reassess a Philharmonic Concert
In music criticism, there usually are no second thoughts: the music flashes by; the ears catch what they can.
But the New York Philharmonic's concert on Wednesday night at Avery Fisher Hall was broadcast live on public television, offering an unusual opportunity.
A critic conversant with home video recording could double-check impressions formed on first hearing.
Somehow the technology did not fail me on Wednesday; here, then, an experiment in parallax reviewing.
Kurt Masur's program was uncomplicated and familiar: Dvorak's Cello Concerto, with Yo-Yo Ma, and Schumann's "Rhenish" Symphony.
Mr.
Ma has played the Dvorak more times than he probably cares to count, and his warmly effusive interpretation is by now well known.
Wednesday's performance, on first hearing, seemed only modestly successful.
Mr.
Ma did not dig into the score as vigorously as he has in the past, and Mr.
Masur's accompaniment was alternately abrupt and tentative.


Pataki to Eliminate 360 State Patronage Jobs
Gov.
George E. Pataki announced today that he would eliminate 22 percent of the political appointments controlled by the Governor, to save $29 million a year.
As a percentage, that cut would satisfy Mr.
Pataki's campaign pledge to reduce at least 20 percent of the state's patronage jobs.
But the number of jobs that Mr.
Pataki identified today as political appointments fell far below the number he used during the campaign.


ABC Is Top Winner of DuPont Awards
ABC News won the highest honors in the annual Alfred I. DuPont-Columbia University awards for broadcast journalism, taking a Gold Baton for exceptional excellence for five reports produced from June 1993 to June 1994.
The awards ceremony was last night, at Columbia University.
The ABC reports included coverage of Haiti's crisis, by Linda Pattillo; a 10-part series on women's health issues; five investigative reports on the magazine program "Day One," on the American tobacco industry; a report on the magazine program "Turning Point," on a white American scholar slain in South Africa, and a documentary on the American Government's reaction to the Bosnian crisis, by Peter Jennings, the ABC News anchor.


Simpson Trial Is Adjourned Until Monday as the Lawyers Clash Bitterly in Court
After hearing hours of acrimonious exchanges between lawyers insisting they are friends, the judge in the O. J. Simpson trial adjourned the case until Monday, leaving the defense's opening statement suspended in midstream.
Before then, Judge Lance A. Ito will rule on whether to punish Mr.
Simpson's lawyers for what prosecutors say is their egregious misconduct.


From Beautiful Frivolity To a Bit of French Song
Style and method are dubious bases for judging worth.
Michael Torke's "Javelin," which Yoel Levi and the Atlanta Symphony played at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday evening, is, in format at least, frivolous, flashy and eager to please.
It is also frivolity beautifully made.
The racing chord figures distribute themselves cunningly throughout this brief piece; they provide balance and coherence.
The rhythmic placements are eccentric but their off-centeredness has always a unifying purpose.
The Atlanta handled Mr.
Torke's sophisticated writing very well.
It is this orchestra's handsome strings one notices first, and the confident brass playing.
Both elements serve music like the Sibelius Second Symphony well; Tuesday's performance of it began as well ordered and noncommittal but gathered momentum as it went along.
The final great themes were affecting.


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp.(OCF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cadbury to Purchase Dr Pepper
The Dr Pepper/Seven-Up Companies, the third-largest American soft-drink maker, agreed yesterday to be acquired by Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C., the London-based soda and candy colossus, for $1.7 billion, or $33 a share.
The deal, if approved, would combine Dr Pepper with Cadbury, the fourth-largest competitor in the $49 billion United States market for carbonated beverages, giving Cadbury a 17 percent share behind the Coca-Cola Company and Pepsico Inc.


Disney (Walt) Co. (DIS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Spoken Word
ANNUAL NATIONAL AFRICAN-AMERICAN READ-IN, House of the Lord Church, 415 Atlantic Avenue, at Bond Street, Fort Greene, Brooklyn.
A silent reading of works by black authors, followed by a reading of works by the authors.
Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
Free.
Sponsored by the Literary Society.
Information: (212) 862-4646.
YEATS IN WORDS AND MUSIC, New York University, Vanderbilt Hall, 40 Washington Square South, Greenwich Village.
An afternoon based on the writing of William Butler Yeats with a reading of his poetry by the actors Charles Keating and Nancy Marchand and others, followed by "In the Deep Heart's Core: A Mystic Cabaret," a musical piece set to words by Yeats composed by Joseph Daniel Sobol and featuring Mr.
Sobol on guitar; Kathy Cowan and Tom Orf, singers; John Floeter, a bass player, and Andrew Bird, a violinist.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Sponsored by the W. B. Yeats Society of New York.
Information: (718) 884-6854.
"FIRESIDE READING AND WRITING," Wave Hill, Independence Avenue and West 249th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx.
Readings by those in attendance of passages from nature literature including works by Thoreau and Alice Walker.
Sunday at 1:30 P.M.
First in a three-part series dealing with nature and literature; other activities are planned on Feb. 19 and March 12, both at 1:30 P.M.
Free with admission to Wave Hill, which is also free.
Information: (718) 549-3200.
"AFRICANA LIBRARIES IN THE INFORMATION AGE," Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York Public Library, 515 Malcolm X Boulevard, at 135th Street and Lenox Avenue, Harlem.
A two-day symposium with representatives from various libraries and government agencies, including the Library of Congress and the United States Department of Commerce, and universities, including Harvard, Howard and Wayne State.
Today, 1 to 6 P.M. and tomorrow, 9 A.M. to 4 P.M.
P.M.
Free.
Pre-registration is required: (212) 491-2040.
HAL HARTLEY RETROSPECTIVE, American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue and 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
Panel discussion on cinematography and production design, tomorrow at 2 P.M., followed by screenings of "Two-Lane Blacktop," directed by Monte Hellman, and music videos by Mr.
Hartley.
Screenings are included in museum admission: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for children and students.
Tickets to the panel discussion are $10 and include museum admission.
Screenings continue on Sunday.
Information: (718) 784-0077.
CHILDREN AND SOCIETY, Barnes &amp; Noble, 2289 Broadway, at 82d Street.
A discussion with Marita Golden, the author of "Saving Our Sons: Raising Black Children in a Turbulent World." Tonight at 8.
Information: (212) 362-8835.
ARTISTS TALK ON ART, 144 Mercer Street, Greenwich Village.
A discussion with Donald Kuspit, a writer and historian, and Elaine Marinoff, a painter.
Tonight at 8.
Admission, $6; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 385-2862.
SATIRE AND POETRY, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
A presentation of the play "The Preacher and the Rapper," a satirical look at the present and future by Ishmael Reed, tonight at 7:30, followed at 10 by a poetry reading by Larry May and a poetry slam.
Tickets: $10 to "The Preacher and the Rapper"; $5 to the poetry reading and slam.
Information: (212) 780-9386.
ART TALKS, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
Several sections of "Thomas Cole: Landscape Into History": today at 1 P.M. by Constance Rosenblum, and at 3 P.M. by Barbara Dayer Gallati; tomorrow at 2 P.M. by Maribeth Flynn, and on Sunday at 3 P.M. by Marlene Holtan.
Admission: $4; $2 for students; $1.50 for the elderly; free for members and children under 12.
Information: (718) 638-5000.


Cirrus Logic Inc.(CRUS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cincinnati Bell (CSN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lee Enterprises Inc.(LEE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


1-3 Rangers Feel Pressure in Wake of Cup
When the final whistle blew at Rangers practice today -- a hard-skating 90-minute session -- many players hunched to their knees and began breathing heavily.
Some went straight for water bottles.
Some began peeling off their equipment as if their skin were on fire.
Others hurriedly skated off the ice and disappeared into the dressing room.
After losing three of their first four games in six nights, each at home, each by a single goal, the Rangers are having a hard time recapturing the stamina and dynamic form they possessed during their run to the Stanley Cup.


Corrections
A report in the "On Stage, and Off" column in Weekend last Friday about suggested changes in the Tony Awards misidentified the committee that will consider special Tonys on May 4.
It is the administration committee, not the nomination committee.
The report also misidentified Keith Sherman, who explained other actions of the administration committee.
He is a spokesman for the committee, not a member.


Also of Note
Here are critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows: ALFONSO OSSORIO, Zabriskie Gallery, 724 Fifth Avenue, at 58th Street (through Feb. 11).
Works from the 1960's translating his Surrealistic wall assemblages into free-standing sculptures resembling trees or totem poles; dotted with glass and plastic eyes, the sculptures seem to be watching you (Pepe Karmel).
SARAH RAPSON, Yoshii Gallery, 20 West 57th Street, Manhattan (through Feb. 11).
Ms.
Rapson's off-white paintings combine canvas, linen sheets and rubber and often have the format of rough-edged diptychs.
Their suggestion of used lives and abused materials is intriguing, but the paintings look frustratingly bland (Holland Cotter).


Art in Review
'Fields of Vision'  'The Art of Sotho Habitation'
Miriam and Ira D. Wallach Art Gallery  Columbia University  Broadway at 116th Street  Morningside Heights  Through Feb. 4
The Wallach Art Gallery at Columbia should be on the regular beat of anyone serious about art in New York.
It can often be counted on for tightly focused exhibitions on offbeat themes -- the kind museums rarely get around to tackling -- organized by faculty members and graduate students from the university's art history department.


Singer Co.(SEW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CMS Energy Corp.(CMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ballistics Tests Clear A Revolver Seized After S.I. Shooting
The bullets that killed a car-theft suspect outside a Staten Island pool hall on Tuesday night did not come from the gun carried by a man arrested minutes after the shooting, the police said yesterday.
The arrested man, Jonathan Pappa, 20, of Morganville, N.J., faces a charge of criminal possession of a weapon.
The chief investigator in the case would not rule out the possibility that Mr.
Pappa was connected to the shooting, but ballistics tests showed that the bullets did not come from that gun.


CHRONICLE
Justice RUTH BADER GINSBURG of the United States Supreme Court and HERBERT WECHSLER, who taught at the Columbia Law School for six decades and had Justice Ginsburg as a student, will meet again.
They will be honored today at the school's 46th annual winter luncheon.
Justice Ginsburg will receive the Medal of Excellence, the school's highest honor, and Dean Lance Liebman will announce the establishment of the Herbert Wechsler Professorship of Federal Jurisdiction.


Barnes Group Inc.(B,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sensormatic Electronics Corp.(SRM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Williams Cos.(WMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Natural History Museum Plans Big Overhaul
The American Museum of Natural History, dogged by a reputation for stodginess despite recent renovations to many of its most famous exhibits, is planning to embark on a major reconstruction and expansion intended to bring it into the realm of the latest generation of interactive science museums.
The centerpiece of the plan is a huge, softly illuminated sphere, 80 feet in diameter, that would replace the 59-year-old Hayden Planetarium on the north side of the museum.


Episcopal Church Reveals Sexual Misconduct by Bishop
In an extraordinary statement reflecting the deep concern in many religious circles over sexual misconduct by the clergy, leading officials of the Episcopal Church disclosed yesterday that Bishop David E. Johnson of Massachusetts, who committed suicide two weeks ago, had been involved in several extramarital affairs throughout his ministry.
The statement, signed by the church's top official, Presiding Bishop Edmond L. Browning, said some of the relationships "appear to have been of the character of sexual exploitation."


Computervision Corp.(CVN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Police Agency Faulted for Inquiry in Killing
An untrained police department badly bungled the 1991 investigation into the death of an infant in the care of a Swiss nanny, failing to take such elementary steps as examining the charred plastic seat where the baby died and a cloth soaked in lighter fluid found near the nanny's bed, a state commission has concluded.
In issuing its report, the State Commission of Investigation shed light on a failing common to small-town police departments, which are often fiercely protective of their turf but lack the skilled investigators to marshal evidence in those rare cases when they are faced with complicated crimes like murder.


CHRONICLE
Who was that corpse marching across the stage?
JOANNE WOODWARD and JOYCE EBERT, who play the murderous sisters in "Arsenic and Old Lace" at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven, took their curtain calls on opening night Wednesday.
Then they opened the basement door and out came 12 men, representing their victims, all poisoned with elderberry wine.
At the end of the line, there was PAUL NEWMAN, togged out in a Yale sweatshirt and sweatpants and a red baseball cap.
The audience gasped and cheered.


Rizzotti's Intensity Sets Tone for No. 1 UConn
Two weeks ago, late in the game, unbeaten Connecticut was trouncing Seton Hall in women's basketball by 30 points.
Three days later, Connecticut, then ranked No. 2 in the nation, would play Tennessee, then ranked No. 1, so the end of the Seton Hall game was a perfect time for the UConn players to relax.
Then a loose ball headed out of bounds, but not for long.
The 5-foot-5-inch UConn point guard, Jen Rizzotti, dived and skidded 10 feet and grabbed it.
UConn went on to win that game by 44 points, beat Tennessee by 11 points and now ranks No. 1.


Conrail Inc.(CRR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Union Texas Petroleum Holdings Inc.(UTH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SFFed Corp.(SFFD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Margaret Kahn Ryan, 93, Financier's Daughter, Dies
Margaret Kahn Ryan, an heir to a New York financial fortune who carried on her father's interests in opera and art, died yesterday at her apartment in Manhattan.
She was 93.
She died of natural causes, her son, John Barry Ryan 3d, said.


There'll Be No Ho-Hum in Deion's Post-Game Life
With baseball on an indefinite hiatus, Deion Sanders could have an awful problem next summer -- deciding whether to go to training camp.
His routine is usually to finish up the baseball season, take a one-week fishing trip and then rejoin his football team.
But the 49ers may have him all to themselves next July.


Flextronics International Ltd.(FLEXF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Suzanne Pincus, 60, Volunteer in the Arts And Social Services
Suzanne Storrs Pincus, a community volunteer active in social services and the arts, died on Wednesday at her home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
She was 60.
She died after a lengthy illness, her family said.


Benefit for Dance Group
The companies of Bill T. Jones and Ralph Lemon will perform in a benefit for Movement Research, a dance service, educational and presenting organization, tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the Pace Downtown Theater at Pace University, 3 Spruce Street, just south of City Hall.
Other performers are Lucy Guerin and Hot Mouth, an a cappella group (Grisha Coleman, Viola Sheedy, Jonathan Stone and David Thomson) that specializes in song inspired by black and European classical music.
Tickets are $20; $35 and $75 tickets include a pre-performance reception.
Information: (212) 477-6635.


Cantona Attacks Fan
The Football Association yesterday charged ERIC CANTONA of Manchester United, last season's Premier League player of the year, with "misconduct which has brought the game into disrepute" for kicking and punching a spectator at a match Wednesday night in London.


I.M.F. Tentatively Approves $7.8 Billion Loan to Mexico
While skirmishing over a proposed emergency aid package for Mexico continued in the United States Congress, Mexican officials announced here today that the International Monetary Fund had tentatively agreed to lend Mexico $7.8 billion, the largest loan made by the organization in its 50-year history.
The Mexican officials said they believed that the money, because of the international commitment it represents, would boost Mexico's chances of getting the larger package of loan guarantees from the United States.
Opponents of the $40 billion American package have complained that the United States would bear too much of the burden for Mexico's rescue.





Hartford Steam (HSB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Trails of Blood, Seeds of Doubt
The swarms of legal experts eager to comment on the O. J. Simpson double murder case made it sound as if opening statements were the decisive element in a criminal trial.
That view is clearly open to question.
From the vantage point of the television audience, the first round was hardly a knockout for either side.
Is Mr.
Simpson shown guilty by a trail of blood from the crime scene to his bedroom and a record of spousal abuse that, the prosecution says, escalated to the killing of his former wife, Nicole, and her friend Ronald Goldman?
Or will he be acquitted because the defense can undermine the state's case with evidence or doubts?


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-A10  RUSSIANS ACCUSED OF BRUTALITY  Grozny residents say Russian troops have turned increasingly brutal now that they control much of the Chechen rebels' capital.
A1  MOSCOW'S MONEY PROBLEMS GROW  Russia has dug itself into a hole with Western Governments and with the I.M.F., which is currently debating a $6 billion loan that Moscow is counting on.
A6


Myopia on Mexico
The Clinton Administration has failed to rally Congressional support for its plan to stabilize Mexico's peso.
That is alarming.
The crisis threatens to engulf not only Mexico but other recently reformed Latin American economies as well.
U.S. financial interests are also at risk, from Wall Street speculators to the pension and mutual-fund accounts of millions of middle-class Americans.
Finally, the crisis is a major test of Washington's ability to act decisively in an international emergency that is as close to home as those emergencies come.
Yet even after hearing Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin and the Federal Reserve's Alan Greenspan describe the economic dangers, and Secretary of State Christopher the diplomatic consequences, members of House and Senate committees remained decidedly cool to the package.
The plan would provide $40 billion in loan guarantees, at minimum financial risk to the U.S.


GTE (GTE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Home Video
Movie Delivery
"Let's say I feel like a movie," says the man in the television commercial.
"Whoa! Do I drive to a video store? No, I stay right where I am. Direct TV is my video store." The message champions one method of movie delivery over another, but it also reflects a broader strategy being followed by hardware and software producers.
Not sure of what kind of delivery systems will dominate the digital era, the same companies are working on several kinds at once.


Bolivar as an Idealist Thwarted by Messy Reality
Toward the end of Thea Musgrave's intriguing new opera, "Simon Bolivar," which is receiving its world premiere performances at the Virginia Opera here this week, there is a scene in which the many flaws of the work recede to the background, and the vital episodes of this acidic score come together.
Bolivar, who is still known in South America as El Libertador for his fight against Spanish colonial rule, is ill and near the close of his career.
After bloody battles, he has led six countries to freedom, but he has also been stymied again and again in his attempts to unify them.
There have been conflicts among his generals, quarrels over whether to compromise the revolution's ideals and outrage over his own lust for power.


InterTan Inc.(ITN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp.(DNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Inquiry Over Insurers' Annuity Moves
The Justice Department said yesterday that its antitrust division had started investigating efforts by the insurance industry to prevent banks from issuing annuities, an increasingly popular form of retirement savings.
Justice Department lawyers are concerned about a campaign by life insurers and their large trade organization, the American Council of Life Insurance, to persuade state insurance regulators to prevent banks from issuing annuities that would be backed by Federal deposit insurance.
The department is worried that the campaign may have illegally restrained trade and violated the Sherman Antitrust Act.


Chesapeake Corp.(CSK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Where the Blue Paper Cups Are; A Warehouse Store in Queens Serves Ethnic Traditions
After they have saved enough money frying breakfasts and washing produce, just before they are ready to fling open the doors of their gleaming new bagel shop or deli or diner, there is still one last ritual to perform, one rite of passage that will usher the foreign-born entrepreneurs into the mainstream of the culinary life in Queens.
They must buy their first case of Greek-style blue paper coffee cups.
And most likely, they must purchase it at Zahner's Cash and Carry restaurant supplies in Woodside.


Debt
*
Chase Manhattan Corp., New York, is selling $100 million of subordinated notes due in 2002 through Smith Barney Inc.
The notes are priced at par to yield 9.05 percent.
Noncallable in two years, the issue is rated A3 by Moody's Investment Service and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's and Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $100 million of two-year bonds due in 1997 through Lehman Brothers Inc.
The noncallable issue is priced at par to yield 7.59 percent.


On Eve of Liberation Anniversary, a Lament for Auschwitz Victims


Cable News in Florida
The Sarasota Herald-Tribune, a daily newspaper owned by The New York Times Company, and Comcast Cable Communications, a unit of the Comcast Corporation, have agreed to create a 24-hour cable news channel in Sarasota and Charlotte counties in Florida.
The Herald-Tribune will produce the programming for the channel, which is expected to begin operations by summer.
Comcast will distribute the channel on its Sarasota cable system and will produce a daily local talk show.


Southwest Airlines Co.(LUV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Terreri Sparkles in Goal But Receives No Help
For a man making his first appearance in goal since May 17, Chris Terreri's performance tonight for the Devils against the Bruins was so spectacular that it surprised even those who are familiar with his past heroics at Boston Garden.
This building has been Terreri territory since his days at Providence College about 10 years ago, but he put his stamp on it in last season's playoffs when he won all three games the Devils played here.


Alexander Makes Case For the Arts Endowment
Jane Alexander, chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts, defended its role as a patron of poets, painters and musicians today, but Republican Senators told her that she must set stricter standards for the use of taxpayers' money.
At a hearing of the Senate Committee on Labor and Human Resources, Ms.
Alexander responded to those who want to abolish the agency, created in 1965.
"There is a legitimate Federal role in the arts," she declared.
"The endowment speaks to the soul of who we are as individuals and as a nation."


McDermott Intl.(MDR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


JP FoodService Inc.(JPFS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


P.&amp; G. Taking a Charge to Cover Kobe Losses
In an announcement that took investors and analysts by surprise, the Procter &amp; Gamble Company said yesterday that it would take a $50 million after-tax charge to cover its losses from the recent earthquake in Kobe, Japan.
Nearly $13 million of the total will be used to support relief efforts for its 2,600 employees in the Kobe area, 600 of whom were displaced from their homes and an additional 1,500 of whom suffered severe housing damage, the company said.


Quaker Oats Co.(OAT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Fashion; Ole! Lacroix Conquers the Couture
In the high-strung world of fashion, it is perhaps not the biggest news if an haute couture audience is brought to its feet, as it was for the only time this season when Christian Lacroix closed the spring 1995 shows here today.
But when normally splenetic photographers, who work on their feet anyway, begin to chant a designer's name and stamp their feet demanding a second ovation, when flowers are tossed at the designer's feet and his clients are in tears, that is when fashion shows start resembling bullfights, and designers conquering matadors.
Which is all in keeping, anyway, with Lacroix's roots in Camargue, in southern France.


Lanzmann's Meditation On Israel's Defense
NEAR the end of "Tsahal," his ruminative, epic-length examination of the Israeli Army and what it demonstrates about Israel's national identity, Claude Lanzmann engages in debate with an Israeli building contractor.
"When the Arabs know there will be Jews here for eternity, they will learn to live with it," insists this man, whose new houses are being erected on occupied territory.
Arab workmen labor busily behind him as he speaks.
Confronted by the thorny questions that his settlement-building work raises, the man contradicts himself freely.
He also digs in his heels.
"This is the land of Israel," he insists obliquely, whenever Mr.
Lanzmann, who has made it his mission to explore the Israeli people's relationship with this land, poses one of the many questions that have no answers.
Eventually, the director finally gives up arguing, smiles philosophically and throws his arms around the builder.
At that moment, he expresses all the ruefulness and frustration seen in "Tsahal" and does it in a single gesture.


Harland (John H.) Co. (JH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rangers' Generosity Overwhelms Messier
He had to endure a management shake-up, a self-imposed holdout and a league-wide lockout, but six days after the Rangers' triumphant return to Madison Square Garden, Mark Messier finally cashed in on the Stanley Cup championship he virtually willed into being last season.
The team captain and the Rangers came to terms on a renegotiated contract that is believed will more than double Messier's salary over the next two seasons, bringing him as much as $12 million.


CHRONICLE
After more than a week of rumors about the possible sale of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis's apartment, HALL WILLKIE, senior vice president of Brown, Harris, Stevens, the agent for the apartment, said yesterday that the estate had accepted an offer from DAVID H. KOCH, executive vice president and a director of Koch Industries. (The name is pronounced coke.)
The 14-room apartment, at 1040 Fifth Avenue (85th Street), where Mrs.
Onassis died in May, was listed at $9 million, but "various people were bidding for it," Mr.
Willkie said.


Uneasy Haitians Await U.S. Pullout
Painted slogans demanding that the "Americans stay for 50 years" are still appearing on walls around the Haitian capital.
But the United States has already decided to hand over its responsibilities here to a United Nations force in two months, and Haitians are finding it difficult to adjust to the new military and political reality that portends.
From senior Government officials down to peasants in the countryside, many Haitians are convinced that the American invasion force that landed here on Sept. 19 is leaving without having finished the job it came to do.
Although the United Nations peacekeeping contingent will consist largely of American troops and be led by an American general, there are also questions whether the new international force, operating under a different set of rules, is equal to the challenge it will inherit.


MCI's 4th-Quarter Revenue Advanced 9%
MCI Communications, the nation's second-largest long-distance carrier, reported today that revenue in the last three months of 1994 climbed 9 percent while growth in its long-distance business slowed.
The results confirmed expectations on Wall Street that MCI's double-digit growth had been slowed by the AT&amp;T Corporation's aggressive marketing campaign, and they reinforced a concern that MCI may have to endure at least several more sluggish months before it regains its balance.


Art in Review
'Outsider Art Fair'
Puck Building  Lafayette and Houston Streets  SoHo  Today, tomorrow and Sunday
Outsider art, or art by untrained artists, has become big business.
The Rev.
Howard Finster, an artist in Georgia who is well-known for his densely allegorical paintings, has set up a cottage industry in which he and his family turn out art objects, and potential clients can now reach him by dialing (800) FINSTER.


Corrections
A report in the Pop Life column on Wednesday misidentified the site of Stevie Wonder's concerts this week.
They were at Radio City Music Hall, not at Madison Square Garden.


49ers' Plummer Learned to Turn the Other Cheek
There was certainly ice to be broken between Gary Plummer and San Francisco 49ers Coach George Seifert in the last off season when Plummer met with the 49ers as a free-agent linebacker considering a new team.
There was this little matter that happened more than a decade ago.


TRANSACTIONS
Auto Racing
JONATHAN BYRD-DICK SIMON RACING -- Named Davy Jones driver of two entries in the Indianapolis 500.
Baseball


Duracell International Inc.(DUR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Art in Review
Fairfield Porter
Hirschl &amp; Adler Modern  21 East 70th Street  Manhattan  Through March 4
The 22 watercolors here, done from 1941 to 1974, emphasize Fairfield Porter's interest in landscape.
Most depict the New England coast, with its innumerable inlets, bays and promontories, clothed in pines and dune grass, simultaneously monotonous and sublime.
These are supplemented by several pictures devoted to the private spaces of Porter's imagination: the back porch, the yard, the old-fashioned interior with paper lampshades and comfortable, unpretentious furniture.
But the intimist ideal Porter derived from Vuillard and Bonnard translated uneasily into the watercolor medium of Cezanne: he kept reaching for the solidity and saturation of oil paints.


Smith's Food &amp; Drug (SFD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Restaurants
For at least some of this season, San Pietro, a wildly popular, two-and-a-half-year-old midtown sibling of Sistina on the Upper East Side, was decorated with baskets of eggplants and cauliflower and plates piled high with tomatoes.
But something was wrong with the picture.
Those tomatoes were plump and pale, and come to think of it, who wants to eat tomatoes in the middle of January?
And wouldn't you think somebody might have remembered to take the cellophane off the cauliflower?
Even though it was not straight from the farm, the illusion of freshness is always welcome.


One Good Quarter By Knicks Is Enough
The Knicks were not at their best, but they were not bad enough to lose to the Los Angeles Clippers.
After three uninspired quarters, the Knicks (26-13) got serious and won their sixth consecutive game, beating the lowly Clippers, 87-74, last night at Madison Square Garden.


Ingersoll-Rand (IR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Harte-Hanks Communications Inc.(HHS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hill Is Top Vote-Getter
Detroit's GRANT HILL is the fans' favorite in N.B.A.
All-Star balloting, becoming the first rookie ever to lead the voting.
Getting 1,289,585 votes, Hill edged Orlando's SHAQUILLE O'NEAL in final results of fan balloting yesterday even though he has played in only 25 pro games.


Energen Corp.(EGN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Audit Finds Fund Misuse By York College President
The president of York College made political contributions with college funds, billed the school twice for some moving and travel expenses and spent $272,000 in public funds for the renovation of her official residence, college and City University officials said yesterday.
University officials say they are also questioning the use of college funds to pay for a trip by the president, Josephine D. Davis, and her family to South Africa as well as the college's purchase of hundreds of copies of a book she co-edited.


World News Briefs; American Who Built Unicef Retires
James P. Grant, the American who built Unicef, the United Nations Children's Fund, into one of the leading agencies of the United Nations, retired today.
He has been ill for more than a year.
With the retirement of Mr.
Grant, who became executive director of Unicef in 1980, the United States loses one of its strongest voices at the United Nations at a time when the organization is under attack by a new Congress.


Defeat Leaves A Taste of Salt
Can Mario M. Cuomo and Ann Richards, formerly loquacious and sometimes acerbic Governors, find happiness as junk-food munchers-for-pay?
Can two defeated Democrats make Super Bowl television-advertising history?
Will these former monarchs of New York and Texas outshine the rest of the halftime entertainment?
Find out on Sunday, when Mr.
Cuomo and Ms.
Richards appear in an ad for Doritos during the Super Bowl.
The ad, page B3.


On My Mind;
It's a normal thing: ask for a loan, or go co-signer, and you have to answer a few questions.
We don't want to seem stingy or mean, but maybe U.S. and Mexican officials involved in the Mexican economic disaster would not mind skipping their press conferences and do a little answering under oath.
After all -- $40 billion, you know.


Jury Chosen for Conspiracy Trial of Sheik and 11 Others
A jury of seven women and five men, including a letter carrier, two people working with computers, a transit worker and an accountant, was selected yesterday in the terrorist conspiracy trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 11 other men.
Opening statements are expected on Monday.
The 12 jurors, along with 6 alternates, are to sit through what is regarded as the biggest terror trial ever to come to court in this country.
The trial in Federal District Court, with a mountain of evidence, including many hours of taped conversations among the defendants, and the expected testimony of a Government informer who infiltrated the group around Mr.
Abdel Rahman, is likely to last at least until the fall.


DavCo Restaurants Inc.(DVCO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stock and Bond Funds Show New Signs of Life
The bargain hunters in mutual funds are buying Latin American stock funds, betting that the plunge following the devaluation of the Mexican peso will soon reverse.
And domestic bond funds, which suffered their largest cash outflows ever in 1994, are beginning to attract new investor money.
Mutual fund managers reported yesterday a surprisingly good first month of 1995 in terms of cash flow from investors, with domestic stock fund cash flows also picking up from December.


Springs Industries(SMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


State Appellate Court Disbars An Advocate of Civil Rights
C.
Vernon Mason, a controversial and outspoken lawyer and civil rights advocate, was disbarred yesterday by a state appellate court, which cited him for "a pattern of professional misconduct" spanning at least six years.
That misconduct, according to a decision by a five-judge panel of the First Judicial District in Manhattan, included "repeated neglect of client matters, many of which concerned criminal cases where a client's liberty was at stake; misrepresentations to clients; refusal to refund the unearned portion of fees," and instances in which Mr.
Mason used nonlawyers.


Dow Chemical Co. (DOW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


After 10 Million Copies, A Sense of Familiarity
BORDER MUSIC
By Robert James Waller
248 pages. Warner Books. $17.95.
Having sold more than 10 million copies of his first two books, "The Bridges of Madison County" and "Slow Waltz in Cedar Bend," Robert James Waller has fed his hackneyed romance recipe back into the computer and come up with his worst book yet, a truly atrocious ballad about a part-time cowboy and a onetime topless dancer that gives new meaning to the words sappy, sexist, mannered and cliched.


San Diego Gas &amp; Electric Co.(SDO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Spectrum Information In Bankruptcy Filing
Punctuating a year of high corporate turnover and shareholder trauma, Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. said yesterday that its deteriorating financial position had forced it to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
Three of its four operating subsidiaries also filed for reorganization.
A fourth unit, Spectrum Global Services Inc., is profitable and did not file a Chapter 11 petition.
One of the subsidiaries that filed, Computers Unlimited of Wisconsin, a franchiser of microcomputer resellers, has been closed, the company said.


Fiserv Inc.(FISV,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Simpson Hiatus
After an especially bitter hearing on a list of defense witnesses, Judge Lance A. Ito adjourned the murder trial of O. J. Simpson until Monday, without letting the defense complete its opening statement.


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc.(WIN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 11


World News Briefs; Bombs at Rally Kill 8 in Kashmir
Three bombs exploded today at a rally to celebrate the Indian national holiday in the city of Jammu, killing at least 8 people, wounding more than 100 and narrowly missing India's top civilian and military officials in the state of Jammu and Kashmir.
Although the attack failed in its apparent objective of killing the governor of Kashmir, K. V. Krishna Rao, and the army commander, Lieut.
Gen.
L.
T.
Surender Singh, the attack underscored the power of the Muslim rebels who are contesting India's rule in the country's only Muslim-majority state.
Mr.
Rao, who is no relation Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao, emerged from the bombing with what Indian news reports said were minor bruises.


Baxter International Inc.(BAX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Shell Oil Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
FIRST BANK SYSTEM INC., Minneapolis, completed the acquisition of Metropolitan Financial Corp. for $800 million.
MILLER BREWING CO., Milwaukee, a subsidiary of Philip Morris Cos., completed an agreement with Asimco, Beijing, an investment company, to acquire a minority equity interest in four breweries in Beijing.
Terms were not disclosed.


Alltel Corp.(AT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


3 Dances, Presented Unhurriedly
Three brief dances were offered on Sunday night at the Context Studios, but time in them passed in a totally unhurried yet not unpleasant manner.
These pieces were part of the second program in a series of choreographers' showcases called Removed Boundaries, arranged by Dagmar Spain.
In Teruyo Yamauchi's "Silent Partner No. 6," Akiko Watabe and Ms.
Yamauchi might well have represented plants developing according to their own cycles of growth and decay.
This duet, to recorded music by Yukio Tsuji and Brian Schober, was divided into two parts, "Seeds" and "Flowers." The dancers moved slowly through each episode, letting spread fingers evoke flowers blooming and hunched positions recall wilting.


Nets' Coleman Issues a Rebuttal
Derrick Coleman was not supposed to play on Wednesday night.
He had a hip pointer on his left side.
It gouged his leg every time he sprinted downcourt.
His face looked as contorted as it was on the cover of this week's Sports Illustrated, under the crybaby headline, "WAAAAAAH!!"
"You saw me with the ice on it before the game," he said afterward, a bulky ice pack wrapped around his waist.
"It was painful until it went numb."


Sterling Chemicals Inc.(STX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Civil Justice System Is Overhaul Target
Major proposals for remaking the civil justice system, long a priority of the Republican right, are almost certain to reach the floor of Congress within the next few months.
But the thrust of proposed changes is still much in doubt.
House Republicans have pledged a quick vote on The Common Sense Legal Reforms Act, a grab bag of measures intended to strengthen defenses against torts, lawsuits seeking damages -- what Corporate America sees as an unprincipled attack on property and enterprise and what many consumer groups see as their leverage against corporate power.


Dun &amp; Bradstreet
Shares of Dun &amp; Bradstreet fell sharply yesterday.
On Wednesday, after the market closed, the company warned of slower growth in the first quarter, mainly as a result of a decline in earnings at its Moody's Investors Service subsidiary.


No Headline
"If the players and owners are unable to find common ground and find it soon, then we will have to find some way to empower those who are the most important element in the baseball equation, the fans themselves." SENATOR BOB DOLE.  [ A1:1 ]


Ultramar Corp.(ULR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


DataFlex Corp.(DFLX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


AT&amp;T Capital (TCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Howard Stern Rest Stop
It started out as an on-the-air jape: the shock-jock extorting a promise from the candidate in exchange for his endorsement.
But now it's for real: Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman today named a nondescript rest area on Interstate 295 south of here in honor of Howard Stern, the WXRK radio and former late-night television host whose on-air language has prompted penalties by the Federal Communications Commission.
An 8 1/2-inch-by-11-inch aluminum plaque will be mounted on a cement base at the rest area, showing a caricature of Mr.
Stern peering out of an old-fashioned outhouse.
"Howard Stern Rest Stop Dedicated 1995" reads the inscription.
Cost: $1,000.
Source of funds: private, said the Governor's press office.


Quake Scales Today Go Beyond Richter
To the Editor:
"Cataclysm in Kobe" (editorial, Jan. 20) requires a correction and some clarification regarding earthquake magnitude scales and what they represent.


Offensive-Line Shift Is Measured in Pounds
The subject for ABC's Dan Dierdorf is big and brawny: the carnivores who guard tender quarterbacks and pave running backs' paths on the offensive line, where the former Cardinal toiled devotedly for 13 years.
"When I was in my prime in the mid-1970's, there were a handful of us who played in the vicinity of 300 pounds," said Dierdorf, an analyst, Slim-Fast spokesman, pilot and restaurateur.
"Art Shell. Louie Kelcher. When I retired, I was the fifth heaviest player on my team."


Pula Journal; Out on a Limb in Croatia (and Happy About It)
Croatia is caught up in war, and nearly one-third of its territory is occupied by rebel Serbs.
The front lines, now quiet but liable to erupt at any time, are less than 100 miles from this seaside resort.
But there is a widespread sense here, and elsewhere on the Istrian Peninsula, that the conflict is a world away.
Tourism is thriving, the harbor here is full of fishing boats and yachts, and although there are no figures to prove it, local officials believe that the average income in Pula is higher than in any other city or large town in Croatia.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "SLAVS! THINKING ABOUT THE LONGSTANDING PROBLEMS OF VIRTUE AND HAPPINESS," New York Theater Workshop, 79 East Fourth Street, East Village.
A comedy-drama by Tony Kushner about the fall of the Soviet Union; directed by Lisa Peterson.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets, $25.
Information: (212) 302-6989.
"TRUE FICTION PICTURES: A HAL HARTLEY RETROSPECTIVE," American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
Screenings and discussions.
Through Sunday.
Hours: today, noon to 4 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.
Museum admission: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for students and children; discussion admission, $10.
Information: (718) 784-0077.
TWYLA THARP, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene.
"Red, White and Blues New Works." Through tomorrow.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $25.
Information: (718) 636-4100.


Dial Corp.(DL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pet (PT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kemper Corp.(KEM,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Publisher at Mademoiselle
Catherine Viscardi Johnston, publisher of Mirabella, was appointed publisher of Mademoiselle yesterday.
She replaces Julie Lewit-Nirenberg, who was named director of special projects for Conde Nast Publications, the parent company.
Ms.
Lewit-Nirenberg was the founding publisher of Mirabella and of New York Woman magazine, which is defunct.


Pay Children to Read, and Pay the Piper
To the Editor:
I notice that House Speaker Newt Gingrich is planning to tour the country promoting a program he calls "earning by learning," in which children will be paid to read books (news article, Jan. 21).
He apparently hopes to enlist the support of major newspapers in this plan.


An Unaffordable Pension Boost
New York City is cutting core services like sanitation and schools in a desperate effort to ease its budget crisis.
But state legislators seem oblivious to the city's plight.
Lawmakers of both parties collaborated this week to placate their union supporters -- by imposing big new pension costs that would hurt the city's already precarious finances.
A measure that passed with near-unanimity in the Republican-led Senate and the Democratic-led Assembly would increase the pensions of both state and city workers, saddling the city with unaffordable recurring costs.
The state's new Republican Governor, George Pataki, had supported such a boost when he was courting unions during last year's campaign.
But Mr.
Pataki reversed himself just after the election -- a prudent response to the state's own budgetary problems and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's strong objections.


Danaher Corp.(DHR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Taking a Computer Crime to Heart
It was as if the thieves, to prove their prowess, had burglarized the locksmith.
Which is why Tsutomu Shimomura, the keeper of the keys in this case, is taking the break-in as a personal affront -- and why he considers solving the crime a matter of honor.
Mr.
Shimomura, one of the country's most skilled computer security experts, is the person who prompted a Government computer agency to issue a chilling warning on Monday.
Unknown intruders, the agency warned, had used a sophisticated break-in technique to steal files from Mr.
Shimomura's own well-guarded computer in his home near San Diego.
And the stealth and style of the attack indicated that many of the millions of computers connected to the global Internet network could be at risk.
There have been at least four other known victims so far, including computers at Loyola University of Chicago, the University of Rochester and Drexel University in Philadelphia.


Pierce Overwhelms Sanchez for First Grand Slam
Mary Pierce, the prodigy who needed to cut her parental ties to achieve the destiny an infamous tennis father had demanded of her, finally attained Grand Slam peace of mind today by capturing the Australian Open.
Pierce avenged her 1994 French Open final loss to Spain's Arantxa Sanchez Vicario with a vengeance beneath the gathering clouds at steamy Flinders Park, seizing her first Grand Slam title with a 6-3, 6-2 victory.


Progressive Corp.(PGR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New York Needs Its Taxi Safety Agents; Raise Cabs' Liability
To the Editor:
Is the taxi-riding public aware of the low liability limits ($10,000 to $20,000) that taxis are required to carry under New York State law?


Wellcome Fails to Sway Trust on Sale
Wellcome P.L.C.'s largest shareholder said today that it would press ahead with its plan to sell its 39.5 percent stake in the pharmaceutical company to Glaxo P.L.C., diminishing Wellcome's chances of evading Glaxo's $14 billion hostile takeover offer by attracting another bidder.
To Wellcome, the decision was a continued if widely expected betrayal by the shareholder, the Wellcome Trust, an independent charity that until 1986 was the sole owner of the company.
The trust, which was set up by Sir Henry Wellcome in 1936 to finance medical research, had reduced its stake through two public share offerings in recent years and had no legal duty to protect Wellcome.
But it had been seen by the company as a reliable bulwark against an unwanted takeover.


Benefits of Recycling Are Not Mythical
To the Editor:
Robert M. Lilienfeld and William L. Rathje offer a holy grail with no road map ("Six Enviro-Myths," Op-Ed, Jan. 21).
Exhorting us to "use less," they suggest that recycling is "one of the least important things we can do" for the environment.


Nets Find Mutombo A Very Rude Host
The commercial is an old one, from his rookie year.
It features a regal-looking center from the Denver Nuggets on two giant video screens, positioned at both ends of McNichols Arena.
Suddenly, in the middle of the game, his deep, baritone voice proclaims, "Man does not fly in the House of Mutombo."
Corny?
Perhaps.
But you do what you can to end a five-game losing streak, and no one understood that better tonight than 7-foot-2-inch Dikembe Mutombo, blocker of shots, conqueror of the Nets.
Mutombo scored 14 points, grabbed 19 rebounds, had 6 blocks and perhaps 20 hurries to lead the Nuggets over the Nets, 96-90.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Varied Proof of Life In the Yiddish Theater  'Too Jewish?' John Houseman Theater


G. Robert Holmen, 61, Advertising Executive
G.
Robert Holmen, the former chairman of the United States division of Backer Spielvogel Bates, the advertising agency, died on Monday while vacationing in the United States Virgin Islands.
Mr.
Holmen had lived in Vero Beach, Fla., since 1993.
He was 61.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said Robert C. Holmen, his son.


Pataki Asks CUNY and SUNY to Cut Costs
The Pataki administration has asked the State University and the City University of New York to cut their spending by $40 million over the next five months to help the state close a $300 million gap in its current budget.
In letters sent out Thursday to university officials, the State Budget Director, Patricia Woodworth, told the State University that it must reduce spending by $25 million and City University that it must reduce spending by $15 million.
The cuts, which must be completed by June 30, would represent about a 2 percent reduction in state aid for each system, state budget officials said.


Geon Co. (GON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Croll Collects the Biggest Honor for Holy Bull
Holy Bull, already voted the 3-year-old champion race horse of last year, was resting in Barn 3 at Gulfstream Park tonight while Jimmy Croll, his owner and trainer, flew to Washington and gathered the biggest Eclipse Award -- Horse of the Year.
By earning 241 of the 245 votes, the great gray horse proved as formidable at the ballot box as he did on the race track, where he won six of his eight starts and captured the imagination of the public by his front-running style.
He ran 12th in the Kentucky Derby and skipped the Preakness, Belmont and Breeders' Cup, but he dominated the sport whenever he ran.


Under Its Calm, Sarajevo Hides Deep Bitterness
For more than 1,000 days, Sarajevo has not been this quiet.
Children on sleds slide noiselessly over the snow.
Trams glide by.
At night the lights on the hills climb silently toward the stars, and not a mortar round or a sniper's shot disturbs the peace.
The cafes that were once the heart of this city's life are almost full again.
A take-out pizza service is doing a reasonable business.
Food does not abound, but there is enough to eat.
Among the United Nations armored personnel carriers on the streets, there are now a few private cars.


An Immortal Scot Travels Through Time
How could an action-adventure film that cost $34 million, most of which clearly went into pyrotechnics, computerized special effects and scenic locations, end up looking cheap, silly and lifeless?
To find out, see "Highlander: The Final Dimension."
The third and last episode of the series starring Christopher Lambert as a time-traveling Scot is an incoherent mess.
Directed by Andy Morahan, who comes from the world of music video, it follows the immortal Connor MacLeod (Mr. Lambert), as he darts through several centuries pursued by his archenemy, Kane (Mario Van Peebles).
Whoever manages to decapitate the other will possess the power to create illusions.


Tangshan Journal; After Eating Bitterness, 100 Flowers Blossom
Here at the site of the deadliest earthquake in the last two and a half centuries, He Shuyun, a 46-year-old Communist Party member, expresses nothing but sympathy for the quake victims of Kobe, Japan.
But more than concern, Mr.
He and others in this industrial city 105 miles southeast of Beijing exude resilience.
Since a quake struck Tangshan nearly 19 years ago, they have shown through enterprise and determination that life goes on even in the face of devastation and death 50 times greater than the disaster that hit the industrial city in western Japan last week.


Shooting Victim And Defendant Go Eye to Eye In Courtroom
Maryanne Phillips, the first person to be wounded in the Long Island Rail Road shooting a year ago, took the witness stand today and identified Colin Ferguson as the gunman who fired at point-blank range, "looking me dead in the eye."
"I had just started to read the newspaper and I was literally in my own little world when, through my peripheral vision, I could see the man next to me stand up," said Mrs.
Phillips, who still wears a cast on her arm from the wounds from 13 months ago and faces her fourth operation on Monday.
"I turned and he was looking me dead in the eye and pointing a gun at me. It was the most serious look I have ever seen on anyone's face. And then he shot me.


Bemis Co. (BMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prisons Chief Is Selected By Rowland
Last year, John G. Rowland made the state prisons chief, Larry R. Meachum, a central issue in his campaign for governor, accusing Mr.
Meachum of coddling criminals and building "Club Med style" prisons.
Today, after an international search for a new correction commissioner, Governor Rowland announced that he was appointing one of Mr.
Meachum's top aides, John Armstrong, to the job.


U.S. Exhibit On Bomber Is in Jeopardy
The Smithsonian Institution is expected to scale back or cancel an exhibit of the fuselage of the Enola Gay, the B-29 bomber that dropped the first atomic bomb on Japan in World War II, Congressional and Clinton Administration officials said today.
I.
Michael Heyman, the secretary of the Smithsonian, would not say today whether he would recommend to the Board of Regents that the exhibit, scheduled to open in May in the Smithsonian's National Air and Space Museum, be canceled when the board meets on Monday.


No Headline
I don't think it was on the tip of his tongue, but I do believe it was in the back of his mind.
There are a lot of ways to mispronounce my name.
That is the least common. -- REP.
BARNEY FRANK, after a Republican leader referred to him as 'Barney Fag.'  [ 8:1 ]


Rabin Renews Denunciation of Settlers as 'Burden'
While his Government approves new settlement construction in the West Bank, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has renewed his harsh attacks on settlers, denouncing them as "a burden" on the Israeli Army and on its fight against radical Palestinian terrorists.
"Settlements add nothing, absolutely nothing, to Israel's security," Mr.
Rabin told members of his Labor Party on Thursday night.
"They are a liability rather than an asset."


Family Keeps Control of Heat
The Miami Heat will end up in the hands of the family that had majority ownership all along.
MICKY ARISON announced yesterday that his family would buy out the partners BILLY CUNNINGHAM and LEWIS SCHAFFEL to gain full ownership of the team.
Cunningham and Lewis had shared the general manager's duties.
Arison said he would serve in that capacity until he can begin searching for a new general manager after the deal is closed.
The deal also has to be approved by the National Basketball Association.


Dole Warns White House That Plan to Bolster Peso Will Not Pass
The Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, signaled today that the White House plan to rescue the Mexican economy by guaranteeing $40 billion in loans is headed for defeat in Congress.
After two weeks of debate, the program is "out there in limbo somewhere," he said.


Man Accused of Clinic Killings Had Delusions, His Parents Say
The parents of John C. Salvi 3d, the man charged with killing two women at abortion clinics in the Boston area last month, said today that their son had a long history of strange behavior, and that they regretted not getting psychiatric help for him.
At a news conference here today, Anne Marie and John C. Salvi 2d said their son had once imagined an evil black bird in their living room, had held prayer vigils to ward off evil from his own apartment and had disrupted a Mass last Christmas Eve.
The clinics were attacked six days later, on Dec. 30.


Prison Term for Schlichter
ART SCHLICHTER, the quarterback whose professional career was ended by a gambling addiction, was sentenced to 24 months in prison yesterday for stealing hundreds of thousands of dollars from friends to fuel his habit.
Schlichter, jailed since November, stood somberly as United States District Judge PHILIP PRO in Las Vegas, Nev., imposed the maximum sentence possible on his guilty plea to bank fraud.


Extend the Nuclear Firewall
In this week's State of the Union address, President Clinton said the United States "will lead the charge" to extend the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty indefinitely and negotiate a global ban on nuclear testing.
These are vital issues, especially in the absence of a cold war.
Yet resistance remains, and Mr.
Clinton will need to move quickly and forcefully to achieve either goal.
The 1968 Nonproliferation Treaty, the bulwark of U.S. efforts to stop the spread of nuclear arms, comes up for review in April.
Signed by 168 nations, the treaty has helped keep nuclear power programs from being used to make arms and was a factor in persuading South Africa, Brazil, Argentina and Ukraine to give up their nuclear arms or arms-making.
It is essential that a substantial majority of countries vote to extend the treaty indefinitely.
That outcome is in doubt, to judge from this week's meeting of signatory countries in New York.


Franz Allers, 89, a Conductor And Broadway Musical Director
Franz Allers, a classically trained conductor who was the musical director for the original production of "My Fair Lady" and other Broadway musicals by Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe, died on Thursday at Desert Springs Hospital in Las Vegas, Nev., while traveling to California.
He was 89 and lived in Munich, Germany.
The cause was complications from pneumonia, said Chandler Holmes, his brother-in-law.


Observer; Joy In Burgville
Not much to report from Burgville.
We've had O. J. on the television night and day, and of course President Clinton's State of the Union speech went on for 20 years.
Col.
Rip Van Cantata, dean of Burgville Republicans, went to sleep when the speech started, the way he always does when there's a Democrat on television, saying, "Don't wake me till the rascal's through," and Mrs.
Cantata had to start him on intravenous feeding two days ago.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Japanese Soprano In First New York Recital  Kyoko Saito 92d Street Y


Knicks Can't Stop Johnson And Hornets
The Knicks' winning streak came to a screeching, embarrassing halt tonight.
They fell behind by 21 points in the first half.
Coach Pat Riley was ejected in the third quarter.
Larry Johnson had a career-high 39 points.
And Charlotte Coach Allen Bristow incensed some of the Knicks by putting Johnson back into the game in the last minute -- with the outcome already decided -- so Johnson could make a 3-pointer for his career scoring high.


Three New Offerings in World Markets
The Benham Global Natural Resources Index Fund tracks the basic material and energy sectors of the Dow Jones world stock index.
The fund owns stocks of companies that produce oil, metals, forest products and other types of raw materials.
Diversity is a prime selling point.
Even so, share prices are expected to be volatile, so the company suggests a time horizon of five years or more.
For short-term investors, the fund offers a way to bet on growth during economic expansions.
The Scudder Greater Europe Growth Fund invests mostly in the established markets of Western Europe, where economies are recovering.
Future investments are planned in the less industrialized nations.


Sumitomo Bank Expecting Huge Loss From Bad Loans
In what analysts say was a signal of the first annual loss for a major Japanese bank since the end of World War II, the Sumitomo Bank said today that it expected to report a loss of about $2.8 billion this fiscal year as it writes off mountains of bad loans.
The announcement, which stunned bankers here, reflects the magnitude of the bad-debt problem afflicting Japanese banks.
But the move by Sumitomo, the third-largest bank in the world, was also praised by analysts as a bold attempt -- at least for the normally conservative Japanese banks -- to bite the bullet and resolve problems quickly.


Flat Islanders Are No Longer Unbeaten
The Islanders were unbeaten through their first three games.
The Capitals were without a victory in their first three games.
It didn't stay that way.
Washington, a team that had scored only twice in its three road-opening games, got five goals against an ineffective and inefficient New York team and went on to a 5-2 victory at the USAir Arena.


Domtar (DTC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Is It Unexpected? Odd? It's Here
They both love their mothers and get nervous when it's time to perform.
Beyond that, the legendary Brian Wilson of the Beach Boys and the fashion designer Isaac Mizrahi have little in common, aside from the fact that they're both overnight stars of the Sundance Film Festival's documentary competition.
And that, however incongruous it may be in the studiously casual small-town atmosphere of Park City, they've both been here.
Mr.
Mizrahi is featured in "Unzipped," Douglas Keeve's revealing, hilarious film about the fashion industry, which happens to be everything that "Ready-to-Wear" is not.
Meanwhile, elsewhere in what has proved a hotly competitive lineup led by celebrity-related entries ("Crumb" is another), Mr.
Wilson is the subject of what he accurately calls "one of the better rock documentaries of our times."


George Baker, Harvard Dean And U.S. Adviser, Dies at 91
George P. Baker, dean of the Harvard Business School in the 1960's and a leading authority on transportation, air defense and the organization of business and government, died on Wednesday in the Good Samaritan Regional Medical Center in Phoenix.
He was 91.
The cause was complications from a stroke, the business school said.


Inventions That Emerge From Silence
The pianist Jacky Terrasson put on a show on Tuesday at the Village Vanguard that pretty much summed up what a rhythm section can do working within the modern mainstream.
The 29-year-old Mr.
Terrasson, who has just released his first American album, "Jacky Terrasson" (Blue Note), has received a lot of attention since winning the Thelonious Monk Institute's first prize in 1993.
But he was a fine player before, in part because he had worked with one of jazz's great taskmasters, the drummer and band leader Art Taylor.
Mr.
Taylor's lessons show.
Mr.
Terrasson's band, featuring Ugonna Okegwo on bass and Leon Parker on drums, is a meticulously controlled unit that emphasizes musical interchange, huge dynamic changes and sharp stop-time sections.
Mr.
Terrasson has also absorbed Mr.
Taylor's relationship to the audience: He is an entertainer in the great jazz tradition, where virtuosity and populism mix.


The Path to Literacy, As Found in Verse
THE three new readers had much in common.
They were all in their 60's and had come to New York from rural communities years back.
They all raised children and, until they started learning four weeks ago, had never truly mastered the written words.
Now all three were preparing to read their poems.
Robert Jackson hunched his big plowman's shoulders over the library computer making last-minute revisions in "Love Is a Hurting Game," one of the poems he was planning to read at the eighth and final session of the twice-weekly workshops he had been attending at the Eastern Parkway branch of the Brooklyn Public Library.


Ex-Bengal Enjoying This Time As a 49er
Marc Logan walked into Joe Robbie Stadium for Super Bowl picture day on Tuesday and pointed to the spot in the end zone where John Taylor drove a stake through the hearts of the Cincinnati Bengals on Jan. 22, 1989.
It was near the left corner of the north end of the stadium where Taylor split Bengals safety David Fulcher and cornerback Ray Horton, and quarterback Joe Montana squeezed in a perfect strike for a 10-yard touchdown pass with 34 seconds to play.
The play helped give the San Francisco 49ers a 20-16 victory and back-to-back Super Bowl championships.


A Flood Here, An Agassi Blitz There
The first tidal wave was created by Andre Agassi, who pounded Aaron Krickstein into early retirement in their bizarre Australian Open semifinal this afternoon.
But the second time the floodgates opened, Agassi was blameless: he and Krickstein had left the stadium court minutes before a power outage triggered a failure of the Flinders Park drainage system and a geyser of rainwater surged into the stadium.
The place turned into a disaster center for everyone except the Las Vegan, who has turned his Australian Open debut into a full-scale takeover.


A 'Happy Lunar New Year' Next Week
To the Editor:
The so-called Chinese New Year, which this year falls on Jan. 31, comes about one month after the Western New Year.
I am a Chinese-born Korean.
Neither in China nor in Korea do I recall people saying they were celebrating the Chinese New Year.
If you needed to make a distinction from the Western New Year, you used the term lunar New Year.


New York Needs Its Taxi Safety Agents
To the Editor:
The concerns raised in "We Need Protection From Perilous Taxis" (letter, Jan. 14) come at the same time Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York is looking to cut the number of taxi enforcement agents in half.
These agents insure that passengers get safe rides in well-maintained vehicles at the regulated fare.


Service Merchandise Co.(SME,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


PBS Brings Enjoyment
To the Editor:
I don't know how much House Speaker Newt Gingrich pays for cable television, but his arrogance shows if he thinks cable substitutes for the Public Broadcasting Service.


Bonds Gain On Signs of A Slowdown
Treasury bonds rallied yesterday, driving rates down to their lowest level in more than three months, on signs that the economy might be cooling off and that inflation remained in check.
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond jumped 14/32 , to 9710/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction, fell to 7.73 percent, from 7.83 percent on Thursday.
The market had its biggest one-day gain yesterday since Dec. 2, and the 30-year bond's yield was the lowest since Oct. 19, when it was 7.67 percent.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Signs of slowdown were evident in a report showing that economic growth had accelerated to 4.5 percent.
Despite the strong growth, the data also showed inventories of unsold goods climbed more rapidly than expected, suggesting that factory orders could taper off early this year.  [ Page 1. ]


Westinghouse Electric Corp.(WX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Less Affluent Players Join Super-Rich Game
EVERY investor dreams of discovering the next Apple Computer or Intel.
But investors who get in long before a public stock offering have the most to gain.
And small start-up companies fail at an alarmingly high rate, leaving many people holding the bag.
To spread the risk, venture capital funds bet on many companies.
Getting into such a fund, though, generally requires an investment of at least $1 million.


Ursula Oppens Plus One, in Works for Two Pianos
Musical and political ideas are each other's servants in Frederic Rzewski's piano works, which often use protest songs as platforms for extraordinarily inventive fantasies.
For a pianist, keeping both elements in focus is as important as negotiating Mr.
Rzewski's assertive language, and although he has quite a few champions, Ursula Oppens has been one of the most eloquent.
On Wednesday evening at the Miller Theater, Ms.
Oppens and Mr.
Rzewski, who is also a formidable pianist, joined forces in a program of music for two pianos.
Only the second half of the program was devoted to Mr.
Rzewski's works.
The pianists opened the program with Arnold Schoenberg's peculiar but fascinating arrangement of his own "Kammersymphonie No. 2." At first the comparatively dry piano sound seemed irreconcilably foreign to this lushly orchestrated score.
But the sharply articulated piano writing yielded surprises and clarifications, including a Bachian quality -- a rhythmically steady chromatic probing -- that is virtually undiscernible in the orchestral version.


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ
Raw Emotion, Given Form By Density and Energy  Matt Shipp Knitting Factory


Man Accused of Clinic Killings Had Delusions, His Parents Say
The parents of John C. Salvi 3d, the man charged with killing two women at abortion clinics in the Boston area last month, said today that their son had a long history of strange behavior, and that they regretted not getting psychiatric help for him.
At a news conference here today, Anne Marie and John C. Salvi 2d said their son had once imagined an evil black bird in their living room, had held prayer vigils to ward off evil from his own apartment and had disrupted a Mass last Christmas Eve.
The clinics were attacked six days later, on Dec. 30.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.69
5.53
2.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.76
2.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.10
6.15
3.10
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.61
7.74
5.63
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.73
7.83
6.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.58
8.70
7.13
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.73
6.79
5.44
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
From the Midwest, Roots-Rock That Avoids Arty Poses  The Bottle Rockets The Mercury Lounge


The Escalating War on Legal Abortion
In the last 22 months, five people -- two doctors, a clinic escort and two receptionists -- have been murdered by anti-abortion activists.
Last week, at a Washington march commemorating the 22d anniversary of the Supreme Court's Roe v.
Wade decision, a group called the American Coalition of Life Activists issued an invitation to more mayhem.
True, the invitation to violence is not wholly explicit.
But the group distributed a flier, bearing the title "Guilty of Crimes Against Humanity," that gave the names and addresses of 12 doctors who perform abortions, describing them as "The Deadly Dozen." This has an uncomfortable resemblance to a hit list; several of the doctors had already been displayed (as were the two murdered physicians) on "wanted" posters.


W.B.A. Says No to Foreman
The World Boxing Association championship committee unanimously denied the request by GEORGE FOREMAN to fight AXEL SCHULZ of Germany and yesterday threatened to strip him of the world heavyweight championship if he didn't reconsider.
GILBERTO MENDOZA, the W.B.A. president and one of five voting members of the committee, said from New York that he would try to meet as soon as possible with Foreman.


Lemuel W. Diggs, 95, a Leader In Study of Sickle Cell Anemia
Dr.
Lemuel W. Diggs, who spent more than 60 years as a national leader of research into sickle cell anemia and helped the actor Danny Thomas establish the aims of the St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, died on Jan. 8 at his home in that city.
He was 95.
The cause was general organ failure, said a son, Walter W. Diggs, also of Memphis.


Williams Is an All-Star
The Yankees' BERNIE WILLIAMS has been named to the Puerto Rican League all-star team.
The center fielder finished with a .269 average and was among the league leaders with 13 stolen bases and 7 homers in 160 at-bats playing for the Arecibo club in the winter league.
Other all-stars from the major leagues included JOEY CORA and ROBERTO HERNANDEZ, who played with the White Sox last season, and LEO GOMEZ from the Orioles.


United Suspends Cantona
Manchester United suspended ERIC CANTONA, the striker who was last season's Premier League player of the year, yesterday for kicking and punching a fan during a match on Wednesday.
France also dropped Cantona, its captain, from the national team.
Cantona jumped into the stands at Crystal Palace and aimed a two-footed kick at a spectator who had been taunting him.
Cantona then punched the fan, MATTHEW SIMMONS, before being restrained by officials and teammates.
Simmons has been banned from the stadium.


ALC Communications (ALC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Winding Paths To Glory
ONE day before before another Super Bowl kickoff, the million-dollar question is: "Who do you like?"
My million-dollar answer is: "I like San Diego." And I do, literally.
I like the team, the players, the colors.


Senate Democrats Threaten Balanced-Budget Measure
Hours after the balanced-budget movement rolled its constitutional amendment, juggernaut fashion, through the House, the Senate served notice today that it might not be so compliant.
At a news conference, Senate Democrats who had voted for a similar amendment in the past hinted broadly that they could change their minds unless the Senate's Republican majority agreed to produce a detailed budget-balancing plan as part of an amendment package.


Economy Grew At a Brisk Rate In 4th Quarter
The economy accelerated to a 4.5 percent growth rate in the final three months of 1994, the Government reported today, but ended the strongest year in a decade with clear signs that the slowdown long sought by the Federal Reserve may be at hand.
In financial markets, bond prices surged, driving interest rates lower, as analysts concluded that a slowdown could mean the Federal Reserve was close to the end of a credit-tightening it began a year ago to keep inflation in check and the business expansion from overheating.  [ Page 33. ]  The broad stock market was steady, but blue-chip stocks fell.  [ Page 34. ]


BCE Inc.(BCE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A headline and a subheading yesterday about a hearing on foreign policy misidentified the location.
It was in the House of Representatives, not the Senate.


Pataki Hints Budget Will Delay Business-Tax Cuts He Promised
As he began to prepare New Yorkers for the painful budget news he will deliver next week, Gov.
George E. Pataki hinted strongly today that he would not be able to reduce two business taxes this year that he criticized harshly during last year's campaign.
As a candidate, Mr.
Pataki vowed to cut the two taxes -- the 4 percent gross receipts tax on utility revenues, and the real property transfer gains tax, a 10 percent tax on gains in sales of property for more than $1 million.
But he never set a timetable, and he suggested today that he would have to delay cutting those taxes because of the depth of the state's fiscal problems and his preference for reducing income taxes.


Investigation Of Secretary Of Commerce Faces Delays
As President Clinton offered a brief endorsement of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown today, the Republican Congressman leading the investigation into Mr.
Brown's financial dealings said he had no plans to hold hearings until at least late spring, making it likely that the dispute would continue to bother the White House for months.
Representative William F. Clinger, the Pennsylvania Republican who heads the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee and who has been investigating Mr.
Brown's finances for nearly a year, said that House approval of the main Republican legislative package, the Contract With America, would be his top priority for the first 100 days of this session of Congress.
The current session began on Jan. 4.


Former Football Stars Bring Game Plans to Capital
The dingy basement hallways that connect the Capitol and the House office buildings are a complicated series of 10-yard outs, button hooks and slants.
Steve Largent never had a problem with those patterns as a wide receiver in the National Football League.
But minus his helmet and shoulder pads, with rookie politicians rather than defensive backs at his side, Largent the Congressman carries a compass on his key chain to help him navigate his new playing field.


INSIDE
Remembering Auschwitz
Lech Walesa of Poland, the writer Elie Wiesel and other officials and survivors confronted Auschwitz's memory, and today's legacy.
Page 5.
Unsettling for Israel
Contradictory statements by Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel about the perplexing issue of West Bank settlers and their impact on peace talks is causing public support for him to decline.
Page 3.
Agreement on Crime Bill
The National Rifle Association will follow House Speaker Newt Gingrich's request and postpone its push for repeal of the ban on assault weapons while other elements of the new package are decided.
Page 7.
History With Gizmos
A Philadelphia organization seeking to promote the Constitution and Declaration of Independence has plans for a modern museum that critics say would trivialize the history it seeks to promote.
Page 6.
Police Department Dispute
New York City's top police corruption fighter has been forced to resign after a power struggle with the Police Commissioner over how far the Police Department should go in combatting corruption.
Page 23.
Pierce Wins in Australia
Twenty-year-old Mary Pierce captured her first grand slam title by defeating No. 1-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, 6-3, 6-2, in the Australian Open final.
Page 25.


S.E.C. Staff Seeks Kidder Charges
The staff of the New York regional office of the Securities and Exchange Commission has recommended that civil administrative charges be filed against Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company and three of the Wall Street firm's former executives in the aftermath of one of Wall Street's most spectacular scandals.
The recommendations, which were confirmed by several people familiar with the case, were made known when the firm and the three former executives, including the chief bond trader, Joseph Jett, got letters inviting them to submit arguments to the S.E.C. saying why civil charges should not be filed.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Nordiques (3-0) Turn It On  Bob Bassen had two goals and five other Nordiques scored as visiting Quebec routed the Buffalo Sabres, 7-3, last night in a matchup of undefeated teams.
Quebec is home tonight to play the slumping Stanley Cup champion Rangers.
Quebec's seven goals nearly doubled the number Buffalo (3-1) had allowed in its first three games.
Buffalo goaltenders Grant Fuhr and Dominik Hasek had allowed only four goals in three victories.
Bassen's two goals came as Quebec (3-0) scored three straight in the second period against Fuhr for a 5-2 lead. (AP) Penguins 5, Senators 4: Mike Hudson scored off a rebound on a two-on-one break early in the third period as the Pittsburgh Penguins squandered a three-goal lead in their home opener before beating the Ottawa Senators.
The Penguins' 4-0 start is only the third in their 28-year history. (AP)


A Gift-Free Congress
Brushing off President Clinton's State of the Union challenge to Congress to stop taking gifts from lobbyists proved light work for the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole.
The President, he noted drily, "did not mention how many lobbyists contributed to his legal defense fund."
It was clever of Mr.
Dole to switch subjects to the hypocrisy of Mr.
Clinton's accepting lobbyists' contributions to his Paula Jones and Whitewater defense funds while asking Congress to give up its own benefits.
The White House responded by announcing that the President would no longer accept lobbyists' contributions but would not return contributions already made to the fund.
That is not good enough if the President really means to persuade people of the evils of outside influences.
He should give the money back.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
A Performance Trip Through Hip-Hop History  The Roots Irving Plaza


Gunshots in Rockefeller Center Subway Station


Cram Schools: Immigrants' Tools for Success
On a brisk Saturday morning, while most of their friends were relaxing at home, 16-year-old Jerry Lee and eight other Asian teen-agers huddled over their notebooks and calculators for a full day of math and English lessons.
During the week, they all attend public schools in the city.
But every Saturday, they go to a Korean hagwon, or cram school, in Flushing to spend up to seven hours immersed in the finer points of linear algebra or Raymond Chandler.


Panic in Subway as Pickpocket Hunt Leaves Officer Shot
What began as a relatively minor incident -- police officers chasing a team of suspected pickpockets into a subway -- turned the homebound rush into a nightmare for thousands in midtown Manhattan late yesterday after a police officer accidently shot himself.
Confusion over the shooting brought swarms of fellow officers to the scene and subway power had to be turned off as they searched for suspects in dark tunnels.
The police snared two of three suspects, one outside and one inside the crowded subway station at Rockefeller Center, at the Avenue of the Americas between 47th and 50th Streets.
But hundreds of civilians cowered in the station and aboard stalled trains, and more than 100,000 subway riders and countless motorists were caught in delays of up to two hours that spilled across midtown.


Consolidated Papers (CDP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gingrich and N.R.A. Will Delay Effort to Repeal Ban on Assault Weapons
In a deal with House Speaker Newt Gingrich, the National Rifle Association has agreed to postpone its push for a repeal of the ban on assault weapons until after the House completes work on other elements of a new crime bill.
In exchange, a group of lawmakers will be appointed to hold educational hearings intended to show that "gun control does not reduce crime," said Tanya Metaksa, chief lobbyist for the N.R.A.


Simpson Asserts Innocence In a Prison Book and Tape
In his new book, which arrived in stores today, O. J. Simpson, repeatedly maintains his innocence, lambastes the press for murdering him as surely as someone else murdered Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman, and talks about a new spirituality -- strong enough, he says, to keep him off golf courses on Sundays once he gets out of jail.
"How could anyone say I could kill this woman?" Mr.
Simpson asks in the book, "I Want to Tell You," written with Lawrence Schiller.
"Don't they understand that I'd jump in front of a bullet for Nicole? That I'd jump in front of a train to protect my family?"


Corrections
An article on Jan. 19 about two boys who went to summer camp with the help of an agency supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund misspelled the camp's name and misidentified its sponsor.
The name is Camp Wilbur Herrlich, not Herlich; the sponsoring organization is Lutheran Social Services of Metropolitan New York, not the Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies. (The federation, which includes Lutheran Social Services, provided scholarships to the two boys to attend the camp.)


New Welfare Proposal
The National Governors' Association has a bipartisan proposal allowing the states to design their own welfare programs.
But Administration officials say such a move would be a mistake.
Article, page 8.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about hearings by the National Transportation Safety Board into the crash of USAir Flight 427 near Pittsburgh referred incorrectly to criticism of the Boeing Company by the Safety Board's chairman, James E. Hall.
He accused the company of having failed to tell the board everything it knew about incidents that might have a bearing on the crash.
He did not say Boeing withheld data.


Edward Aborn, Executive, 84, In Coffee Trade
Edward Aborn, a leader in the American coffee industry who helped develop instant coffee, died on Jan. 15 at South Miami Hospital.
A former resident of New Jersey, he was 84 and lived in Hot Springs, Va., and Key Largo, Fla.
The cause was cardiac arrest, his family said.


Lawmaker Upbraids Panel on Slow Pace
The House Judiciary Committee hearing room was stunned into silence today when Representative Sonny Bono, Republican of California, reprimanded lawyers on the committee for arguing over details of a crime bill provision to protect citizens during searches by the police.
"When are we going to stop the games?" Mr.
Bono asked abruptly, drawing attention to the frustrations of a non-lawyer impatient with the slow-moving legislative process.
"We get in these buildings, and, with all due respect to lawyers, it's wonderful that you have this intricate knowledge."


Paralyzed Golfer Overcomes Doubts
A biting wind swept in off the lake in front of the driving range, forcing some of the cramped swings of the golfers who were pounding balls to get even tighter.
Up and down the practice ground, players flailed at balls, scattering shots like little leaguers in a batting cage.
There was one exception.
At the very end of the range, loosening up for a clinic, a middle-aged fellow was effortlessly ripping shot after shot deep into the rock pit.
Every free and easy swing produced a clean hit, right on the sweet spot.
The trajectories were almost identical, rocketing off the face of the King Cobra driver like 727's off the runway at La Guardia.


Cabot Corp.(CBT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SENATE APPROVES LIMITS ON RULES COSTLY TO STATES
The Senate today approved legislation making it harder for Congress to impose costly new requirements on state and local governments without providing the money for them.
The 86-to-10 vote gave bipartisan approval to one of the central elements of the Republican legislative agenda.
It also ended three weeks of debate in which Democrats tried futilely to limit the measure's scope.
In the end, many ambivalent Democrats joined enthusiastic Republicans to support a measure that is broadly popular with governors and mayors and that President Clinton has endorsed.


Kobe's Best Problem: Too Many Gifts
Narumi Nakagawa has plenty of problems, like a house that collapsed in last week's earthquake, but as she sits on a futon in a refugee shelter, she is fretting about another painful quandary.
Friends have brought her so many apples and rice balls and other gifts that she can never get through them all.
That creates the risk of an aftershock of horrible embarrassment: What if a friend returned and found a gift moldering in a corner?


The Cleveland as One Very Large Quartet
Your music teacher around the corner has been telling you for years that the piano is not a drum with all the pitches, but instead a messenger of song: a veritable orchestra of 88 keys capable of singing like a cello or trilling like a flute, if you will but treat it properly.
So what a surprise it was to come to Carnegie Hall on Wednesday night and hear the Cleveland Orchestra trying to imitate a piano.
The first of four concerts on consecutive nights by this distinguished group began indeed with Arnold Schoenberg's fascinating, if slightly weird, recasting of the Brahms G-minor Piano Quartet for full orchestra.
It scotched pretty quickly any ideal of pure, disembodied music, floating free of instruments and performers.


Kennedy Blessing Raises Questions for Catholics
A statement that Senator Edward M. Kennedy had his second marriage blessed by the Roman Catholic Church after a 1982 divorce has revealed wide confusion among both Catholics and non-Catholics about the church's policy on annulments.
Catholic teaching does not allow remarriage after divorce unless a spouse has died or the earlier marriage is annulled, meaning that it was found to have been invalid from the beginning.


Two Sides Will Return To Bargaining Table
Perhaps in an effort to see some professional athletes play a game of major league quality, some of baseball's most prominent executives, including the acting commissioner, Bud Selig, headed to Miami today to attend tomorrow's Super Bowl.
By Wednesday, though, Selig and his fellow club owners will focus solely on baseball as they return to the bargaining table with the striking players.
That's when Bill Usery Jr., the mediator President Clinton has charged with finding a way to get baseball back in action, will reconvene talks.
The session is tentatively set to take place at a hotel in downtown Washington.


The Neediest Cases; Charities Say Donations Are Weak
Last winter, as the nation edged its way out of the recession, many New York City charities reported slight increases in private donations.
But this season, officials at some of the city's largest social service agencies say giving has been surprisingly weak.
While giving has remained stable on a national level, all but one of the seven agencies supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund say that donations are flat or lagging up to 10 percent behind last winter.
Citing reasons as various as the welfare reform movement and the mild winter, they say that a lag in all private giving -- not only to the Neediest Cases -- jeopardizes their most basic programs as record numbers of New Yorkers seek help.


Maj. Gen. John W. Kaine, 79, Commander in Army Reserve
Maj.
Gen.
John W. Kaine, who rose from private to become commander of New York's 77th Infantry Division of the Army Reserve, died on Wednesday at Winthrop University Hospital.
He was 79 and lived in Williston Park, L.I.
He had a lengthy illness, complicated by surgery, according to the 77th United States Army Reserve Command at Fort Totten, Queens, his final command.


Mapco Inc.(MDA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
NEW YORK METS -- Named Lee May, Jr. and Greg Tubbs scouts.


Woman Identified Her Killer, Jury Is Told
Three and a half years ago, as a 30-year-old woman lay dying after being stabbed with an 11-inch carving knife near Central Park, she lifted her head and identified her attacker, the prosecution told jurors yesterday.
In opening arguments in the murder trial of Kevin McKiever yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, jurors heard that as the woman, Alexis Ficks Welsh, lay on the sidewalk, she told a neighbor who came to her aid who the killer was.


Taking Sides Won't Solve the Bosnian Conflict
To the Editor:
"Yes, Talk to the Bosnian Serbs" (editorial, Jan. 21) is remiss on facts.
It makes President Carter's well-meaning discussions with the Bosnian Serbs sound somehow dishonorable and counterproductive.
This, even though throughout Europe and elsewhere, except for most of the American media, experts praised his attempt to gain a cease-fire and initiate a positive dialogue among the warring sides.


Stocks Finish Mixed On Economic Report
The stock market closed mixed yesterday, despite a rally for bonds that saw their biggest gains in more than two months.
Stock and bond traders reacted differently to news that the economy grew as strongly as expected in the fourth quarter but that growth may be slowing.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 12.45 points, to 3,857.99, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index rose 2.07 points, to 470.39.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index gained 1.34 points, to 758.91.


Chronicle
For the last 25 years, JONATHAN SCHWARTZ has devoted an hour of his Super Bowl Sunday radio program to a discussion of baseball played over the sounds of old games and baseball-inspired music.
Tomorrow, he plans to be silent on the subject on his weekly show on WQEW (1560 AM), which is owned by The New York Times Company.
Except that he will explain why he's avoiding the topic.


Mandate Bill Cancels Threat of Water Plant
To the Editor:
"What's the Rush on Mandates?" (editorial, Jan. 18) questions Republican efforts to rush legislation that would bar Federal mandates on states unless Federal financing is provided.
This is exactly the type of legislation that would eliminate the threat of a Federal order that New York City build water filtration plants it doesn't need, costing billions of dollars it doesn't have.
Under current regulations, Washington could order construction of these plants without providing financing.


Getting Into the Driver's Seat
Mark Ventimiglia, 35, of Ozone Park, Queens, set out to buy a new car and after some research decided on a Chrysler Concorde.
To help him get a good deal, he contacted the American Automobile Association club in New York.
For a small fee, A.A.A. provides members with the invoice prices of cars.
Customers can use this information to negotiate for a lower price with a dealer, or they can buy the car directly through the A.A.A.
Auto Ease program, available in many states.
Financing is also available.


Beliefs; Dispelling a myth about class warfare but confirming a decline of old values.
Are the vociferous battles that Americans have long waged over values a reflection of class warfare?
Reacting to the radical questioning of American institutions and beliefs that flourished in the 1960's, many conservatives and disillusioned liberals said, "yes." They contended that the challenge to long-held moral and social standards was the work of a powerful "new class" of educated professionals or "knowledge workers."





Top Police Corruption Fighter Forced Out
Deputy Commissioner Walter S. Mack Jr., the Police Department's top corruption fighter, was forced to resign yesterday amid a dispute with Police Commissioner William J. Bratton over how far the department should go in combating corruption.
In an interview yesterday, Mr.
Bratton said that he asked for the resignation of Mr.
Mack, head of the Internal Affairs Bureau, because he needed a more effective administrator and communicator in the job.
He said part of his problems with Mr.
Mack was caused by the former official's excessive demands for resources at a time when the city faced huge budget problems.


Air-Crash Hearing Suspended While Investigation Goes On
The National Transportation Safety Board ended a week of hearings today, indefinitely adjourning the session to give investigators time go back to the laboratory, and even into the air, to search for a cause of the crash of USAir Flight 426 here on Sept. 8, in which all 132 people aboard died.
Investigators usually have a good idea of the cause of an air crash before they begin hearings, but in this case the months of painstaking detective work failed to produce a plausible theory of what happened.
All the main parties in the case promised to go on with the search, but each found something in the evidence to vindicate itself.


No. 2 House Leader Refers to Colleague With Anti-Gay Slur
The House majority leader, Representative Dick Armey of Texas, set off a dispute on Capitol Hill today when he referred to Representative Barney Frank, one of several openly homosexual members of Congress, as "Barney Fag."
Mr.
Armey said later that he had simply mispronounced Mr.
Frank's name.
First privately and then in addressing the House, he apologized to Mr.
Frank for the remark, which he had made in an interview with a group of radio broadcasters.


Giuliani's Plan to Unite Police Approved by Transit Agency
After a decade-long effort by three successive Mayors to consolidate New York City's three police forces, the last major obstacles to the merger of two of the departments -- the transit and city police -- were removed yesterday.
The board of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority reluctantly approved the merger early yesterday afternoon, and just a few hours later, leaders of the union representing transit officers said they were dropping their opposition to the plan.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Jan. 12 about the denial of a gaming license to Bally Gaming Inc. by Louisiana regulators misstated the charge to which Alan Maiss, the company's former president, pleaded guilty.
The charge was that he failed to tell Federal officials that Christopher Tanfield, the president of the company that distributed Bally's video poker machines in Louisiana, was not licensed to conduct gambling business in that state.
Mr.
Maiss did not plead guilty to failure to tell Federal officials that he knew Mr.
Tanfield was a reputed associate of organized crime.


Joanne Woodward as a Lethal Old Lady
At 60-something, Joanne Woodward still gives off the glow that movie stars are supposed to have but that often exists only on film.
In the current Long Wharf Theater revival of "Arsenic and Old Lace," Joseph Kesselring's 1941 comedy about sweet little old poisoners, she has wattage to spare.
But she uses it to slyly subversive effect to burnish a theatrical chestnut that needs all the polish it can get.
Her hair a dusty shade of blond and her face a study in seraphic contentment, Ms.
Woodward brings a quality of arrested girlishness to Abby Brewster, one of a pair of do-gooding, geriatric sisters whose hobby is killing off lonely old men.
She seems to exist in her own golden haze, nodding her head as if the world were a litany of lovely reassurances to which she can only agree.
And when she moves, it's with a strange, scuttling gait, somewhere between a skip and a canter, that bespeaks infinite enthusiasm.


Governors Propose a Limit To U.S. Control of Welfare
On the eve of a White House conference on welfare policy, leaders of the National Governors' Association have devised a bipartisan proposal that would give states the option of taking a single Federal payment each year and designing their own welfare programs, with hardly any Federal regulations.
Although President Clinton called the conference to promote bipartisan cooperation on welfare, top Administration officials have already expressed reservations about some elements of the association's plan, saying they could hurt poor children.


Germans Reflect on Meaning of Auschwitz
Perhaps no country in the world has marked the 50th anniversary of the liberation of the Auschwitz death camp this week with as many solemn speeches, graphic television programs and lengthy newspaper supplements as Germany.
The flood of self-examination reflects the desire of the united Germany to come to terms with its Nazi past in a way that the divided country never did.
It is an attempt by the children of perpetrators and unprotesting witnesses to find a way to confront the Nazi campaign that sought to destroy European Jewry.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Edwin M. Slote, a Manhattan lawyer, omitted the name of a surviving son.
He is Prof.
Michael A. Slote of Silver Spring, Md.


York College Head Answers Critics of Costs
The president of York College, Josephine D. Davis, said yesterday through a spokeswoman that she did not intend to resign in the wake of reports this week about questionable spending practices, and added that she may give her side of the case.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ANADARKO PETROLEUM CORP., Houston, an oil and gas company, said that because it expected lower gas prices, it would cut its exploration budget for 1995 by 60 percent.
COMDISCO INC., Rosemont, Ill., which buys, sells and leases computer equipment, has repurchased 1.1 million shares of its common stock for $26 million from the estate of its founder, Kenneth Pontikes, and related trusts.
Comdisco has about 35.2 million shares outstanding.


Group Offers Plan to Give Historic Area Modern Look
In an effort to lift the local economy and turn one of the country's oldest historical areas into a bigger tourist attraction, an organization that promotes the United States Constitution has announced a proposal to develop a high-tech, underground museum with exhibits on the Constitution and Bill of Rights, the Declaration of Independence and the Liberty Bell.
A proposed $170 million Constitution Center, to be financed largely through private donations, would replace a parking garage beneath the mall facing Independence Hall, where the Declaration of Independence was adopted and the Constitution was drafted.


In Auschwitz, Snow Faintly Falls on the Living and Dead
Dignitaries and death camp survivors converged today on Auschwitz-Birkenau, the main inferno of the Nazi killing machine, and confronted an unspeakable memory with carefully chosen words for those who died and for those who are determined not to forget.
Snow began falling lightly, just as it had 50 years ago, when Russian soldiers, moving behind weeks of artillery barrages, finally arrived at the gates to find thousands of emaciated prisoners, a remnant of the more than one million people who were murdered there.


Ivy and Red Tape
Four years ago, as part of the relentless struggle to balance its budget, Brown University eliminated financing for four varsity teams -- two men's and two women's.
Female athletes sued, and now, after a trial that dragged on three months, a Federal judge in Providence, R.I., is considering whether the university is offering enough opportunities for women to take part in sports.
The case is ironic on at least two counts.
First, Brown has spent more in legal fees than it ever saved by cutting the teams.
Second, few institutions are more eager to encourage women than Brown is.
This fall, 54 percent of the entering class was female; in relation to the number of participants, Brown has more women's varsity teams than men's, and it has more women's teams (17) than the national average of women's and men's teams combined.
But when it comes to Federal harassment of colleges and universities, Brown is hardly alone.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 ANGER IN SARAJEVO  A cease-fire has silenced the guns in the Bosnian capital, but the look of normalcy veils a deep bitterness and a determination to settle accounts with Bosnian Serb leaders regarded as war criminals.  1  NEW U.S.
TIES WITH VIETNAM  The United States will exchange envoys with Vietnam and open a mission there, another step toward establishing full relations.
The Smithsonian Institution is expected to scale back a disputed World War II exhibit, Administration officials said.  8  SIMPSON BOOK ARRIVES IN STORES  In his new book, O. J. Simpson repeatedly maintains his innocence, lambasts the press, and talks about a new spirituality.  6  CELEBRATING OR TRIVIALIZING?
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19 Editorials  Police merger, public fears.
Extend the nuclear firewall.
A gift-free Congress?
Escalating war on legal abortion.
Letters  Russell Baker: Joy in Burgville.
Steven Rattner: Ivy and red tape.
Richard S. Aronson: "I will die over here without someone to help."  Adam Davidson and Brian A. Brown: India's valley of death.
Neediest Cases 22  Chronicle 20 Bridge 15 Crossword 16


Police Merger, Public Fears
Even Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's staunchest supporters occasionally lose patience with his combative approach to politics.
But in the case of New York City's long and fruitless quest to merge its three police forces, Mr.
Giuliani's confrontational style might well produce success where his predecessors failed.
Mayors Edward Koch and David Dinkins were both thwarted in their attempts to consolidate the three departments, largely because of resistance from the Transit and Housing Police and their allies in Albany.
Mayor Giuliani, too, met strong opposition, and the Housing Police are still battling in court.
But yesterday, in a last-minute turnaround, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority dropped its opposition and voted to bring the Transit Police into the New York City Police Department.
The Transit Police union later also agreed to allow the merger.


Future Looks Brighter For No-Load Stocks
MOST people have heard of no-load mutual funds, which do not levy sales charges.
Now make room for no-load stocks.
Under new securities rules, do-it-yourself investors will have more chances to buy stocks directly from companies -- and be able to bypass brokers entirely in the bargain.
Several corporations have set up plans under the new rules, or will do so within weeks.
They include Houston Industries, a $5 billion cable and energy company; Morton International, the salt seller, and Portland General, an Oregon utility.


World News Briefs; Burmese Army Captures Stronghold of Insurgents
The Burmese Army today overran the jungle headquarters of one of the world's oldest insurgent groups, forcing thousands of refugees to flee across the border into Thailand.
Diplomats said that as many as 15,000 Burmese soldiers were involved in the capture of the Manerplaw, the headquarters of the military arm of the Karen, an ethnic group that has been fighting for greater autonomy since 1948.


Commissioner Tells N.F.L. to Follow the Straight and Narrow
There were times in his first five years as N.F.L. commissioner that Paul Tagliabue would stand before the hundreds of reporters at the Super Bowl and tensely deal with such awkward and difficult situations as drug abuse, a bitter labor dispute and a sometimes frantic expansion process.
That was then, this is now.
Times must be good when the biggest controversy is the vision of the officials.
On top of the sports world and enjoying the view, Tagliabue addressed the news media today with the National Football League in a state of prosperity and peace for the first time since he took office in 1989.


U.S. AND VIETNAM PLAN TO EXCHANGE LOW-LEVEL ENVOYS
Taking a major step toward full diplomatic relations with Vietnam, the United States announced today that it would open a liaison office in Hanoi on Saturday and sign an agreement to exchange diplomats.
The agreement will not establish full diplomatic relations.
Low-level diplomats will be exchanged, with the first American diplomats stationed in Vietnam since April 1975, when the final American troops and officials pulled out as Communist troops moved to capture Saigon.


Tosco Corp.(TOS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


USAir Posts Loss; Crashes Called a Factor
The USAir Group estimated yesterday that it lost $110 million in revenues in the fourth quarter because passengers continued to avoid the airline after two of its jets crashed last year.
That figure is in addition to the $40 million in revenue the airline said it lost in the third quarter because of the July and September crashes.


How Mr. Fish Helped Preserve Hudson Valley
To the Editor:
Is 18 1/2 years too long to fulfill a prophecy?
Not when it results in nuclear freedom for the Mid-Hudson Valley in New York State.


Unisys (UIS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chronicle
Attention, Washington hostesses: big changes are afoot on Embassy Row.
Sir ROBIN RENWICK the British Ambassador, is departing the post he has held since 1991.
Newspapers in London were reporting this week that his successor would be Sir JOHN KERR, the British representative to the European Union in Brussels.


Taking Sides Won't Solve the Bosnian Conflict; Don't Coddle the Serbs
To the Editor:
As you accurately point out (editorial, Jan. 21), by traveling to Pale and talking to the Serbian leadership, the contact group (Britain, France, Russia, Germany and the United States) has already violated last summer's United Nations Security Council resolution that required all countries to "desist from any political talks with the leadership of the Bosnian Serb party as long as that party has not accepted the proposed settlement (51 percent-49 percent division of Bosnia) in full."


Executive Changes
METROPOLITAN LIFE INSURANCE CO., New York, appointed Anthony C. Cannatella, C. Robert Henrikson and John H. Tweedie executive vice presidents and members of the corporate management office.
In addition, Leland C. Launer Jr. was named senior vice president of the fixed-income investments department.
OSRAM SYLVANIA INC., Danvers, Mass., appointed Charles F. Jerabek executive vice president and general manager of automotive and miniature lighting.
Asahel Parmelee was named senior vice president for precision materials and components.


LTV Corp.(LTV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Balanchine And One He Inspired
"Serenade," which dates from 1934, is important for being the first ballet George Balanchine choreographed in America and an early example of the plotless mood pieces for which he became famous.
"Serenade" was danced by the New York City Ballet at the New York State Theater on Thursday night along with two other works of this kind by Balanchine: "Duo Concertant" and the previously reviewed "Agon." The program also included Lynn Taylor-Corbett's "Chiaroscuro," which probably could not have existed without the precedent of Balanchine.


No Deal With Strawberry, Major League Officials Say
Major league baseball officials denied yesterday that they had agreed to a deal that would allow Darryl Strawberry to settle Federal tax charges against him by accepting a three-month prison sentence, paying a substantial fine and performing community service while continuing his baseball career.
"Contrary to published reports, we haven't made a deal with anybody," said Rich Levin, a spokesman for the commissioner's office.


Bridge; The formidable Meckstroth-Rodwell partnership wins the Macallan Pairs Championship.
Two American stars, both multiple world champions, Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell, won the Macallan International Pairs Championship in London yesterday.
They played outstandingly, clinching victory before the final match was played.
The standings were: 1st, Meckstroth and Rodwell, 620 victory points; 2d, Henry Szwarc and Marc Bompis, France, 569; 3d, Cezar Balicki and Adam Zmudzinski, Poland, 526; 4th, Bob Hamman and Bob Wolff, United States, 500; 5th, Michael Rosenberg and Seymon Deutsch, United States, 489.


Text of House Amendment to Require a Balanced Budget
Following is the text of House Joint Resolution 1, a proposed amendment to the Constitution requiring a balanced Federal budget, as published in The Congressional Record:  SECTION 1  Total outlays for any fiscal year shall not exceed total receipts for that fiscal year, unless three-fifths of the whole number of each House of Congress shall provide by law for a specific excess of outlays over receipts by a roll-call vote.
SECTION 2  The limit on the debt of the United States held by the public shall not be increased, unless three-fifths of the whole number of each House shall provide by law for such an increase by a roll-call vote.
SECTION 3  Prior to each fiscal year, the President shall transmit to the Congress a proposed budget for the United Sates Government for that fiscal year in which total outlays do not exceed total receipts.
SECTION 4  No bill to increase revenue shall become law unless approved by a majority of the whole number of each House by a roll-call vote.
SECTION 5  The Congress may waive the provisions of this article for any fiscal year in which a declaration of war is in effect.
The provisions of this article may be waived for any fiscal year in which the United States is engaged in military conflict which causes an imminent and serious military threat to national security and is so declared by a joint resolution, adopted by a majority of the whole number of each House, which becomes law.
SECTION 6  The Congress shall enforce and implement this article by appropriate legislation, which may rely on estimates of outlays and receipts.
SECTION 7  Total receipts shall include all receipts of the United States Government except those derived from borrowing.
Total outlays shall include all outlays of the United States Government except for those for repayment of debt principal.
SECTION 8  This article shall take effect beginning with fiscal year 2002 or with the second fiscal year beginning after its ratification, whichever is later.


Ross Keeps Offense Up on the Lift
On Thursday, three days before the game of their lives, and in their last full-contact practice, the San Diego Chargers were still tinkering with new plays.
Charger Coach Bobby Ross would not say what the new wrinkles were, although he said there were a few mistakes during the practice.


From a Two-by-Four to a Highway


Hershey Foods Corp.(HSY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
FAR FROM HOME, CRAM SCHOOLS FLOURISH
Long a tradition in the Far East, where the competition to get into a top university borders on the fanatic, the cram schools of Asia have begun to appear in this country too, in Queens and New Jersey and Los Angeles and elsewhere, following the migration of many Koreans, Japanese and Chinese over the last two decades.
In the last 10 years, the cram schools -- called juku in Japanese and buxiban in Chinese -- have become a flourishing industry, thriving on immigrant parents' determination to have their children succeed.
Page 1.
M.T.A.
BOWS TO POLICE MERGER
After a decadelong effort by three successive Mayors to consolidate New York City's three police forces, the last major obstacles to the merger of two of the departments -- the transit and city police -- were removed.
The board of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority reluctantly approved the merger, and just a few hours later, leaders of the union representing transit officers said they were dropping their opposition to the plan.
Page 1.


One Last Stroll Through the Strategy Before the Big Game Begins
Gentle breezes stirred the palms, and Biscayne Bay sparkled in tropical sunshine today as the San Francisco 49ers and the San Diego Chargers held their final workouts for Super Bowl XXIX on Sunday at Joe Robbie Stadium.
The hope was for a fast track and mild temperatures by kickoff, scheduled for 6:18 P.M.
Eastern time.
The National Weather Service projected a warm, cloudy day with high temperatures in the upper 70's that would decline into the low 70's by game time.
As of this afternoon, the service said there was a 40 percent chance of late afternoon showers on Sunday.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Unfunded Mandates: Vote on passage of a bill would make it more difficult for Congress to impose mandates on state and local governments if it did not provide money enabling them to comply.
Approved 86 to 10, Jan. 27.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
Y Lieberman (D) . . .
N  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
N  Lautenberg (D) . . .
N  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
Y Moynihan (D) . . .
Y KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
House
1.
Balanced Budget: Vote on a version of the balanced budget constitutional amendment that would bar tax increases without the consent of three-fifths of the entire membership of both houses of Congress.
Failed, with 253 in favor and 173 opposed (short of the two-thirds vote needed), Jan. 26.
2.
Balanced Budget: Vote on a version of the balanced budget constitutional amendment that would exempt Social Security from balanced budget calculations.
Rejected 296 to 135, Jan. 26.
3.
Balanced Budget: Vote on a version of the balanced budget constitutional amendment that requires only a majority of all members of the House and the Senate to approve any bill that increases revenue.
Approved 300 to 132, Jan. 26.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . . N Y N
2. Gejdenson (D) . . . N Y N
3. DeLauro (D) . . . N Y N
4.
Shays (R) . . .
Y N Y  5.
Franks (R) . . .
Y N Y  6.
Johnson (R) . . .
N N Y New Jersey
1.
Andrews (D) . . .
Y N Y  2.
LoBiondo (R) . . .
Y N Y  3.
Saxton (R) . . .
Y N Y  4.
Smith (R) . . .
Y N Y  5.
Roukema (R) . . .
N N Y  6.
Pallone (D) . . .
Y Y Y  7.
Franks (R) . . .
Y N Y  8.
Martini (R) . . .
Y N Y  9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
N Y Y 10.
PaY Ne (D) . . .
N Y N  11.
Frelinghuysen (R) . . .
Y N Y 12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
Y N Y 13.
Menendez (D) . . .
N Y N  New York
1.
Forbes (R) . . .
Y N Y  2.
Lazio (R) . . .
Y N Y  3.
King (R) . . .
Y N Y  4.
Frisa (R) . . .
Y N Y  5.
Ackerman (D) . . .
N Y N
6. Flake (D) . . . N Y N
7. Manton (D) . . . N Y N
8. Nadler (D) . . . N Y N
9.
Schumer (D) . . .
N Y N  10.
Towns (D) . . .
A Y N  11.
Owens (D) . . .
N Y N  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
N Y N  13.
Molinari (D) . . .
Y N Y 14.
Maloney (D) . . .
N Y N  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
N N N  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
N N N  17.
Engel (D) . . .
N Y N  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
N Y N  19.
Kelley (R) . . .
Y N Y 20.
Gilman (R) . . .
Y N Y 21.
McNulty (D) . . .
N Y Y 22.
Solomon (R) . . .
Y N Y 23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
N N Y 24.
McHugh (R) . . .
Y N Y 25.
Walsh (R) . . .
Y N Y 26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
N Y N  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
Y N Y 28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
N Y N  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
N Y N  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
Y N Y 31.
Houghton (R) . . .
N N Y KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Urban Strategy: Keeping It All in the Family
WHO knows which shattering of glass finally got my attention, the third or the fourth.
I just remember looking up and seeing five kids in front of my building.
They were amusing themselves by tossing bottles at one another.
Until one bottle landed close by, the boys had been a distant sideshow.
I was absorbed in my own project: replacing my car's battery, which had been stolen that morning.


WHAT'S DOING IN AUSTIN
AUSTIN surprises many first-time visitors who arrive expecting the capital city to be, well, more like Texas.
Instead of dusty plains they find a hilly, green oasis laced by rivers and walking trails, where high-tech wizards, musicians, writers and artists are more common than cowboys or oil magnates.
Austin, which calls itself "The Live Music Capital of the World" for its many nightclubs and outdoor concerts, has been struggling to maintain its laid-back charm while coping with one of the fastest growth rates in the nation.
But with the arrival of spring, which in Austin can begin in late February and is fully sprung in March, the town has more than enough charm and energy to share.


SUPER BOWL XXIX: Sports of The Times; When the Pageantry Obscures the Poverty And Social Action
THE MOST amazing aspect of extravaganzas like the Super Bowl is the extent to which the pageantry numbs, often obliterates, reality.
So many private parties.
Dances.
Mountains of food.
After a week of watching the wealthy and the near-wealthy, the notion of poverty becomes an abstract concept.
The subject rarely comes up.
Today's game marks the seventh Super Bowl in Miami, the first since 1989, when a Miami police officer fatally shot a black motorcyclist.
Three days of rioting followed during the week leading up to the game.


Getting Real
FACING FACTS  Realism in American Thought and Culture, 1850-1920.
By David E. Shi.
Illustrated. 394 pp.
New York:  Oxford University Press. $35.


OFF THE GRID
In the 1950's, the faint of heart headed for fallout shelters and now, in the 1990's, their progeny head for the hills.
Despite the tough talk and "every man for himself" credo of those living "off the grid," I am unimpressed by selfish people who cut and run.
The real patriots are those who stand their ground, working to build and bring hope to both urban and rural America.


A Shrine To Western Wildlife
ALONG with cowpokes and weather-worn Stetsons, what endures from the mythic West is its wildlife -- all those boulder-size bison with snow on their snouts, grizzly bears chomping on huckleberries, or wild horses sprinting through a draw.
Photographs, even to this day, have never really done justice to these images.
And much of the art of Western wildlife has been dismissed as place-mat kitsch.
This is unfair, defenders of this uniquely American art form have long argued.
But until the recent unveiling in Jackson Hole, Wyo., of what is said to be the world's most extensive collection of American wildlife art, there has been no real shrine for such work.


Strains of Chechnya War Setting Russians on Edge
In ancient times, sailors lost at sea would sometimes encounter mythical sirens, scary temptresses like Lorelei or Circe who lured and destroyed men.
Perhaps the first sign that Russia's leaders were suffering from strain was when they began insisting that female snipers from the Baltics were stalking Russian soldiers in war-torn Chechnya.
Newspapers are using the term "Smutnaya Vremya," or Time of Troubles, to describe Russia's state of mind.
The phrase usually refers to the social and political chaos that arose from a schism in the 17th-century Russian Orthodox Church.
From talk of sinister right-wing plots, to rumors of poisoned vodka sent from Chechnya, to a tabloid report that the stress of war has caused a mutation in the Russian gene pool, the country is a bundle of nerves.


ROGER AILES
What a treat!
A bunch of right-wing, gun-toting, people-hating radicals and Roger Ailes ("Embracing the Enemy," by Nancy Hass, Jan. 8)!
All in one issue.
It's more than I can take.
DAVID CURTIS Milford, Conn.


SUPER BOWL XXIX: Sports of The Times; It's O.K. To Watch This Game
AL OERTER, the great discus champion, once divulged his training technique to me.
He would eat only healthy food -- it was the first time I had ever heard a man over 200 pounds utter the words "rose hips" -- but every two weeks or so, Oerter would gorge on hamburgers and french fries and dessert.
Maybe his personal engine would knock the next day, but then he would resume his gold-medal diet.
In that same spirit, I say, go ahead and watch the Super Bowl today.
It's all right.
Normally, I counsel people to do the healthy thing and avoid the Super Bowl as a show of psychic strength, but we haven't had any good sporting rituals since that great glut of Stanley Cup, Knicks-Rockets and the World Cup of soccer last summer.


In Family Court, Caring for Children
Among the armed court officers, crowded waiting rooms and accusing glances in Family Court here, there is no place for a child.
One morning, for example, a 5-year-old from Peekskill played tic-tac-toe while teen-agers in shackles shuffled past the court waiting room.
As strangers wrangled loudly over child support and paternity, he flipped through a magazine about Power Rangers.


Oh, Say Can You Sing?
AS RENDERER OF THE NATIONAL ANTHEM AT Super Bowl XXIX tonight, Kathie Lee Gifford joins this troupe, formed in 1967:
I. Universities of Arizona and Michigan bands.


Turning the Tables On Turnip Bias
TURNIPS are a much underrated vegetable.
But their sweet, distinctive flavor is a perfect complement to rich meat like duck, goose, pork or ham.
At the Union Square Cafe in Manhattan, one of my favorite winter dishes is mashed yellow turnips (rutabagas) topped with crisp fried shallots.
I also like white turnips grated and sauteed or roasted like potatoes.
Baby turnips, available at fancier food markets, are especially good glazed.


From the Sandlots Of Greenwich To the Super Bowl
SHERRY YOUNG vividly remembers standing in Union Square in downtown San Francisco last November and seeing a huge billboard with a picture of her son Steve, the star quarterback for the San Francisco 49ers of the National Football League.
"It was amazing, and I had this ambivalent feeling," Mrs.
Young said at her home in Greenwich.
"In a way I wanted to shout out: 'He's my son. Hey, everybody look.' But on the other hand I felt he looked so vulnerable up there and I wanted to say, 'Leave me alone; he's my son.' "


Largent Receives The Call From Hall
Steve Largent, the former Seattle Seahawks receiver who at the time of his retirement in 1989 held four National Football League records in receiving, was elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame this afternoon in his first year of eligibility.
The five-member Hall of Fame class of 1995 includes Lee Roy Selmon, a defensive end with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers from 1976-84, and Kellen Winslow, a tight end with the San Diego Charger from 1979-87.
Two inductees were voted in posthumously: Jim Finks, a quarterback for the Pittsburgh Steelers from 1949-55 who was known for his work as a team administrator with the Minnesota Vikings, Chicago Bears and New Orleans Saints, and Henry Jordan, a defensive tackle with the Green Bay Packers from 1959-69.


Cherry Pickers
And if not poli-sci courses in college, what?
At Oregon State University, take Food Science and Technology 102 -- the Maraschino Cherry.
That's right, the same artificially flavored brine cherry, survivor of red dye cancer scares, that sits at the bottom of a Manhattan cocktail or at the summit of an ice cream sundae.
No basket-weaving gut, the class is an alternative to the often-bland survey course, combining food processing, engineering, chemistry, microbiology, law, toxicology, marketing and, in this case, university pride.
The modern maraschino cherry was developed at Oregon State in the mid-1920's by E. H. Wiegand, founder of the food science department, and remains a significant industry in the state.


A Preview
One factor may determine whether the Super Bowl becomes a 49er rout or a Charger upset: big plays.
A special look at the big-play picture, strategy and some little things that also count.
SportsSunday, section 8.


What House's 'Taking Down' Rule Means
To the Editor:
A recent flurry of news articles, including one on Jan. 26, suggest that when words in Congressional debate are "taken down," that means they are stricken from the Congressional Record.
The offending words of Representative Carrie P. Meek, for example, were that, after Speaker Newt Gingrich had given up his $4.5 million book advance, "how much he earns has grown much more dependent on how hard his publishing house hawks his book."


Turning the Tables On Turnip Bias
TURNIPS are a much underrated vegetable.
But their sweet, distinctive flavor is a perfect complement to rich meat like duck, goose, pork or ham.
At the Union Square Cafe in Manhattan, one of my favorite winter dishes is mashed yellow turnips (rutabagas) topped with crisp fried shallots.
I also like white turnips grated and sauteed or roasted like potatoes.
Baby turnips, available at fancier food markets, are especially good glazed.


How a Legend Tapped the Rock Underground
IN 1963, THE STUDIO MOGUL JACK Warner bought Reprise Records from Frank Sinatra.
The deal did not signal an appreciation of the record business by the studio head: Reprise -- even with Mr.
Sinatra on its roster -- was a loser.
Rather, Warner's studio had recently enjoyed a hit with "Ocean's 11," a Las Vegas caper film featuring the singer and several of his "rat pack" buddies, and the purchase of the label was part of a broader deal to tie up Mr.
Sinatra as an actor.
Even if Reprise continued to lose money, it was a cheap way of assuring that Mr.
Sinatra would make movies for the studio -- a potential gold mine for Warner Brothers.
The deal did prove a gold mine, but not because of Frank Sinatra.
Reprise gave Warner Brothers the services of a man whose ultimate value to the company over 31 years would dwarf Mr.
Sinatra's: Mo Ostin.
At 68, the balding, bespectacled and low-key Mr.
Ostin looks more like the controller he is by training than the monumental cultural visionary and business tactician he has proved to be.
He stepped down as chairman and chief executive officer of Warner Brothers Records on Dec. 31 after losing an unusually public corporate power struggle.
But long after the dust of his departure has settled, Mr.
Ostin's contribution to the record business will endure.
Under his direction, Warner Brothers was transformed from a small, struggling label into the world's largest record company and the financial engine that drove Steve Ross's Warner Communications.
Most significant, however, was the way Mr.
Ostin achieved the transformation: by embracing the rock underground of the 60's when other, more conservative labels were loath to do so.


A Place Where Nylon Isn't a Dirty Word
IF a person is happening, they are because of what they're like on the inside," said Chris Brick, an owner of Smylonylon, a clothing store that opened last year in SoHo. Terminal hipness, in other words, can't be achieved by imitating someone or by spending a lot of money. Still, times are tough.
"From the looks of it," he lamented, "everybody's going to be in baby pink and powder blue T-shirts this summer."


He Was a Camera
The painter Thomas Eakins did not start photographing until 1880.
EAKINS AND THE PHOTOGRAPH: Works by Thomas Eakins and His Circle in the Collection of the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts (Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts/Smithsonian Institution, cloth, $80; paper, $34.95), by Susan Danly, a curator at the Mead Art Museum at Amherst College, and Cheryl Leibold, the archivist at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, catalogues the 648 Eakins prints and negatives held by the academy and examines the ways he used photography in his life and work.
For Eakins, photography was a tool for teaching, for visual record keeping and exploration, but not an end in itself.
Especially when compared to his powerful paintings, most of Eakins's photographs are less than remarkable.
However, the large number of female and male nudes among his more conventional photographic images -- portraits of family and friends, snapshots of outings, picturesque scenes and farm animals -- attests to the originality of his methods.
Eakins loathed polish and, when possible, chose students, friends, even himself for nude models to capture the awkwardness of real life.
The book is a model of catalogue making -- attractive, thorough and richly informative.
ROSEMARY RANCK


Spirituality On the East End
I am writing to inform your readers concerning the Siena Spirituality Center at Villa Maria in Water Mill  [ "East End a Center for the New Age," Dec. 11 ] .
The Siena Spirituality Center is a ministry of the Amityville Dominican Sisters, committed to the mission of preaching the Gospel.
We reach out to all and collaborate with the church and existing agencies and groups on Long Island in response to unfolding needs.
To meet this challenge we provide an atmosphere of hospitality for programs and growth opportunities in the areas of education, spirituality and wholistic living.


At Meeting, a Glimpse Into the Life of Lubavitch Emissaries
Every year at this time, the women who run Lubavitch centers, synagogues and schools all over the world gather at the headquarters of the Hasidic movement in Crown Heights.
Last weekend they came together again, 1,000 women strong, but there was a difference.
It was the first such gathering since the death of their revered leader, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson.
The rabbi, known to his followers and other admirers as the Rebbe, died on June 12 at the age of 92.


Painting Life Into Sammy
SHORTLY AFTER HIS 36TH birthday, in what he calls a Faustian trade-off, an ambitious New York painter named Vincent Desiderio was offered a rare plum: a contract for representation by the powerful Marlborough Gallery in Manhattan.
At the time, driven by the critical illness of his 4-year-old son, he was spending his days compulsively painting and repainting the child's portrait.
If he got it just right, he believed, somehow the boy would live forever.
Desiderio signed.
Over the next 18 months, distraught, despondent, certain he had "missed the mark in every single one of the pictures," he produced a dozen works.
It was a startling exhibition that went on view at the gallery in February 1993, a series of paintings so much in keeping with one another that the effect was of a suite of elaborately paneled rooms.
Most were narrative paintings, and the paint, tinged with pale greens and browns, had been applied in the highly finished manner of the old masters.
One huge triptych hung at the center, with half a dozen smaller triptychs here and there.
These were filled with scenes of struggle and despair: a grim, naked couple flanked a desolate room; a man wept by the side of a small white coffin.
Interspersed among them were several single canvases, less melodramatic but equally troubling.
In "Savant" a little boy lay on a sofa with an old man, the man asleep, the boy nestled against him, radiantly awake.
A long green tube snaked from a heavy tank of oxygen to the boy's throat.
In "Study for a Hero's Life," this same boy lay in a hospital bed, eyes closed, mouth slightly open.
A third, "Plein-Air," showed him walking alone through a sparse wood, older and, apparently, healthy.
Yet even this image was mysteriously unsettling.
The show went almost unnoted by the press, though all the usual critics came to see it.
Just before it closed, friends who knew Desiderio invited me there to meet him.
Arriving early, knowing nothing about him except for what was on the walls, I circled the rooms a couple of times, moved by the beauty of the pictures but less and less enthusiastic about meeting the artist.
What kind of person paints a sick child to create an artistic effect?
And how much talent does it take to make such an image disconcerting?
My friends appeared with Desiderio: a smiling, soft-spoken man with pink cheeks, blue eyes and all the Machiavellian guile of, say, a bicycle rental clerk in rural Massachusetts.
They introduced us, then swiftly drew me back to "Savant," the picture of the old man and the boy.
"That's his son," one friend said, and went on to murmur a confused story about a birth defect and an operation a couple of years before.
Something had gone wrong afterward, and the boy's life had been in continuous jeopardy ever since.
Desiderio rejoined us.
As my friends asked after his son, Sam, I moved back a little.
"Savant" now looked painfully intimate -- too intimate, surely, for the artist to confront beside a stranger.
But Desiderio, far from excusing himself, plunged into fluent if confounding commentary.
"This is a kind of a complicated painting," he began.
"It's connected to Manet's 'Gare Saint-Lazare' -- do you know it? A woman and a little girl are at a train station; the child is holding onto a gate with vertical bars. Manet loved Velazquez, and I'm convinced he painted those strong verticals in response to Velazquez's 'Surrender of Breda,' in which a row of lances makes a similar effect. I wanted to connect the two paintings with a third. In that sense, it's almost a triptych."
Desiderio pointed out a painting within the painting, a frameless row of vertical stripes above the couch.
"Here, the vertical bars became a neo-geometric painting," he resumed.
"So it's Sammy and his grandfather," he said, then corrected himself at once.
"Not necessarily Sammy or his grandfather; I mean, they're just characters, one young, one old, with something passing between the two. The grandfather -- modernism? -- is alive and healthy but looks dead. The child -- third-generation abstraction -- is infirm but looks very much alive. So I'm playing with the idea of third-generation abstraction supported by elaborate artificial means, i.e., art criticism," he confided.
"So there's a little humor in it."
Desiderio stepped back, smiling genially, as if everything must now be quite clear, then led us to several other paintings.
Each received a similar explanation.
"Romance and Reunion," the enormous triptych that dominated the exhibition -- which to my eye clearly concerned family, birth, the mysteries of inheritance -- was, he said, about overcoming the influence of modernism.
"Expulsion," the triptych with the grim couple (an especially wretched Adam and Eve, I had thought), concerned "the sterility of the aftermath of modernism." Only "Premature," a single painting of a premature infant, its head swathed in a turban of bandages, the whole bathed tenderly in Rembrandtesque shadow, escaped such explication.
"This doesn't have very much significance, this painting," the artist said.
"It's nothing more than a picture of a baby."
HOW COULD DESIDERIO SPEAK SO CEREBRALly of paintings that all but punched the viewer in the chest?
Between his words and his images -- between his intellect and his imagination -- yawned a curious gap.
A downright spooky gap.
Intrigued, I met him for lunch a few weeks after the show closed at a coffee shop near his studio in Long Island City, Queens.
Desiderio had grown up in a prosperous Philadelphia suburb.
His parents, both children of Italian immigrants, had been reared in a poor section of Philadelphia, but his father had become a successful doctor and his mother a fashion illustrator.
In third grade, while the other children drew bunnies on their Easter cards, Vincent surprised the nuns with a rendering of the Resurrection of Christ.
At 12, "entranced with the Renaissance," he painted Michelangelo's "Creation of Adam" on the ceiling of the family garage.
He had had a long arts education: four years at Haverford, one in Florence, four more at the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts.
At Haverford he had met his future wife, Gale, a student at Bryn Mawr.
They married in 1980.
Three years later, thoroughly trained in accordance with all the best modernist tenets ("That you can never paint the figure again, that history is a linear process, that art is evolving," he recited), he went into the world, an abstract painter eager to follow in the revered steps of Arshile Gorky and Willem de Kooning.
DESIDERIO SLID OUT OF THE BOOTH AND LED the way to the chilly, light-filled studio he shares with two sculptors.
A new triptych in its earliest stages hung on one wall.
The central panel showed a middle-aged man in a tub; on a nearby hamper sat a nurse.
"This painting started with a man in a bathtub being watched by an attendant," he said.
"In some sense, I must have been thinking of Sammy. Because Sammy must have someone with him at all times. So if he should grow up -- if he should get that old, you know -- I thought about the nurse always being with him."
Sam had been born with severe hydrocephalus, water on the brain; the fluid that normally circulates in and around the brain gets trapped, pressing on the brain and distorting it.
His case was worsened by an encephalocele, a hole in the head.
There had been no hint of a problem until Gale abruptly went into labor at the start of her third trimester, in October 1986.
She was in her last year at Cornell University Medical College.
She was admitted to New York Hospital, Cornell's affiliate, and the labor was stopped with drugs.
A sonogram showed the hydrocephalus.
It was far too late for an abortion, so a plan was made to stave off labor until the baby's lungs were developed, then deliver him by C-section and rush him into surgery.
The odds were overwhelming.
On Sam's birth, Nov. 17, the hole was discovered and repaired.
He was fitted with a shunt, a narrow tube that conducts fluid from the brain to the abdomen, where it is harmlessly released.
Sam's brain had developed under such intense pressure that at birth it was no more than a thin rim pressed against the interior of the skull.
Yet to everyone's amazement he began to thrive, developing on the late end of normal but doing everything babies should.
Vincent and Gale, who had been warned that Sam would likely be blind, soon realized that he could see.
He started to talk on schedule and grew very sociable.
There were setbacks, most notably the onset of seizures.
But these were controlled with medication.
Sam was "the wonder kid of New York Hospital," Vincent said.
During these years, Vincent's career was beginning to take shape.
For a while he had painted abstractly, working to join form and content, "to make the authentic painting" as he had been taught.
He would "charge" himself up, then "attack" the canvas in search of that passionate mark that would be both peculiarly his and a continuation of the momentum of all art history before him.
But he was stumped.
"The Abstract Expressionists went the farthest out on that limb you could," he said.
"They developed that romantic modernist idea as far as it could be developed. They were the greatest painters, and I just couldn't get beyond them." At the same time, he felt increasingly pinched between modernism's "constant throwing out of the past" and the "incredible, meaningful experience" he had when he looked at a Delacroix or a Gericault.
"Modernism says you can never go back. But why can't you?"
Desiderio became frustrated, then rebellious.
Finally he staged a sorrowful, angry, exuberant mutiny.
He "jumped the modernist ship" -- not backward, toward the "naive realism" of the past, but up and out "into hypermode, a poststructuralist mode," reclaiming in the process the entire legacy of Western art.
Within a year or two, he was painting vast triptychs -- 10 by 25 feet was not unusual -- whose scale and style alluded to the great 19th-century history painters.
He intended the pre modern references to remind the viewer that he or she was indeed looking at a painting; that painting, like language, is always the signifier, never the signified.
He amalgamated these references with a quasi-allegorical, almost surreal imagery to construct on canvas elaborate, ambiguous polemics about art, politics or philosophy.
And the art world responded.
In 1987 he signed with a small SoHo gallery, Lang &amp; O'Hara.
In these same years, Gale had finished her training at Cornell and gone on to specialize in psychiatry at New York University School of Medicine.
By the fall of 1990, she was also six months into a healthy pregnancy.
One day that October, Sam became pale and lethargic, vomiting repeatedly -- a symptom of pressure inside the head.
By evening, the trouble was diagnosed: his shunt was blocked, a common development.
By midnight, he was in surgery at New York Hospital.
He emerged at around 2 A.M., his head wrapped in bandages ("like a swami," said Vincent, "like the kid in 'Premature.' "), tired and cranky, but talking.
Vincent stayed with him; Gale, pregnant and exhausted, left.
According to Sam's medical records, he continued to vomit as the night went on.
At one point, a nurse noted in his chart that his pupils were unequal in size, a likely sign that the brain was being pushed out of place by accumulating liquid.
His new shunt had failed.
The pressure became so extreme that his brain herniated -- was forced partly into the opening at the base of the skull where the spinal cord meets the brain stem.
In the morning, the malfunctioning shunt was replaced, but the damage had been done.
"It was like someone took a cue ball and shattered our lives," said Vincent.
Sam suffered several strokes.
He was left paralyzed and in a coma.
In the months that followed, he gradually regained consciousness, motion and speech.
But his ability to breathe on his own had been compromised.
His progress was slow, uncertain, studded with reversals.
After what had happened, Gale and Vincent were unwilling to leave him alone for even a moment. (In 1993 they filed a malpractice suit, which is pending. New York Hospital denied the charges in court papers and has declined to discuss the case.) In mid-December, Gale gave birth to their second son, Oscar, while Vincent shuttled from her bedside to Sam's, several floors below.
At the same time, Vincent had his most successful exhibition ever -- his third solo show at Lang &amp; O'Hara.
On the last day, the Metropolitan Museum of Art bought "Sleeping Family," a single canvas showing an almost aerial view of a sleeping couple, their young son between them.
Soon afterward, Lang &amp; O'Hara folded.
But Marlborough stepped in, a dazzling deus ex machina.
Nearly four months after his shunt became blocked, Sam was finally stable enough to leave New York Hospital for Blythedale, a children's rehabilitation hospital an hour north of Manhattan.
His memory and intelligence were intact.
But he had lost the automatic reflex that forces the body to breathe when respiration has been interrupted.
Now when he had a seizure -- and he had them often -- Sam would stop breathing.
A tracheostomy, a surgical opening into the windpipe, allowed quick ventilation of his lungs at such moments.
But because the seizures occurred without warning -- and because failure to respond immediately meant death -- he needed constant attendance.
A VAST CANVAS HUNG NEAR THE BACK OF Vincent's studio, the central panel for a projected triptych.
It showed a seance taking place in a darkly painted, richly furnished room.
"This was the first big triptych I tried to do after Sammy got sick," said Vincent, surveying it doubtfully.
"It's got grave problems, but I don't throw it out, because it's got certain things about it that are very beautiful.
"I started with this image of a seance, a seance in a room of history," he went on.
"And these people -- I thought initially they were revisionist historians trying to understand what had happened before us -- instead of using scientific methods, they've allowed themselves to indulge in the supernatural, in a conjuring of the past. But it got very dark. I couldn't control it. I worked on it for seven months straight and it just got darker and darker." He pointed to a number of paintings within the painting.
As at the gallery, nothing in Vincent's slightly bemused tone suggested that these images had any personal resonance, that the idea of revising history might have particular appeal to a man whose happiness had been wrecked by the events of a single night, that an ambitious man in his situation might sometimes feel he had been "done in" by his wife and child.
Looking at the Manfredi painting-within-the-painting, I murmured something to the effect that, even as adults, we tend to cast ourselves as the child in the Oedipal triangle.
And yet, in a very profound sense, at the time he painted the seance, Vincent had been a father.
"Yeah, well, I'll tell you, it's very intriguing to think of the relationship between Gale and me as becoming the sort of Adam and Eve relationship, where the original sin produced Sam, who had birth defects," he said abruptly.
"Eventually Gale and I got much closer than we'd ever been.  But there's a lot of guilt associated with----." He broke off.
"You know, he was my child and I was in the very room while he was herniating," he said.
"I was in the room there with him, you know? I mean I was doing my best as a lay person to alert the staff that he was not doing well. Nonetheless, you feel, Could I have done more? But I don't know what more I could have done."
Vincent sat beside the studio's big windows and talked expansively about the tub picture ("I started thinking about the guy in the bathtub as being structuralism, this old, weak mode . . . ."), then about art in general.
His mind hopped furiously from idea to idea.
Socialism, Cubism, Barthes, Zola, Habermas -- names and theories flew like the spray of sawdust thrown up under a whirling blade.
"There's a lot about Vincent's own life that he paints," Gale, a small, fair woman whose mild brown eyes and delicate features give her the look of a Renaissance angel, told me later.
"But he very rarely will directly address that," she added.
"To him, it's about some really complex, titan battle of art historical principles. You know, we talk about painting all the time.  It's something we really love. And painting really is about these intellectual conversations. But sometimes you just have to tell him, 'Would you shut the hell up about that stuff?' "
IN SPRING 1992, VINCENT AND Gale, now a practicing psychiatrist, moved to Tarrytown, to be close to Blythedale.
For a long time, every Friday, Saturday and Sunday, they would drive to Blythedale, take Sam home for the day and return him at night; two evenings a week, they visited him at the hospital.
Sam was there more than two years before he came home for good, accompanied by a rotating staff of 24-hour nurses.
On a damp Saturday morning not long before his return, their kitchen was a picture of cozy domesticity.
Gale was making brownies.
Sam, who doesn't like loud noises, was next to her, nervously eyeing the mixer.
Oscar was on the floor, beating the tar out of some kind of postmodern Tinkertoy.
Within minutes, Sam was standing beside me, leaning against me, holding my hands, a tall, handsome 6-year-old with tousled dirty-blond hair and rebellious front teeth.
The strokes affected his balance and he cannot stand unsupported.
His appearance -- a bit off, a bit shaky -- might have disconcerted me if my eyes had not been prepared by the paintings.
"What's your name?" he demanded, though we had just been introduced.
His ability to reason and remember are good, but the anticonvulsants that control his seizures make him groggy; the stroke damage makes it difficult for him to express his thoughts.
I hadn't been in the house half an hour before he kissed me, the first of many kisses.
"He used to be this really brash, bubbly little devil. Now he's more weepy and lovey," Gale said later.
"I think he feels a lot of this is his fault. That's why he's so kissy and apologetic."
"Sam's had to deal with things most of us never have to deal with," Vincent says.
"But he's learned to cope by expressing affection for his tormenters. It almost reminds me of the way hostages adopt the philosophical views of their captors."
Sam and I discussed the color of my sweater (lavender) and the noise of the mixer (mean).
With a curiously intimate gesture, he showed me a small plastic figurine clutched in his hand.
"That's actually a Ghostbuster, I think," Gale told me.
"He isn't a Ghostbuster," objected Sam.
"Who is he?"
"He is Dad."
Later, Vincent put Sam to bed for a nap.
He undressed him and injected several medicines into his gastrostomy tube, which runs from a surgically created opening near Sam's waist directly to his stomach.
Unable to swallow since the herniation, Sam receives all his nourishment through this tube.
In all the turmoil, he had not yet been toilet-trained, so Vincent changed him.
Then, with a green tube like the one that winds through "Savant," Vincent hooked him up to a supply of humidified air mixed with oxygen.
He poured out a liquid food and turned on a pump to propel it into the gastrostomy tube.
Then he attached a monitor to Sam's toe; if his oxygen level dipped, it would sound an alarm.
Then Vincent kissed him.
Gale was raised a Quaker and has continued as an adult to attend Quaker meeting.
But for a year after the herniation, she stopped.
"People always say to me, 'How did you survive it?' " she said, late that afternoon.
"But you don't have a choice, because you don't die."
TWO WEEKS LATER, VINCENT SAT IN HIS STUdio with a stack of slides and catalogues.
He had often painted Sam before the Marlborough show, but in the earlier pictures, the boy was clearly a symbol among symbols -- for example, a priest raised a baby aloft rather than the Host.
It was Sam, all right, but there was none of the agonized rendering of him so evident in the Marlborough show.
But why not?
Some of these earlier pictures had been painted just after his birth, before his unexpected recovery.
When Sam was first born, Vincent explained, "there was an opportunity for denial, and we took advantage of it. We were never sure whether he understood us, whether he saw or didn't. He was like an abstract painting. You could develop any text for him. And that's what we did.
"But when he got sick and we had to be there and he was dying and -- oh, this wasn't expected to happen! And that we couldn't deny."
Sam's sickness "infiltrated the imagery" of Desiderio's work: "He became a pure symbol, a metaphor for a damaged legacy."
Vincent tried to pray just after Sam herniated.
"But it didn't last," he says.
"It seemed the more I prayed, the worse he got." Instead, he began to paint Sam, beginning with "Study for a Hero's Life." "I started -- it's sick, but I was kind of screwed up at the time." His voice dropped to a hoarse whisper.
"I was doing that painting, of him in the hospital, and he kept getting sicker and sicker. I stopped work on that picture, turned it to the wall, and he started getting a little better. And I started thinking, Oh my God, there's something wrong with this picture. So I started the painting of him walking" -- "Plein-Air" -- "because I thought, If I do this, he's going to get better. At the back of my mind, I knew it wasn't real, but there was something delusional about all this."
Obsessed with the notion of making the painting "be Sam," making "the signifier touch the signified," Desiderio tried desperately to compress the two.
"But it was impossible, impossible, impossible. . . ." A moment later: "Oh, it's so stupid!" he burst out.
"What could be more naive?  But the agony of this picture for me was trying to paint it knowing it was only a painting.
"I guess by painting him I had this idea that I could keep him alive forever," he continued.
"And this sort of crazy idea that if I painted him walking, he would walk again. You know? If I made it just right. . . . Crazy. Desperation."
It occurred to me that the Marlborough show had developed under a pressure no less intense, perhaps, than the pressure on Sam's unborn brain.
And that Vincent had painted it was nearly as astonishing as Sam's having thrived.
SAM, NOW 8, HAS SETTLED IN AT HOME AGAIN.
He knows all his letters and can sound out words, though fluent reading still eludes him.
He has also learned to use the bathroom.
Hoping it would stop the seizures, his doctors recently put him on a high-fat diet.
His seizures are less frequent, but they have not stopped.
Gale is pregnant again.
The baby is due in May.
ONE OF VINCENT'S FAVORITE PAINTINGS from the Marlborough show is a triptych called "Untitled Loss." The left panel shows a man at prayer, the right a man picking up a weapon in anger.
In the center, a red buoy floats on a dark sea.
"A painting like this," he said one day, gazing at a reproduction, "at its core, there's a total involvement with the unknowable." One man converts his uncertainty into faith, the other into violence.
But "abdication of one's will to religion, or this gesture of violence when you don't know what you're raging against, these are both very superficial gestures," Desiderio said.
"And you see, their backs confront you; they stop your vision almost at the surface of the pictures."
But in the center "is this dimensionless sea, defined by a single marker. And your eye wants to go beyond the page, wants to go deep in. It's as if in this nothingness, only our action defines -- It's an existential thing; there's the void and the action in the void." He talked on for some minutes in such terms, then broke off as if suddenly weary.
"I don't know," he said.
"I don't know. That's why it's called 'Untitled Loss.' "


It's the Game
To the Sports Editor:
As we all watch the self-destructive pattern of this present baseball strike, several things come to mind.
First of all, it seems to me that in this American capitalistic system, it has always been appropriate for the entrepreneur or owner of a corporation be allowed to make a larger profit than the individuals he hires.
When the employees begin to make a larger yearly salary than the profits of the company, something would seem to be dramatically wrong.


Balancing Space, Variety and Vegetables
THE recent mild weather and the arrival of new seed catalogues have caused gardeners to yearn for spring.
But patience.
There still is February to get through, and March can offer some weather challenges, too.
Even April, for that matter.
Meanwhile one can hope and dream and try to make decisions.
There usually is a strong desire to grow everything.
Then reality strikes; garden space is only so big and backs only so strong.


Point Made, Clintons Dine at Club
Last year, when he arrived hours late to the Blue Jeans Bash, a gathering of Arkansans, President Clinton apologized for his tardiness and pointed to his tuxedo, explaining, "We just went to this sort of stuffy dinner." But once again, the President and Hillary Rodham Clinton had plans to attend that "stuffy dinner," the Alfalfa Club's annual roast.
In his first year in office, President Clinton became the first President since Jimmy Carter to pass up the annual boys'-night-out supper held by the 82-year-old club of Washington's political and corporate elite -- the male elite, that is, until last year.


In Vitro Vs. Adoption: Some Couples Try Both
To the Editor:
The Jan. 8 article "Tough Choices: In Vitro Vs. Adoption" described the torment of people going through extended infertility treatments and contrasted it with people who decide to "give up" and adopt.
But a person having difficulty conceiving a child does not have to choose.
Some clients of our adoption program pursue adoption and infertility treatments simultaneously.


More Than Just a Victorian
To the Editor:
As the president of the Trollope Society, I would like to offer my congratulations on a wonderful essay by Cynthia Ozick on Anthony Trollope and "The Way We Live Now" ("More Than Just a Victorian," Jan. 1).
I think she captured beautifully the qualities of mind and expression that make him a truly great writer and that make his works so universal, entirely transcending their time and nominal topics.


OFF THE GRID
Add to Philip Weiss's report on the beliefs of the radical, anti-Government crowd their notion that a special computer chip has been placed in all vehicles manufactured since 1987; at any time the Government can "push a button" and the vehicles won't go ("Off the Grid," Jan. 8).
This is why (I was told in all sincerity by a believer) people who wish to escape enslavement to the Government must own at least one pre-1987 vehicle.


Hate Speech Comes to Congress
Whatever else it has done, the new Republican Congressional leadership has coarsened American political discourse to a remarkable degree in a very short time.
The most recent example is Dick Armey's reference to Representative Barney Frank, who is openly homosexual, as "Barney Fag." Mr.
Armey is the House majority leader, and we would have to go back to the days of Earl Butz to find a parallel example of such common behavior by a high Federal official.
His explanation that this was a "stumbled word" instead of "an intentional personal attack" is not supported in any way by the tape recording of his interview.
He spoke with clear intent to defame a worthy opponent.
In place of true contrition, Mr.
Armey used a ranting speech on the House floor to denounce reporters for refusing to suppress his disgraceful on-the-record remarks made to interviewers assembled by Mr.
Armey's staff with the express purpose of taping his words for broadcast.
Even those who argue that Newt Gingrich's mother was sandbagged into criticizing the First Lady cannot defend Mr.
Armey.
Here was a professional politician speaking in a formal setting with bigotry aforethought.


More Than Just a Victorian
To the Editor:


A Snowy Duty for Peacekeepers


Data Bank/January 29, 1995


Tangled Case of Sexual Molestation Pits a Doctor Against 8 Poor Women
In the tangled mass of sexual molestation charges and countercharges that have riveted this town's attention for nine months, there is one unchallenged fact: Dr.
James C. Johnston, a neurologist here, pleaded guilty on Dec. 20 to eight counts of assault by contact and was fined $4,000.
The women who filed complaints against him were mostly poor and from tiny towns scattered through the piney woods of East Texas.
Most had filed workers' compensation claims for repetitive stress injuries and had been referred by their doctors to Dr.
Johnston for a test in which a needle is inserted into their arms, through which an electric current measures nerve functioning.


Journal; Marathon Man
Am I the only person in America who thought Bill Clinton's State of the Union Message was too short?
After 81 minutes of the President, I found myself suffering from the intellectual equivalent of the Chinese food syndrome: my mind was overstuffed with words, programs and thoughts -- and yet I was famished.
Had he gotten to the point, or had I missed it?


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
McLean Stops Blues  Kirk McLean stopped 35 shots as Vancouver, the Stanley Cup runner-up last season, beat the host St.
Louis Blues by 3-1 last night for their first victory.
Cliff Ronning, Mike Peca and Pavel Bure got the goals for the Canucks, who had been outscored, 20-7, while starting the season 0-3-1.
McLean, who was not in the nets when the Blues romped past Vancouver, 7-1, in the second game of the season a week ago, did the rest. (AP)


More Than Just a Victorian
To the Editor:
Having read all the Palliser and Barchester novels (and feeling pretty smug about it!), I was thrilled to read your cover essay on Trollope, who wrote:


Accessible Nijinsky
To the Editor:
Re your Jan. 24 Arts page article on the publication in France of Vaslav Nijinsky's diaries: Three of the four original notebooks were recently acquired by the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts.
No longer in a private archive but publicly accessible, these remarkable journals reveal through Nijinsky's handwritten entries and dance notations much of his emotional state and choreographic goals.


A Corporate Lawyer Is Ordained and Doubles as a Priest
ON a raw Saturday morning last month, Marsha Bacon Glover left her home in White Plains and drove to the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in Manhattan.
When she walked into the cavernous Gothic church, Ms.
Glover, a corporate lawyer at Kraft General Foods in White Plains, was a part-time Episcopal deacon.
When she stepped out into the pouring rain that afternoon, she was a newly ordained priest.
The ordination of Ms.
Glover is a striking example of a newly emerging trend in the Episcopal Church toward what she calls "bivocational clergy." She said she intended to pursue her legal career and her church vocation with equal dedication.


The Neediest Cases; Energy Aid Plan Helps Older Couple Survive a Hard Winter
When B. Johnson thinks of how cold it was last winter, he shudders from more than the memory of frigid air.
Last year, he and his wife faced a financial crisis that could have taken his home and left him penniless.
"My story is not unusual for senior citizens," Mr.
Johnson, 72, said recently.
"It's a hard thing after working all your life to find yourself in this kind of predicament." The Johnsons live on $1,100 a month, from his Social Security benefits and a small pension.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Jan. 8 about the use of insecticide on some foreign airliners arriving abroad from the United States included an erroneous reference to Costa Rica supplied by the Department of Transportation.
Costa Rica requires spraying when passengers are still on board.


6 Characters Found Just The Author
AT THE BEGINNING OF HUGO WEISGALL'S "SIX Characters in Search of an Author," which has just been released on compact disk by New World Records, a new opera is being rehearsed: "The Temptation of St. Anthony," by a composer named Weisgall.
The Director acknowledges that many cast members dislike the work and think it unworthy of being in the company's repertory.
"To tell the truth," he says, "I hate this modern, tuneless stuff myself. But novelties are hard to come by. And now and then we must present them for reasons of prestige."
Weisgall's "Temptation" was never, of course, a free-standing work.
It just provided the composer an opportunity to mock the attitudes of opera houses along with his own predilection for "modern, tuneless stuff." He even includes an Expressionist, atonal aria about St.
Anthony's pig. ("It's lousy enough with the right notes," the Accompanist says as he corrects a singer's performance.) Mr.
Weisgall also displays a gentle irony toward his own taste for serious religious themes; the portentousness of "The Temptation" is disrupted by six unnamed characters from another drama, who magically enter the opera company's "real world." The result is a combination of styles ranging from opera buffa to verismo to musical comedy.


Susan Hrvatin, David M. Mullane
Dr.
Susan Hrvatin, a dentist, was married yesterday to David Michael Mullane, a managing director at MeesPierson Inc., a Dutch merchant bank.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
John E. Bennett performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Dr.
Hrvatin, 34, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the State University at Albany and received her dental degree from Tufts University.
She is a daughter of Rudolph and Emma Hrvatin of Flushing, Queens.
The bride's father is the founder and president of the R. H. Edrich Precision Corporation, an engineering and manufacturing company in College Point, Queens.


Double Helixes, Chickens and Eggs
THE PURPOSE OF LIFE IS A MATTER usually left to theologians, and for good reason.
But scientists have a right to put in their two cents' worth, and every so often a few are brave enough to try.
Bravery is required because the goal of science is to describe the natural world as it is, and design cannot always be inferred from function.
The scientists daring enough to speculate anyway tend to fall into two main camps.
One, whose adherents include physicists and astronomers, favors the anthropic principle.
This startling surmise holds that the universe must be specially designed for humans, since if any of several critical physical parameters were just slightly different, life on earth would be impossible.
But the conjecture is impossible to test.
And seen from the perspective of other species, it doesn't sound all that convincing.
Indeed, as Don Marquis's typing cockroach, Archy, reports, "i once heard the survivors/of a colony of ants/that had been partially/obliterated by a cow s foot/seriously debating/the intention of the gods/towards their civilization."


Icon of Rap World at Home on the South Shore
THERE are no groupies with cameras clamoring for autographs at the two-story house on Westwood Drive in Brentwood, no expensive cars out front and no pit bulls snarling to keep the fans away.
It is a calm reserved neighborhood, just the way Craig Mack, 24, has always remembered it.
Mr.
Mack, considered an icon in the larger-than-life world of rap, has a best-selling record, "Flava in Ya Ear," from his album, "Project: Funk Da World." But, he said, the trappings of fame have not changed him, not even his Grammy nomination for Rap Solo Performance.


O'Rourke Agrees To Get Out The Ax
FOLLOWING the lead of Washington, where lawmakers are attempting to reduce the cost of running the Federal Government, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke last week called on the Board of Legislators here to join him in doing the same for Westchester.
"My goal is to downsize government," Mr.
O'Rourke told the Board's Budget and Appropriations Committee on Monday.
"I think that's what you've asked for and that's what the people have asked for."


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE EVOLUTION CONTROVERSY IN AMERICA  By George E. Webb.
University Press of Kentucky, $34.95.


Henry Druding, 87, Senior Engineer For Port Authority
Henry Anthony Druding, a former senior resident engineer for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey who directed major projects, such as the laying of the foundation for the World Trade Center, died on Monday at Corning Hospital in Corning, N.Y.
He was 87.
The cause was complications from pneumonia, said Charles H. Druding, his son.


The World; In South Africa, Laws Still Not Hard and Fast
FOR weeks South Africa has been absorbed by the story of 3,500 police officers and two former Cabinet ministers who, days before the end of white rule, applied for immunity from prosecution for any minor crimes they may have committed in defense of apartheid.
The tempest over whether these indemnities were legal raged from the newspapers to the Cabinet, provoking the latest in a series of melodramatic quarrels between President Nelson Mandela and his predecessor, F. W. de Klerk, now a deputy in a volatile coalition Government.


Two Notorious Cases: The Politics of Penalty
To the Editor:
If one goes on the assumption that both O. J. Simpson and Susan Smith are guilty of the respective crimes of which they are accused ("Two Crimes, Two Punishments," Week in Review, Jan. 22), the fact that they could meet different penalties confirms that the merits of capital punishment are currently based on bureaucratic, political factors, such as geography, economics and voter appeasement.


Returning a Bit of the City to Nature
For three centuries, developers have transformed New York's shoreline by constructing piers and bulkheads and filling in marshes and waterfront.
Now the people who run Roosevelt Island are nudging the clock back by removing nearly an acre of man-made land.
And they hope to sell the value of that environmental restoration, to offset waterfront development elsewhere.
In a preliminary step, bulldozers have been busily working on the island's southern tip, where the borders will ultimately shrink a bit.
Alyce M. Russo, the planning and development director for the Roosevelt Island Operating Corporation, said, "In effect we'll be creating more river."


Foreign Affairs; It's Time to Separate
The latest suicide bombings have left Israel in emotional gridlock.
Israelis know that halting the peace process will only make things worse, but continuing it shows no sign of making things better.
Every Israeli faction has seen its prescription for peace shattered.
It's time for some new thinking, but first a word on how we got here.
The first Israelis to have their illusions exploded were the nationalist ideologues of the Greater Israel movement, who believed Israel should annex the West Bank and Gaza.
That illusion was punctured by the Palestinian uprising in the late 1980's, which made clear to the Israeli silent majority that this Greater Israel vision came at a cost it didn't want to pay.


In the Region/Westchester; Peekskill Council Approves Razing Girls' School
THE City Council voted last week to allow a developer to raze most of what remains of what once was Mount St.
Florence, a Roman Catholic convent and girls' school that has been in the city since 1874, to make way for a 174-unit single-family-home development.
Sitting high on a hill overlooking the city, with a view of the Hudson River from the tops of the buildings, the school has become the center of a local controversy in recent months, pitting the developer, Chapel Hill Development Corporation of Peekskill, against a local preservation group.


Brokers, Backgrounds and Investors
To the Editor:
Your article does not give readers the "lowdown" on efforts by the securities industry, the National Association of Securities Dealers, the Securities and Exchange Commission and state securities regulators to improve the Central Registration Depository.


Food and Judaism In Morocco
The cuisine and Jewish religious traditions of Morocco are the themes of two tours to the country this year.
Presidential World Tours and Cruises, based in New York, focuses on Judaism in Morocco during its eight-day tour.
The tour is offered every week, with a commitment of at least six participants, leaving New York on a Thursday and returning the next Thursday.
The five days of sightseeing include Casablanca, Rabat, Fez, Meknes and Marrakesh, with visits to Jewish historical sites including the tomb of Rabbi Shlomo Ben-Hensh near Marrakesh; Ouzzane, the site of an ancient Jewish pilgrimage; Sale, the birthplace of the 18th-century scholar Rabbi Hayyim Ben Moses Attar, and Fez El Bali, home to the Talmudic scholar Rabbi Isaac Al Fasi.


Remembering Poland's Jews
IN a shiny, German-built minivan, on a sparkling clear day last summer, we drove down a road in Cracow, Poland, paved with Jewish gravestones.
The stones were fake -- and I knew it: just concrete casts of real tombstones, they led into a fenced enclosure of crumbling barracks and rusting barbed wire that were also, I knew, simply stage sets.
My knowledge, however, did little to dispel my acute uneasiness.
Three other tourists and I were on a guided tour of sites related to Steven Spielberg's movie "Schindler's List," released in late 1993.
The movie, based on the documentary novel "Schindler's Ark" by Thomas Keneally tells how Oskar Schindler, an unscrupulous German businessman and Nazi Party member, saved the lives of some 1,100 Jews by putting them to work at his enamelware factory.
For nearly two hours we followed in the footsteps of both Oskar Schindler and Mr.
Spielberg, sometimes tangled in a disconcerting mixture of celluloid and reality.


Jan. 22-28; Nijinsky, Unbound In a Book
The unexpurgated notebooks of Vaslav Nijinsky were finally published in Paris this month, and it was immediately clear why they took 76 years to appear.
The great Russian dancer wrote them in 1919 when he was well on the way to insanity, a fact his wife, Romola, was eager to conceal.
Even after she recognized the existence of the four notebooks in 1934, she allowed only a highly censored version to be published.
Now, however, it is apparent there were other reasons for holding it back, not least the descriptions of his sexual practices with both men and women and of his continuing sexual fantasies.
He also wrote scornfully of Serge Diaghilev, the powerful head of the Ballets Russes, who took Nijinsky as a lover in 1909 and then expelled him from his company in 1914 when he married.


Sports of The Times; The Pizza QB Nobody Knows
WITH his roundish face and roundish body, it's as if Spanky in the "Our Gang" comedies had grown up to be the Chargers' quarterback.
He's known as Stan but he's shaped more like Ollie and there's a reason.
"Stan Humphries," said Stan Brock, "eats more pizza than anybody I've ever known."


Brokers, Backgrounds and Investors
To the Editor:
Your article was right on point!
Somehow, providing less information about brokers will be better for customers?
As a practitioner in the securities arena, as well as a registered representative in the securities industry, I'm having trouble figuring this concept out.


Ecuador and Peru Again Skirmish Over an Old Disputed Border
An Ecuadorean military officer reported today that 20 Peruvian soldiers and 3 Ecuadorean soldiers had died in fighting during the last two days in a border dispute in a remote region in the Amazon.
Peruvian military officials did not confirm the casualties.
The Ecuadorean officer, Col.
Pablo Vitelli, also reported that five Ecuadorean soldiers had been wounded and one Peruvian soldier captured in the fighting.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Connecticut's Loss Is the Bronx's Gain
A new fudge factory opened in the Bronx three weeks ago after the company's plans fell through in Connecticut.


Washington And Hanoi Clear a Path To New Ties
With toasts of sweet Russian champagne, American and Vietnamese diplomats marked the signing today of an agreement that will allow the United States to raise the flag over the first American diplomatic mission in Vietnam in nearly 20 years.
The agreement signed in Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, gave the United States immediate custody of a modern nine-story office building here that will serve as the base of operations for American diplomats until the two countries are able to reach agreement on the establishment of full diplomatic relations and the opening of embassies.


Year of Boar: Firecrackers Are O.K. but Not Too Wild
Although fireworks are banned in New York State, the Police Department has tacitly permitted them during the Chinese New Year.
To many Chinese, fireworks are an integral part of the New Year celebration because they are used to chase away devils that try to sneak into the new year.
Expectations were for even more fireworks than usual this year, the Year of the Boar.
Due to a peculiarity of the Chinese lunar calendar, either the year that should have begun last Feb. 10 (the Year of the Dog) never did, or the preceding year never ended.
That means that there are two years' worth of evil spirits to ward off.


Now Put Whitewater in a Proper Context
To the Editor:
William Safire's Jan. 23 column, "Return of Whitewater," loses its sinister overtones when placed in proper context.


More Than Just a Victorian
To the Editor:
Thank you for your essay on Anthony Trollope.
It's about time that first-rate attention was paid to a novelist who has for so long been underrated.


ALSO INSIDE
URBAN VISTAS 3 The dance of the streets.
A photographer's view, from on high, of lower Manhattan.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 A retired police officer uses his contacts to build a security firm in the Bronx.


Profile; A Brash Outsider, Yes, but He Has Harrods Hopping
WEAVING through the crowds of shoppers who had come to the Harrods winter sale to snap up seven floors of everything from Hermes scarves and hand-tooled saddles to hot fresh scones, Michael Cole, the store's chief spokesman and indefatigable image polisher, pointed out some improvements that had helped generate big profit gains for the fabled emporium in recent years.
See the eye-catching golden columns holding beans in the coffee department of the Food Hall?
"Those were Mohamed's idea," Mr.
Cole said.


Bratton Assailed on Ouster of Top Official
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton's dismissal of his top corruption fighter drew sharp criticism yesterday from Queens District Attorney Richard A. Brown, who said it raised questions about how committed the police department is to rooting out corruption.
His concerns were echoed by other local and Federal prosecutors, who would speak only on condition of anonymity because they have to work with Mr.
Bratton.
The prosecutors said the dismissed official, Deputy Commissioner Walter S. Mack Jr., had been very cooperative with their efforts to rid the department of corruption.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 15 about the Kari-Out Company of Tarrytown misstated the number of employees and the number of condiment packets the company expects to produce this year.
There are 110 employees, not 11; the packets are expected to exceed a billion, not a million.


F.Y.I.
Brooklyn's Shrub
Q.
I recently stumbled across the fact that the forsythia is the official botanic emblem of Brooklyn.
How did it come to be that it's not a tree?


Heavy Losses Prompt Euro Disney Price Cuts
Euro Disney has announced that admission prices to Disneyland Paris will be lowered on April 1 in an attempt to attract more visitors.
The high season admission will drop from $47, calculated at 5.3 francs to the dollar, to $37.
On Oct. 1 low-season rates will drop from $42.50 and $33 (depending on the date) to $28.
The move was made in response to heavy losses in the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, 1994.
The park had 8.8 million visitors in fiscal 1994 and needs to attract an additional 700,000 to break even.


Ticket to Ride
To the Sports Editor:
With several friends, I am a season ticket-holder of four excellent Shea Stadium field-level box seats for the New York Mets, seats we have paid for over nearly 20 years of some good (one great) and more than a few rotten baseball seasons.


Only UConn Women Are Still Perfect
Eventually, a capacity crowd would fill Kemper Arena for the unprecedented basketball doubleheader in which the No. 1-ranked University of Connecticut women and the No. 2-rated Husky men would face teams from the University of Kansas.
Long before the noise arrived, as the UConn women sat on the floor and stretched, the unsolicited opinion of a lone voice made them smile.
"Overrated," it sang. "Overrated."


Asia Linn and Chris Applebaum
ASIA KAIA LINN, whose parents chose her name while looking through a world atlas, met Chris Applebaum about six years ago at Hampshire College in Massachusetts and fell in love with him one Saturday night while they were dancing.
Although many women might swoon over a guy with perfect hair and fluid dance steps, it was his silly haircut and overall lack of coordination that delighted her.
"He's definitely a funny dancer, and he spun me around and we were just being really goofy," Ms.
Linn recalled.
"I realized how much fun we were having, and I thought this is ridiculous and fabulous and I love him."


With the Boom Ending, Will Stocks Suffer?
IF you shoot a man enough times, he's sure to fall down.
The tricky part is aiming the shots in a way that will knock him down without killing him.
Wall Street now believes that with six shots the Fed has succeeded in slowing the economy.
Everyone knows the Fed will fire its seventh shot this week, although there is a debate over whether it will choose to fire even more shots and over the severity of the wounds that will be inflicted.


South Pole Cleanup
Sightseeing is, of course, allowed, but travelers who sign on for a 12-day trip to Antarctica will spend much of their time cleaning up a research station.
Organized by VIEW, a Canadian conservation group, the trip, from March 10 to 21, entails four days of not-too-hard labor, like putting light debris into garbage bags, at the Polish Research Station.


Giuliani Wins It All In Legal Aid Battle
Nearly four months after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani defeated a strike by lawyers for the Legal Aid Society, the city has agreed to a contract that will require Legal Aid to do the same work for 16.5 percent less money, officials said.
Last week, Mr.
Giuliani got virtually all that he demanded.
The city's budget for Legal Aid's criminal defense division will drop from $79 million to $66.4 million over the 18-month duration of the contract.
At the same time, the contract requires the organization to represent at least as many defendants as in the past.


County Signs Pact On Medical Center
REPRESENTATIVES of the County Medical Center and New York Medical College capped three years of contentious negotiations Wednesday by signing a 10-year affiliation agreement.
The 81-page document covers the administration of 16 clinical services and training and supervision of more than 600 medical students, residents and fellows at the 1,000-bed Medical Center here, the only critical-care hospital in a seven-county region.


Remembering Poland's Jews
IN a shiny, German-built minivan, on a sparkling clear day last summer, we drove down a road in Cracow, Poland, paved with Jewish gravestones.
The stones were fake -- and I knew it: just concrete casts of real tombstones, they led into a fenced enclosure of crumbling barracks and rusting barbed wire that were also, I knew, simply stage sets.
My knowledge, however, did little to dispel my acute uneasiness.
Three other tourists and I were on a guided tour of sites related to Steven Spielberg's movie "Schindler's List," released in late 1993.
The movie, based on the documentary novel "Schindler's Ark" by Thomas Keneally tells how Oskar Schindler, an unscrupulous German businessman and Nazi Party member, saved the lives of some 1,100 Jews by putting them to work at his enamelware factory.
For nearly two hours we followed in the footsteps of both Oskar Schindler and Mr.
Spielberg, sometimes tangled in a disconcerting mixture of celluloid and reality.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Serena Chu, a 16-year-old ballet dancer who is studying in Moscow, misstated the name of the Long Beach company that sponsored her travel to Russia.
It is the Lancer Insurance Company, not Landis.


New S.R.O. Policy: The Debate Begins


AIR LINE
Light, spring suits that go from runway . . . to runway!


On Going Out Hunting In the Woods
In his Dec. 18 column, "In the Natural State," Pete Dunne elevates hunting to a mystical experience -- a communion that he cannot exactly define.
He knows only that he can find this experience in hunting and, although he loves being in the woods, he is just too busy to go into the woods without the incentive of killing sentient creatures.
Perhaps he could substitute some of the following for the mystical experience he enjoys in hunting:


Joan Rivers Offers Some Stand-Up Therapy
FOR something billed as "a grief seminar," there were a lot of laughs.
Joan Rivers, the comedian, actress, former talk show host and jewelry pitch woman, has taken a new act on the road and it may add the title "self-help guru" to her already formidable resume.
Ms.
Rivers has begun giving lectures on overcoming life's adversities, something she says she is eminently qualified to do.
In a nearly breathless recital, she told about 300 people who came to hear her in White Plains recently that she had coped with the suicide of her husband, Edgar Rosenberg, along with a devastating series of professional setbacks.
Her basic message to the mostly female, well-dressed audience, which had paid $29.95 to attend, was: If I can do it, you can do it, and I'm going to tell you how.


British Officer Defends Tour In the Balkans
Defending his tenure as commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose said on Friday that the war-torn Balkan country is in better shape and closer to peace than when he took over there a year ago.
"When I arrived a year ago it was a three-sided war," General Rose said at a news conference at the British Defense Ministry.
"The country was devastated. Sarajevo itself received 1,200 shells a day. Today the guns have by and large fallen silent."


And the Winner Is . . . The Presenter
WHEN the American clothing industry puts on its fanciest raiment tomorrow night for what it likes to call the Oscars of fashion, there will indeed be similarities to the Academy Awards ceremony.
Glamorous names, who have paid $1,000 a seat, will check their coats in a tent on Lincoln Center's plaza, then make their entrances into the New York State Theater with bared shoulders and cummerbunds flashing, the better to be photographed and chatted up by a phalanx of television crews.
Ticketless fans will pogo around the arriving limousines to exclaim, "There's Claudia!" or "That's Calvin!"


San Antonio
To the Editor: We returned recently from a visit to San Antonio, and would like to add some things to "What's Doing in San Antonio" (Nov. 13).
Of course, the luminarias on the River Walk are beautiful, but the most spectacular sight is the thousands of twinkling colored lights on the four- to six-story trees all along the walk.


Remembering Poland's Jews
IN a shiny, German-built minivan, on a sparkling clear day last summer, we drove down a road in Cracow, Poland, paved with Jewish gravestones.
The stones were fake -- and I knew it: just concrete casts of real tombstones, they led into a fenced enclosure of crumbling barracks and rusting barbed wire that were also, I knew, simply stage sets.
My knowledge, however, did little to dispel my acute uneasiness.
Three other tourists and I were on a guided tour of sites related to Steven Spielberg's movie "Schindler's List," released in late 1993.
The movie, based on the documentary novel "Schindler's Ark" by Thomas Keneally tells how Oskar Schindler, an unscrupulous German businessman and Nazi Party member, saved the lives of some 1,100 Jews by putting them to work at his enamelware factory.
For nearly two hours we followed in the footsteps of both Oskar Schindler and Mr.
Spielberg, sometimes tangled in a disconcerting mixture of celluloid and reality.


'Carousel' Comes to a Stop As Its Cast Takes a Final Bow
EVEN AS TEARS FELL, along with the final curtain at the Vivian Beaumont Theater earlier this month, "Carousel" was not entirely over.
Nicholas Hytner's shimmeringly dark version of the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical has a new destination -- Tokyo -- and a new cast -- Japanese.
The Lincoln Center Theater presentation, originally produced by the Royal National Theater in London, received accolades when it opened in March of last year and went on to win five Tony Awards, including best musical revival.


BENEFITS
Diabetes Association Benefit  TODAY -- The American Diabetes Association will benefit from the 100th performance of the Kenneth Branagh play "Public Enemy," at the Irish Arts Center, 553 West 51st Street.
Curtain is at 3 P.M.; the performance will be followed by a wine and cheese reception with cast members.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 757-3318.
To Aid Sarajevo  TONIGHT -- The actresses Vanessa Redgrave and Eileen Atkins and other performing artists will present "Letter From New York to Sarajevo," an evening of readings, songs and music to benefit the Unicef fund for the restoration and re-equipping of a closed primary school in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It will begin at 7 at the Union Square Theater, 100 East 17th Street.
Tickets, $45 and $15, from (212) 505-0700.
Fashion World Salute  MONDAY -- The Council of Fashion Designers of America will honor 13 people in the world of fashion, including Carrie Donovan and Bernadine Morris of The New York Times, at a dinner at the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center.
The black-tie event will begin with cocktails at 6 P.M., followed by dinner at 7:30 and the awards ceremony at 9.
A dessert celebration will close the evening.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 921-9070.
Dinner and Cabaret  MONDAY -- A cabaret evening and dinner at the Essex House will raise funds for the Manhattan Theater Club's musical theater and play development program.
Cocktails at 7 will be followed by dinner and cabaret performances by Mary Cleere Haran, Laurie Beechman and Nancy LaMott.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 645-5590, extension 146.
Lunar New Year's Banquet  MONDAY -- St.
Rita's Center for Refugees will honor Rolanda Watts, the talk show host, and Carol Higgins Clark, the author, at a benefit dinner for its educational and job-training programs.
The evening will begin at 6 at the Actors Chapel of St.
Malachy's Church, 239 West 49th Street, and will include entertainment, drinks and Vietnamese and Cambodian food.
Tickets, $100, from (718) 365-4390.
Benefit Screening  MONDAY -- Glenn Close, the star of "Serving in Silence: The Margarethe Cammermeyer Story," a television movie produced by Barbra Streisand, will be the host at a screening to raise funds for Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS.
The screening is at 7:30 P.M. at the Sony Theaters Astor Plaza, 44th Street at Broadway, and will be followed by a cocktail reception at the Minskoff Theater, 200 West 45th Street.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 840-0770.
Dance Party at the Metronome  TUESDAY -- The Jewish Guild for the Blind will hold a Winter Meltdown dance party at the Metronome, 915 Broadway (at 21st Street).
The event, to raise funds for the guild's programs to help blind people live independently, will begin at 7 P.M. and will include a cash bar and dancing until 11.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 769-6240.
Winternight '95  TUESDAY -- The creative arts program of the Lighthouse, the rehabilitative agency for the blind, will benefit from Winternight '95, a black-tie dinner-dance at the Waldorf-Astoria honoring Guy Peyrelongue, the president of Cosmair Inc., the cosmetics company.
The event will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner at 8 and dancing to the Hank Lane Orchestra.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 614-0400.
Benefit in Two Parts  WEDNESDAY -- An evening to benefit the Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service, a social-service agency, will be held at the Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street.
Cocktails at 5:30 will be followed by dinner at 6:30.
Benefactors will then proceed to the Minskoff Theater for an 8 P.M. curtain at "Sunset Boulevard." Tickets, $250, or $200 for the performance alone from (718) 875-0710, extension 344.
Black History Makers Awards  WEDNESDAY -- Associated Black Charities will hold an awards dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The black-tie event will begin with cocktails at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner at 7:30 and the awards, which this year will go to the Children's Defense Fund, the NAACP Legal Defense Fund and the United Negro College Fund.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 245-6570.
Honor for Ronald H. Brown  WEDNESDAY -- A benefit for Hunter College Elementary School and Hunter College High School will honor Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown with the schools' first American Dream Award.
The event, at the Waldorf-Astoria, will begin with cocktails at 6:30 P.M., followed by the dinner and awards ceremony at 7:30.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 843-1727.
Toasting James Beard  FRIDAY -- A food and wine tasting will be held at the Essex House to benefit the James Beard Foundation, an organization promoting education in the culinary arts and the preservation of the late Mr.
Beard's house in Greenwich Village.
This event will begin at 6 P.M. and will include wines from 17 European producers, with food especially created for each wine.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 627-2308.
The Opera Ball  SATURDAY -- The 35th annual Ball in the Opera House will benefit the Metropolitan Opera Association.
The evening will begin with a performance of "Turandot," at 8, and the ball will take place immediately following the opera.
White or black tie.
Tickets, $800, from (212) 496-1516.
To Help Children  SATURDAY -- A dinner-dance to benefit the Hospice of the South Shore's children's bereavement program will be held at the Timber Point Country Club in Great River, L.I.
The evening, beginning at 8, will include cocktails, a buffet dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $75, from (516) 666-4893, extension 38.
Parents in Action Benefit  NEXT SUNDAY -- A party for parents and children, a benefit for New York City-Parents in Action, a group that educates parents about preventing drug and alcohol abuse, will be held from 2 to 5 P.M. at Dezerland Fun City, 28th Street at 11th Avenue.
Included in this indoor amusement park are activities like bumper cars, batting cages, a carousel and miniature golf.
Admission is $75 for each adult and $35 for each child, or $175 for a family of four (children 13 or younger must be accompanied by an adult).
Tickets are available from (212) 831-8382.
En Pointe  FEB. 6 -- The School of American Ballet will honor John W. Kluge, the chairman of the Metromedia Company, and Arthur Mitchell, the president and artistic director of the Dance Theater of Harlem, at a dinner-dance at the New York State Theater.
The black-tie evening will include a reception at 6, the awards ceremony and ballet excerpts at 6:45 and dinner and dancing at 7:45.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 997-0100.
An Honor for Nynex's Chairman  FEB. 6 -- William C. Ferguson, the chairman of Nynex, will be the honoree at a black-tie dinner-dance celebrating the 40th anniversary of the New York Institute of Technology.
The event, at the Waldorf-Astoria, will begin with a reception at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 838-2660.


THE LAST VICTIM
I wonder whether the angry white males, who feel so put upon, would, if given the opportunity, prefer to be white females.
Black males?
Black females?
LOUIS GOLDIN Northport, L.I.


Burned Strip Plans to Rebuild
Since a fire burned down the coffee shop he has owned for the last 15 years, Peter Katsihtis has been surprised to learn just how important Crown Donuts was to the neighborhood.
"I get people coming up to me, literally crying -- I'm not exaggerating," Mr.
Katsihtis said.
"There was one little guy in his 60's, retired. He's been coming here for 15 years, seven days a week, every morning and every afternoon. He seemed like a lost puppy. He goes, 'Peter, what am I going to do?' I told him to go across the street. But he said it wouldn't be the same."


U.C.L.A. Is Upset At Home By Cal
California 100, U.C.L.A. 93
Tremaine Fowlkes scored a career-high 24 points and California kept up its mastery of U.C.L.A. on the fourth-ranked Bruins' home court with a 100-93 victory yesterday.


Oh, Say Can You Sing?
AS RENDERER OF THE NATIONAL ANTHEM AT Super Bowl XXIX tonight, Kathie Lee Gifford joins this troupe, formed in 1967:
I. Universities of Arizona and Michigan bands.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on Nov. 27 about Christmas celebrations in London misstated the telephone number for Restaurant Switchboard, an information service.
The company recently called to point out that it is (181) 888 8080.


McCarver Is Sticking With the Mets
After several months of uncertainty and protracted talks, TIM McCARVER has re-enlisted as WWOR-TV/Channel 9's Mets' analyst.
"We're very happy, we got what we wanted," said BOB ROSEN, McCarver's agent.
Rosen, who did not disclose the terms of the deal, said: "What took so long is I've been dealing directly with FRED WILPON, who's been occupied with other things." Wilpon is the co-owner of the Mets.


Once-Booming Horse-Breeding Industry Falls on Hard Times
NEW tax laws and tougher breeding restrictions have forced many horse breeders out of the business in the last decade, leaving few horse farms on the Island.
In recent years, a difficult economy, along with rising property taxes and increased farm expenses, have added to the gloom.


Rich Jocks Throw Britain for a Loss, Too
IF you're talking football around here this weekend, it's almost certain the conversation won't be about that provincial contest in Miami between the San Francisco 49ers and the San Diego Whatevers.
Even among those in England who will watch the live Super Bowl broadcast Sunday night, real football is still the game played with the round ball, and for them, the electric names of the moment are not Steve Young and Jerry Rice, but Eric Cantona and Andy Cole.
Mr.
Cantona and Mr.
Cole are stars for Manchester United, one of the powerhouse teams in the English Premier League.
In recent days, both have become, in different ways, the focus of intense debate among fans, sports columnists and even the odd politician or two, who believe the sport they like to call the people's game is moving further and further from the people.


German Bonds
To the Editor  You recently implied in a brief article that holders of all German prewar bonds should contact Deutsche Bank regarding their possible redemption ("Paying Hitler's Bills," Diary, Jan. 8).
The Deutsche Bank Securities Corporation, in fact, has been retained as a conversion and paying agent for the settlement of accrued interest on four specific prewar bond issues.


With O'Neal on Sidelines, Magic Still Wins at Home
Magic 107, Bucks 103
With Orlando's inside threat, Shaquille O'Neal, on the sidelines, Dennis Scott's 27 points keyed the perimeter game last night, leading the Magic to a 107-103 victory over the visiting Milwaukee Bucks.


More Than Just a Victorian
To the Editor:
With rehabilitators like Cynthia Ozick, who needs enemies?
Not only is she totally wrong about Trollope, and guaranteed to confuse newcomers to the scene, but she wants to do away with what she sees as some insidious Trollopean conspiracy -- everyone else who has ever read his work. (Yes, I confess, I'm one of the evil fans.)


The View From: Guilford; Eighth-Grade Inspiration From a Great Migration to the North
SIXTY paintings on exhibit at the Museum of Modern Art in Manhattan chronicle a struggle, full of hope, that changed America.
Youngsters in Guilford have been taking in what the paintings tell, and taking off from there.
Jacob Lawrence did the paintings, called "The Migration Series," in 1940 and 1941 to tell the story of blacks moving from the rural South to the industrial North in the decades around World War I. Lawrence, whose own family was part of that migration, depicted people who -- knowing life on tenant farms, under Jim Crow laws -- bundled up their belongings and boarded trains for the North.


The Nation; A Very Unlikely Villain (or Hero)
OF all the many people who achieved fame and influence mostly after their deaths, none seems more unlikely than Leo Strauss, the soft-spoken political philosopher who taught for many years at the University of Chicago.
Professor Strauss was a high thinker devoted to such issues of less than mass appeal as the relative values of reason versus revelation in human affairs.
He wrote books and essays on Plato, Spinoza, Xenophon and Maimonides, and these writings contain nary a sentence about current events or public policy.
And yet, the German born scholar, who came to the United States in 1938 and died in 1973, has suddenly, with the watershed November elections, loomed up almost larger than life as the great champion of conservatives in the hurly burly of current politics -- and as a villain to liberals.
He has been cited in the past as the invisible, posthumous inspiration of an influential group of former students and other followers known as Straussians, a group that includes Robert Bork, the legal scholar and former judge, and Justice Clarence Thomas of the Supreme Court, as well as former Education Secretary William Bennett and William Kristol, now regarded as the leading theoretician of conservative Republicans.
Embraced by prominent conservatives in the context of the 1994 campaign, the ghost of Professor Strauss emerged from his cloister transformed, now a sort of intellectual godfather to the Contract With America.


Norman Plummer, Medical Director, 94
Dr.
Norman Plummer, a longtime general medical director for the New York Telephone Company and an official of the United States Army's Influenza Commission, which helped develop the influenza vaccine, died on Wednesday at the William Hill Manor Health Care Center in Easton, Md.
He was 94.
Dr.
Plummer, who received his medical degree from Cornell University Medical School in 1926, was closely affiliated with the New York Hospital and Cornell University Medical School for many years, serving as an assistant professor of medicine.


M. J. Sheridan, S. M. Rickert
Margaret Jane Sheridan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Sheridan of Guilford, Conn., and Stephen McMurtrie Rickert, a son of Margaret Blake of Santa Barbara, Calif., and the late Van Dusen Rickert, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
George W. Rutler officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a sales development manager at People magazine in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in nutrition and health policy from Harvard University and an M.B.A from Stanford University.
Her father retired as a marketing consultant with the Union Carbide Corporation in Danbury, Conn.


India's Shallow Democracy
India boasts, accurately, of being the world's biggest democracy.
But India's democracy can be as superficial as it is big.
Multiparty elections are regularly held, opposition parties occasionally win and when Indira Gandhi attempted to establish an outright dictatorship in the 1970's, India's people drove her from power.
These are no small accomplishments anywhere, and contrast favorably with the situation in most of India's Asian neighbors.


More Than Just a Victorian
To the Editor:
Much as I enjoyed reading Cynthia Ozick's densely passionate and poetic treatise on Anthony Trollope, I bristled a bit at her cynical view of "us" as "people making use of other people, especially in the accumulation of money." I may be in denial, but I do think twice about this all the time and have a very weak stomach when it comes to the marketplace.


How I Survived Off Off Broadway: One Man's Tale
WHEN Aunt Chiche went for her checkbook, I thought I had it made.
There I was, a young playwright home for the holidays, watching my 86-year-old great aunt, my family's final link to old money, teetering toward her purse with a pen in her hand.
I could barely contain my joy.
I had just laid bare my ambitions and neediness and she'd bought it.
I envisioned my actors getting paid, my four-colored posters plastered on the walls of SoHo and my production heading straight to --


At Plaza, Japanese Rally to Help Quake Victims
FOR the thousands of Japanese families who have settled in Bergen County, Yaohan Plaza here is a link with the homeland.
Its huge supermarket and dozens of adjoining shops offer a myriad of Japanese foods and products.
In the days after the devastating earthquake that struck Kobe and nearby cities on Jan. 17, many shoppers and workers at the plaza stopped near the supermarket's information booth to study lists of those killed in the disaster and to contribute money to relief efforts.
Some of them talked movingly of their memories of the stricken area and of loved ones still living there.


Conflict on G.O.P. Agenda Intense in Capitol Meetings
In dozens of Congressional meeting rooms, the battles over Republican proposals for change are being fought out hearing by hearing, witness by witness.
On Friday, a debate over legislation that would severely restrict American participation in United Nations peacekeeping missions served as an illustration of how intense the conflict is.
It was a day of charged emotions, stiff resistance by Democrats and arcane procedural struggles.


Balancing Space, Variety and Vegetables
THE recent mild weather and the arrival of new seed catalogues have caused gardeners to yearn for spring.
But patience.
There still is February to get through, and March can offer some weather challenges, too.
Even April, for that matter.
Meanwhile one can hope and dream and try to make decisions.
There usually is a strong desire to grow everything.
Then reality strikes; garden space is only so big and backs only so strong.


Researchers Find Early Battlers of H.I.V.
Small preliminary studies that will be reported this week at a national medical meeting show that a new class of drugs is highly effective in knocking out the virus that causes AIDS and allowing the immune system to recover, at least in the short term.
But investigators advise caution in interpreting the results, noting that many promising early findings have failed to lead to effective treatments for AIDS patients.


Religious Form of Yiddish Is Where It All Started
To the Editor:
As the daughter of Holocaust survivors, growing up in Brooklyn, I too learned Yiddish as my "mama loshen." As a child, it generally embarrassed me to have my parents speak Yiddish in public and I asked them to speak only English when we were out together.


Save Now, Pay Later
FIRST, the good news: There is an income-tax deduction available to owners of rental property that could shave thousands of dollars off your tax bill each year.
It is called depreciation.
Now, the bad news: If you take the depreciation deduction when you shouldn't, it could cost you money.
If you don't take it when you should, it could cost you even more.
If you take it and get any of the numbers wrong, you could end up paying a penalty.


Corrections
A report in the "Sunday" pages on Jan. 8 about a telephone storytelling service misstated the given name of the father of one proprietor.
The father is Jeff Segall, not Jess.


Sole Expense
To the Editor:
As a former principal dancer with the Dance Theater of Harlem, I am aware of the financial struggles of professional dancers living on sub-starvation wages  [ "Dancing Precariously on the Bottom Line," Jan. 8 ] .
In addition to the cuts in funding and fierce competition faced by modern-dance companies, ballet companies have an extra handicap in their efforts to stay solvent: they must spend hundreds of thousands of dollars a year on pointe shoes. (New York City Ballet, for example, spends $500,000 annually.)


Spies &amp; Thrillers
A staple of suspense fiction is the figure of one man against the world, up against national or international conspiracies that he alone has to solve.
More often than not, these novels are silly pulp-fiction exercises in which a bigger-than-life hero surmounts all impossible obstacles and in the process puts any sophisticated reader to sleep.
But two new books -- MIRRORS KILL, by Jack Curtis (Crown, $23), and SLINGSHOT, by Jack D. Hunter (Forge/Tom Doherty, $22.95) -- overcome many of the genre's built-in problems.
Both are eminently readable.
And they have other things in common: a plot that has its roots in World War II, modern neo-Nazis and an international conspiracy.
"Slingshot" takes a stab at political and sociological commentary, depicting an uneasy United States in the near future that is ripe for revolution.
"Mirrors Kill" has some things to say about contemporary malaise too, but its scope takes in the entire world, with an especially probing look at Russia today.


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and the satellite booth at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold at Duffy Square beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
The World Trade Center booth opens at 11 A.M. and also sells matinee tickets for the next day.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


Business Diary
THE ECONOMY Just Pass an Amendment and Call the Doctor in the Morning Look at those three little words -- "balanced budget amendment." The first two are truly frightening ones, conjuring images of Social Security slashed in half, crippling taxes, a decimated national defense.
But "amendment" -- what a breath of fresh air that one brings.
All one could hear, though, was talk of amending, not that brutal balancing. 1995's Tax-Cut Star You'd think Christine Whitman's middle name was "Tax Cut," not "Todd." It's been her battle cry from the start, and last week the Governor proudly declared that she'd reach her goal of a 30 percent cut in New Jersey's income tax by next January, a year earlier than she'd promised.
Never mind that critics say she's just shifting the burden to local property taxes -- her message was clear: local governments are on their own.
"Property taxes," she said, "reflect local spending decisions." And the Republicans in Washington are clearly fans, for they chose her to beat up on President Clinton after his State of the Union speech -- only the day after her tax speech.
Mr.
Greenspan Is Watching You could never accuse the Federal Reserve of not being "vigilant." For the past year, it has kept on raising interest rates, each time sounding dire alarms about a too-bubbly economy, even as inflation snuggled in firmly below 3 percent.
So when Alan Greenspan, the Fed chairman, actually used the word last week -- saying, in Senate testimony, that various inflation signals are forcing the Fed to stay "vigilant" -- you could bet he was at it again.
And Friday's report of a strong final quarter of 1994 could add fuel to his fire, even amid signals of a slowing economy.
So when the Fed meets this Tuesday, no one should be surprised if it tightens the screws further.
Let's just hope it doesn't make the patient scream, "Recession!" Super Ads?
Well, Super Money
This is it.
The Big Day.
Anyone who has the strength to sit through that watching-paint-dry exercise called the Super Bowl will at last see the real show: the ads.
What message, after all, could be so compelling that an advertiser would spend $1 million -- yes, $1 million -- to address those partying hordes for 30 fleeting seconds?
The advertising, one executive said, has become "a show in and of itself." Why, even Mario Cuomo and Ann Richards (who lost big in November's Super Bowl) will be out there, pitching Doritos.
Can this possibly pay?
Look at Nike.
It's in for 90 seconds.
That's $3 million.
Suppose it makes $10 on each pair of shoes.
Are 300,000 inspired fans going to rush out and buy Nikes?
Chrysler Doesn't Want It to End Can the auto boom keep rolling forever?
Of course not.
People will finally get rid of the old clunkers and won't buy as many new cars -- especially at those prices.
It's been nice for Detroit, though, and Chrysler would love to have it last a bit longer.
But last week it voiced its worry that if the Federal Reserve raises rates again, it could tip the balance and bring back the bad old days.
But face it: things are already slowing down.
Ford just shut a few assembly plants temporarily, and discounts, rebates and price wars are sneaking back into Detroit's vocabulary.
INTERNATIONAL Hunting Terrorists' Cash With Republicans in the spotlight, President Clinton, naturally, wants to take some decisive actions.
That may have been on his mind last week when he ordered a freeze on the American assets of Mideast terrorist groups.
On the surface, it makes sense.
Like most things, terror isn't free -- so it's logical to "follow the money" (as the Watergate folks used to say).
Trouble is, there probably isn't much terrorist money in American banks, at least not that the Treasury will find.
Can you imagine walking into your bank and saying, "Hi. I'm with Amalgamated Terrorists. What's the minimum for free checking?" Said one Treasury official: "I don't anticipate seizing any large sums." It Isn't About Mexico "It is not just about Mexico," Alan Greenspan said last week, stressing the global impact that Mexico's crisis could have and urging the Senate to approve $40 billion in loan guarantees.
And that global scale was underscored when the I.M.F. tentatively approved a $7.8 billion loan to Mexico, the group's biggest ever.
And as Washington ponders those guarantees, one point became clear: there will be no linkage with any border crackdown on illegal immigrants.
Mexican officials adamantly denied that this would be part of any deal, and American officials backed right away from the idea.
Health Care XXIX: The Merger Yes, health care companies have seen the frugal future and have been preparing for it -- merging, merging, merging to cut costs.
But last week this craze really hit the big time as Glaxo offered $14 billion for Wellcome.
If these British companies join forces, they'll create the world's largest drug maker, even leaping past giant Merck. (Glaxo gets a big chunk of its sales from Zantac, its ulcer treatment, while Wellcome's stand-bys are Zovirax, for herpes, and AZT.) The deal would also be up there with the biggest mergers ever -- and half the level of the biggest, the $30 billion Nabisco merger.
If, that is, it happens.
Wellcome tried to say no, thanks, later in the week, but that might be tough, since its biggest shareholder -- with a 39.5 percent stake -- is all for it.
COMPANIES Soft Drinks: Now There Are 3 Speaking of balancing the budget, here's an idea: since no one needs soft drinks, Americans could just take the staggering sum they spend on them -- $49 billion yearly, fully a third of the global soda market -- and send it to the Treasury.
What a dent that would make!
No, sadly, soft drinks are right up there with Social Security as American icons.
And speaking of soft drinks, a third giant was born last week in that huge industry as Dr Pepper/Seven-Up agreed to be acquired by Cadbury Schweppes (Canada Dry, Crush, etc.) for $1.7 billion.
The combined company would have 17 percent of the American market, nearly in a league with Coca-Cola (41 percent) and Pepsi (32 percent).
And at $33 a share for Dr Pepper, that's quite a run-up from $15, which was the price when the stock was first offered to the public just two years ago.
Spectrum: Out of Its Misery?
In one short year, Spectrum Information Technologies went from being an obscure data-transmission company to being the talk of the technology town.
For a brief spell, that talk was aglow with promise, for the mighty John Sculley had signed on -- it couldn't get better than that.
But soon the talk turned sour, for an S.E.C. inquiry materialized, Mr.
Sculley beat a hasty retreat, woe piled on woe.
And last week came perhaps the final straw, as Spectrum and three of its four operating subsidiaries filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
Don't Forget the Oranges Pretty soon you'll be able to live on orange juice -- it'll be loaded with so much good stuff that you'll be the picture of nutritional perfection if you consume nothing else all day.
Just think: not long ago, orange juice was nothing but juice from oranges.
How primitive!
Marketers have since come to their senses, throwing in vitamins here, calcium there, to make you feel truly virtuous when you drink it.
And last week Tropicana took the Battle of the Oranges to new heights, introducing juices fortified with vitamins A, C and E, calcium, and even fiber.
Everything but a CD player and an alarm system.
Finding That Cloudy Lining It's called the expectations game.
You expect sleet, it's partly sunny, you're ecstatic; you expect a sparkling sky, a few clouds appear, you're in a funk.
Compaq Computer is flying so high it just surged past Apple and I.B.M. in personal computer sales worldwide, and last week it came out with some sparkling numbers -- quarterly earnings up 61 percent.
On this news, its stock proceeded to plunge $5, or 12 percent -- and slid even more the rest of the week, to end at $35.625.
What happened?
Analysts, it seems, expected 94 cents a share, so the reported 90 cents -- mighty as it was -- somehow became bad news.
But it could well be broader than that -- market psychology has "turned on technology stocks," said one analyst, and that means that any whiff of gloom can send them down.


Plan to Spread Pain of Medicaid Cuts Draws Wide but Tempered Criticism
Lieut.
Gov.
Betsy McCaughey's proposal to cut Medicaid embraces a simple strategy: make deep cuts, but share the pain.
Ms.
McCaughey has proposed cutting $1.2 billion, or 13 percent, from a Medicaid budget that has doubled since 1989.
Advocates for patients say the reductions would force many older people who now receive care at home to move to costly nursing homes.
Union officials say the plan would mean layoffs of hospital employees and low-wage nursing home attendants.
And hospitals and nursing homes say it might force hospital closings and a decline in patient care, especially at poor institutions that depend heavily on Medicaid payments.


Nothing's New
To the Sports Editor:
As a baseball purist, I don't understand the fuss over replacement players.
As far as I'm concerned, thanks to expansion, many of the current "major leaguers" are replacement players.
JOANN LA PERLA  Roselle Park, N.J.


Corrections
A weather listing in the Travel Watch column on page 21 of the Travel section today omits the number of days of precipitation in Washington in February.
It is 10.


Little Things Count, But It's Big Plays That Create Champions
Amid the predictions, the hype, the overwhelming anticipation and the unexpected, there is plenty you can count on in Super Bowl XXIX on Sunday night in Joe Robbie Stadium.
This clash between the San Diego Chargers and the San Francisco 49ers will swing on ball possession; the team that keeps the ball the longest is in better shape.
It will swing on turnovers.
It will be peppered with big hits and special-teams play and coaching creativity and success or failure in the red zone, huge factors all.
It has been said many times before, but it's true: The winner must be able to run the football and adeptly stop the run.
There is something else, however, that may prove to be the critical factor in this Super Bowl: big plays.
The team that puts a string of big offensive plays together is well on its way to the championship.


Improbability Knocks
If not youth's commitment, whose?
Try Dave Sayer's.
He's the man responsible for tracking down the winner of the Publishers Clearing House super prize and then surprising the new everyone's best friend with a $10 million knock on the door.
Live, on ABC, right after the Super Bowl.


As Haiti's People Call for Justice, Its Penal System Is Slow to Reform
Three months after President Jean-Bertrand Aristide returned to power promising justice and reconciliation, Haitians are clamoring for his Government to begin prosecuting the soldiers, police officers and paramilitary gunmen who killed, robbed and pillaged during three years of military dictatorship.
Mr.
Aristide has been dismantling the repressive military and police apparatus since he returned on Oct. 15.
The justice system -- historically mistrusted by Haitians and universally condemned as corrupt, incompetent and unfair -- has collapsed.
Rebuilding the court and penal system, however, has proven more difficult than anticipated and little progress has been made.


Oh, Say Can You Sing?
AS RENDERER OF THE NATIONAL ANTHEM AT Super Bowl XXIX tonight, Kathie Lee Gifford joins this troupe, formed in 1967:
I. Universities of Arizona and Michigan bands.


Currency
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen 99.40
99.45
109.90
per Dollar
German Mark1.5156
1.5115
1.7425
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.4150
1.4235
1.3245
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.5890
1.5890
1.4960
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$376.40
$384.70
$377.30
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


By Amtrak
To the Editor: A friend and I planned to take Amtrak's Empire Builder from Portland, Ore., to Chicago and then the Broadway Limited from Chicago to Trenton.
There would be an almost five-hour wait between trains.
We reserved, in each train, a small compartment with its own toilet facilities, which gave us the privilege of prepaying for three meals a day.
We were an hour late leaving Portland, waiting for the connecting train from California.
We settled back, finally, to enjoy the scenery, which was spectacular.
Dinner time approached and we were informed that the kitchen was not in operation and passengers would have a choice of two packaged meals.


Huizenga's Field, but Minus Dolphins
In a career built on dramatically altering how garbage is hauled and videos are rented, the Miami Dolphins' owner, Wayne Huizenga, had no way to change the course of the field-goal attempt by Pete Stoyanovich with 6 seconds left in Miami's 22-21 divisional playoff loss to San Diego Jan. 8.
Huizenga walked from a luxury box to field level at Jack Murphy Stadium, and watched from behind the goal posts as the 48-yard kick faded right.
"It was a big, big disappointment, to be up, 21-6, at halftime and not score another point in the second half," Huizenga said on Thursday.
"We didn't deserve to win. Now, we just have to put on our happy face."


Black History Month: Roots and Flowerings
PROSPECT HEIGHTS  Recounting African Tales That Are Alive With Spirits
The Brooklyn Museum will present African-inspired "Trickster and Dilemma Tales" for children and adults.


OFF THE GRID
Weiss presents the ultra-rightists in Idaho as wacky, paranoid cranks because they fear that trends toward a New World Order and a cashless economy are depriving Americans of their freedom.
But they are right that the growing power of distant economic elites is making democratic oversight of economic choices more difficult, contributing to inequality within and between nations, and shrinking opportunities for small businesses and farms.
The replacement of cash with computerized transfer of funds facilitates access to all kinds of information about personal finances and consumer choices to those willing to pay for it.
ALLEN HUNTER Madison, Wis.


That Boom You Hear Is Natrone Means Hitting the Line
Natrone Means squeezed into a bright orange seat at Joe Robbie Stadium earlier this week, surrounded by a thick knot of reporters on Super Bowl XXIX photo day.
The only other time Means attracts such a large crowd is when he has a football tucked under his arm and is rumbling through the line of scrimmage.
For the Chargers to have a chance of upsetting the 49ers on Sunday, Means must have a big day.


Zunis Mix Traditions With Icons Of Church
Inside the doorway at Our Lady of Guadalupe Church on the Zuni Indian Reservation is a portrait of the Virgin Mary.
Another hangs at the other end of the sanctuary, behind the altar.
Between the two, on the historic church's plaster walls, visitors find a breathtaking surprise.
Above pictures of the Stations of the Cross, depicting scenes from the Crucifixion, are murals of more than two dozen life-sized kachinas, the spirit beings of Pueblo culture.


Lessons of a Father's Death
FIFTEEN years ago, my family, like too many others, endured the shock and despair inflicted by crime.
My father, a veteran of 39 years with the Police Department, became a homicide statistic on St.
Patrick's Day, 1980, four months after he had retired, when he was shot resisting a robbery.
The sense of loss has been with me every moment since.


At Work; If Loyalty Is Out, Then What's In?
THE utility of certain ideas seems so universal it is sometimes hard to wrap the mind around life without them.
Loyalty, for example, to family, friends, colleagues, would seem to be worth preserving.
The loyalty ethic has powered American business.
Good companies will attribute their success to corps of loyal workers, who put their duty to the job ahead of almost everything else in life.
Loyalty has always been corporate oxygen.
Until recently, the reward for loyalty was, of course, a guarantee of security.
As most people know, the security side of the equation is now a big, fat null set, as companies continue to unload their employees and the survivors hunker down and wait for the next burst of unfriendly fire.
Many companies can no longer automatically count on the loyalty of their workers.
How does a company repair the bond broken by, as employees and employers alike would put it, "business necessity?"


Critics in Unison
To the Editor:
In his essay about the playwright John Osborne  [ "The Angry Young Man Who Stayed That Way," Jan. 8 ] , John Mortimer repeats something of an accepted myth about "Look Back in Anger": that the critic Kenneth Tynan single-handedly rescued the play from the precipice of obscurity when it opened to politely hostile audiences in London.
Although he lacked Tynan's panache and flourish in life as well as in print, Harold Hobson, Tynan's counterpart on The Sunday Times, wrote a review as laudatory and enthusiastic as Tynan's, and without equivocation.


Wyoming's Animals, Observed
WE parked the car on a deserted snow-swept road in Grand Teton National Park.
As we unloaded our gear we paused to gaze at the craggy mountain peaks across the valley, disappearing in the cool January mist.
But it was getting late, so our little group of six quickly snapped on snowshoes and set off through the deep, powdery snow, past stands of aspen and pine.
About a mile into the forest we began scanning the treetops for our quarry.
Five or six minutes later I spotted it: a kind of smudge sitting in the branches of a lodgepole pine.
"Hey Tom!" I yelled to the leader of our group as I pointed upward, "what's that up in that tree?" As we climbed a gentle slope toward the tree, we saw a porcupine, sitting serenely about 40 feet up.
Tom Segerstrom, the research biologist who led our trek, filled a hypodermic needle with a blend of muscle relaxant and sedative, hooked it on a five-foot-long injection stick, grabbed a net and shinnied up the pine.
We watched quietly, so we wouldn't scare the animal, as Mr.
Segerstrom maneuvered close and stuck him in the left hip with the syringe.
While he waited for the drugs to take effect, Mr.
Segerstrom held the net underneath the porcupine.
But, rather than dropping straight down, the animal tumbled backward off the limb, bounced off the net and fell to the ground.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
NATURE THURSDAYS
A Young Explorers program for children 4 through 6 will begin on Thursday from 1:30 to 2:30 P.M. and continue for two subsequent Thursdays at the Trailside Nature Museum in Cross River.
Brenda Freeman-Bates, a naturalist at the museum, will take her charges on nature walks, tell stories and supervise craft sessions and games, all keyed to the theme of wildlife.
Animal bones, rocks and fossils will be examined, and the children will have an opportunity to tap maple trees and boil the sap into syrup.


Promises, Promises
The promise of youth, so long ingrained in the American character, keeps on taking a beating.
Now, with the daily bombardment of children killing other children or giving birth to them, comes a report foretelling an age of political agnosticism.
According to the Higher Education Research Institute at the University of California at Los Angeles, never in recent times have so many college freshmen cared so little about the political process.
Commitment turns inward; indifference and apathy, outward.
Perhaps, though, it's always been thus.
Only these days, young people have become more candid in their cynicism, letting down their brave-new-world guard.
Or maybe they're still echoing what they hear at home; not unusual for teen-agers.


The No. 1 Women's Team Takes a Test and Passes It
The setting was big and loud and becoming louder.
Undefeated men's and women's teams from the University of Connecticut had filled Kemper Arena, and ticket holders who may have come with the original intention of concentrating on the men's game were now lending their forceful support to the women.
Connecticut's women had watched a 13-point second-half lead shrink to 4, and suddenly the Huskies were confronted with the type of unfriendly noise they have not known this season and may encounter if they reach the Final Four.


2 Californias Face Off; This Time It's a Game
At kickoff time in Sunday's all-California Super Bowl, Mary Schafer's household will be gathered around the television set with their San Diego Chargers sweat shirts and their "Southern California quiche": a stack of pizzas.
Five hundred miles north, in Sacramento, her twin sister, Sue Whitehead, will be rooting for the San Francisco 49ers with the finely honed disdain that Northern Californians reserve for their sisters to the south.
"Of course we're superior," she says.
"I keep telling my sister she better behave or we'll turn the water off."


Familiar Surroundings for New Food
DINERS familiar with Rusty Staub's on Fifth Avenue and the original Rusty's on 73d Street in Manhattan will find Jasper's in New Hyde Park familiar.
That deja vu feeling is created by its owners and chef, all alumni of Rusty's.
This two-month-old spot, with its steaks, Southwestern fare and Cajun dishes, has taken over the old B. B. Nolan's on Jericho Turnpike.
It is an attractive place, with brick walls, fireplaces, Victorian gingerbread woodwork, etched glass, mirror-backed glass cabinets, Tiffany-style lamps and a masculine color scheme of hunter green and burgundy.
An auxiliary dining room, a two-story balconied space with a huge wrought-iron chandelier, looks like a baronial hall.
Initial favorable impressions are made by the can-do staff and by the sturdy Italian bread accompanied by butter and a low-fat white-bean spread.
But the high noise level on busy nights puts a damper on good times.
A few so-so appetizers get the meal off to a shaky start.
Strictly routine were the somewhat chewy fried calamari mated with a zippy chili-powered dipping sauce.
Another ordinary opener put in the shade by its sauce was the large bland vegetable and black-bean dumplings escorted by a smoky-flavored tomato mayonnaise.
The predominant taste in a smoked-chicken quesadilla was mashed beans, which were not even mentioned on the menu.


Behind Tax Pledge: How the Numbers Came Up for Whitman
The news came on Jan. 4 in a low-key way, just the State Treasurer wrapping up another tedious budget briefing with the words, "So, Governor, if you want to do it, my feeling is that the revenue is going to be there to cover the whole fifteen."
No one seated around the conference table in Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's murky, wood-paneled office needed to be told what the full fifteen was, nor its political significance.


Book, Citing Hanoi Files, Finds M.I.A. Data Withheld
A new book based on Vietnamese military archives asserts that Hanoi withheld considerable information on American prisoners of war for decades, and began releasing it only after the cold war, when Soviet-bloc support evaporated and Vietnam urgently sought to end an American-led economic embargo.
"Perhaps hundreds" of Americans who survived crashes and ambushes were killed by their captors in the 1960's and 1970's, Vietnamese officers are quoted as saying in the book, "Inside Hanoi's Secret Archives: Solving the M.I.A. Mystery."


Van Halen Keeps On Zinging
WHEN IN DOUBT, steal something.
That has been an unofficial policy since the beginning of rock-and-roll, and Van Halen adopts it, shamelessly and skillfully, for the band's 11th album, "Balance."
It has been four years since Van Halen last released an album of new songs, with "For Unlawful Carnal Knowledge" in 1991. (There was also a live album in 1993.) During Van Halen's songwriting hiatus, blustering hard rock and polished pop metal were sideswiped by the agonized self-doubt of grunge and the self-mocking success of punk.
Hit makers from the 1980's like Cinderella and Poison have become instantly dated.
Van Halen, however, is more durable, because even as Sammy Hagar huffs and grunts through lyrics like "Oh girl, come on/ I want you to take me there," the band keeps hurling musical zingers.


Cabaret Raises $1.8 Million
New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center benefits from an event at the New York State Theater, Lincoln Center, Jan. 23.


THE LAST VICTIM
In "The Last Victim" (Dec. 18), what Susan Estrich sees as vicious "backlash" has so far been the gentlest of male reactions to mainline feminism.
What lies behind this restraint is a sexism that Estrich doesn't, perhaps cannot, perceive, because its essential component is silence.
The sexism in question -- and I hold no brief for it -- is part of traditional male chivalry.
It goes like this: Women have some just complaints.
It is our task to be understanding.
We should try to vote for them as much as possible, even for less qualified women if they are not too bad.


BEST SELLERS: January 29, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
48
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
2
32
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
3
3
2
KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The police detective Alex Cross pursues a serial killer and the kidnapper of his niece.
4
4
3
SELF-DEFENSE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tries to help a woman who says she is being stalked.
5
8
2
EYES OF A CHILD, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $24.) The apparent suicide of a San Francisco man leads to courtroom encounters.
6
6
129
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
7
5
9
WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World War II America.
8
7
22
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
9
11
17
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
10
9
15
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work in their small Maine town.
11
1
TRUST ME, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $22.) A canceled wedding leads to a curious romance between the groom and the caterer.
12
10
12
THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote themselves to solving crimes.
13
1
ACCEPTABLE RISK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $23.95.) A researcher's quest for the ultimate drug to treat depression has devastating consequences.
14
1
THE MURDERERS, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $23.95.) A series of murders and "willful deaths" beleaguers the Philadelphia police force.
15
12
10
DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful Government agency.
Weeks This Last On Week Week&gt; List Nonfiction 1 1 13 CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.


Drug War, II
THE MAIL ABOUT THE LOST "WAR ON drugs," discussed here on Dec. 18, has been formidable.
It has brought tomes and treatises, the thoughts of prisoners and preachers, and much evidence of anxiety across the land.
Although most of the government warriors, from the Commander in Chief down, prefer to avoid the subject, people seem desperate for more discussion of alternatives to the failed policies of prohibition and interdiction.
The media have carried the news of the nation's defeat, but they do not dwell, as they would in a conventional war, on the daily cost and humiliation.
Still, the letters from readers imply widespread support for the conclusion that there is no way to win the war so long as small, easily smuggled bundles of addictive cocaine or heroin can finance a large and aggressive criminal sales organization.
Prohibition is what makes drugs so profitable, yet the thought of legalizing their distribution, even with rigid controls and treatment programs, arouses the fear of infecting millions of new addicts.


How Much for a Life? Try $3 Million to $5 Million
YOU'VE watched in horror a dozen times: Scenes of barely recognizable aircraft parts strewn across smoldering moonscapes, with the occasional shoe or child's toy the only reminders of lives snuffed out in unimaginable terror.
And no doubt you've wondered when it would be your turn, a thought quickly shrugged away but never truly forgotten.
Flying, everyone knows, is a risky business.
Any expense that makes it safer thus seems an expense worth making.
And the only question most people ask after a crash is how to get the regulators to get off their duffs before the next one.


The Nation; A Church's Life Reflects A Nation's
ROSE FITZGERALD KENNEDY, 104 years old and a symbol of faith and determination, died last Sunday.
She was buried Tuesday after a funeral mass in a Boston church that itself reflects the history of the city where her son, John Fitzgerald Kennedy, set forth to become the nation's first Catholic President -- and the fourth to be assassinated.
Bernard Cardinal Law, Archbishop of Boston, told the congregation in St.
Stephen's Roman Catholic Church: "Her joys have been moments of triumph for millions. Her personal losses and sorrows have been epic tragedies which have moved the world."


In the Land of Replacements, Corsi Is King
Fourteen teams are pursuing Jim Corsi, a pitcher who won all of his five games from 1988 until 1993 before his major league career fizzled.
The former A's pitcher is reportedly at a loss as to what to do because he has never been caught in a bidding war before.
A war that, one friend said, had moved his contract possibilities into the $250,000-a-year range at last count.
Replacement baseball -- and its madness -- is here.
And baseball men, not the executives bent on forcing striking major leaguers under a salary cap, are left to deal with it.


Contributing To Child Support
In reference to the New Jersey Q &amp; A of Jan. 1, "Getting Tough on Child-Support Arrears":
As a divorced man, I am in full agreement that noncustodial parents ought to contribute in their children's upbringing.
But terrorizing them into compliance of unrealistic court mandates is a purely cosmetic approach to a malady in need of major surgery.


States of Mind; You Say You Want a Devolution
FOR Newt Gingrich and the band around him, his words are words to live by: "We are committed to getting power back to the states, we are committed to breaking out of the logjam of Federal bureaucrats controlling how we try to help the poor, and we believe you can trust the 50 states and the 50 state legislatures to work together on behalf of the citizens of their states."
It is not government itself that is the enemy, the Speaker and his friends believe; it is central government, national government, Federal Government; if most power devolved back to the states, our problems would end.


The Chieftains Make Connections
IT MAY INITIALLY SEEM strange that the title track of the new Chieftains album, the 31st by Ireland's most influential folk ensemble, is actually an American country music classic, "The Long Black Veil." It may seem even stranger that it's sung by an Englishman, namely Mick Jagger.
But the Chieftains and its leader, Paddy Moloney, have the rare ability to find connections between singers and songs and between Irish and other folk traditions that aren't always obvious.


RECORD BRIEFS
Beethoven: 'Missa Solemnis'  Soloists; Chicago Symphony Orchestra and Chorus conducted by Daniel Barenboim.
Erato 4509-91731-2; two CD's.
There is an edge of desperation accompanying even the most professional performances of the "Missa Solemnis." Conspiracy theorists might conclude that Beethoven knew full well of his music's unsingability and used this added factor as an expressive device.


Devils Go To Well, But Find It's Dry
The Devils scored a goal today after going more than two and a half hours of ice time without one, a franchise record.
But the Devils didn't score another, and lost their third straight game.
Unlike their losses at Buffalo and Boston, the 5-1 loss to the Montreal Canadiens this afternoon at the Forum had Coach Jacques Lemaire fuming and looking for answers.


Before 49er Cool Was In, Watters Was the Coolest
A famous radio broadcaster whose voice would be recognized by millions and who should know better saw San Francisco 49ers running back Ricky Watters approaching and said, "Hey, Deion." That stopped Watters in his tracks.
It is about the only time he has been left temporarily speechless all week.
Deion Sanders is a sensitive subject with Watters, one of the cockiest, most self-assured and most talented running backs in the National Football League.
Even though Sanders is seen as the one who brought flavor to the 49ers, Watters was actually the first to put a little hip-hop in the team's step.
But when he did it, he was viewed by many players in the league -- including people on his own team -- with disdain.


Radioactive Waste? Nimby, Towns Tell State
JOHN WEINGART, a state official, spoke before a meeting of the Rotary Club here in Sussex County last week.
His mission: to tell some 25 local business leaders about the benefits available to any municipality that will agree to be host to the state's first low-level radioactive waste disposal site.
Among those benefits, he said, would be about $2 million a year in tax revenues and fees, guaranteed open spaces and even a mechanism to compensate neighbors for any loss in the value of their property.


More Options for Gay Travelers
GAY and lesbian travel seems to be out of the closet for good, with tours and cruises for this market increasing in number and visibility.
Companies like Cunard and American Airlines are now lending their familiar emblems to targeted sales brochures.
The International Gay Travel Association now has 1,000 members, 65 percent of them travel agents, in the estimate of David Alport, the group's vice president, who is also the publisher of the gay travel newsletter Out &amp; About.
And last year, for the first time, the Gay Travel Association participated in the convention of the American Society of Travel Agents, held in Lisbon.
There is certainly a shakeout, too.
Lorry Heverly, an agent in Baton Rouge, who went into business a year ago to serve gay and lesbian clients, said she actually put together one tour herself, a trip to New Orleans at Halloween, when the French Quarter turns into a vast masquerade.
The program did not sell well, she said.
Asked about this apparent paradox -- an event that has been a natural sells badly as a package -- Billy Kolber, editor of Out &amp; About, said that a number of companies new in the field assumed that listing a trip as an "all-gay departure" for, say, a safari would be enough.
But operators and agents have found that this approach does not succeed, he said, because gay clients can be perfectly comfortable on a mainstream safari.
At the other end of the spectrum, gay clients may not need a guided tour to an easygoing place like New Orleans or Key West.
Tour content and assurances of acceptance in areas where gay couples may have been shunned are apparently better selling points.
The owners of Out &amp; About, who say it has a circulation of 6,500, believe that much of the agent interest stems from a need to find loyal clients in hard times.
"Travel agents are delighted to find that this underserved community is so loyal," Mr.
Kolber said.
Out &amp; About is published 10 times a year and a subscription costs $49 in the United States: 8 West 19th Street, Suite 401, New York, N.Y. 10011; (800) 929-2268 or (212) 645-6922.
Focus on 'Community'
When "gay travel" became heard in the mainstream world, probably about 1990, the term was presumed to include lesbians, or gay women.
But some women began to feel invisible.
All-women cruises are increasing, and Alaska is a prime destination.
Charlie Rounds, the new president of RSVP Travel Productions, which until now has aimed at gay men, said the company was offering three all-women cruises on Seaspirit, the company's 100-passenger vessel.
One cruise, leaving Feb. 4 from St.
Martin, calls at Anguilla, St.
Barthelemy, St.
Kitts and Nevis.
Fares start at $995 in double occupancy.
On April 30, the ship will embark on a seven-night cruise along the west coast of Costa Rica, with fares starting at $1,295 in double occupancy.
Mr.
Rounds said that a seven-night Alaska cruise, leaving July 8 from Juneau at the same fares as the Costa Rica cruise, was selling best and would probably sell out.
Even so, RSVP will not offer all-women or all-men cruises after this year.
"We will focus on community: all of us all the time," Mr.
Rounds said.
Taking his parents on the Seaspirit and seeing them treated royally by his fellow gay passengers, he said, taught him that diversity was the way to overcome prejudice.
RSVP's trips are available only through travel agents.
RSVP: 2800 University Avenue Southeast, Minneapolis, Minn. 55414; (800) 328-7787 or (612) 379-4697.
Meanwhile, Jan Cooper of Special Expeditions in New Jersey has scheduled a women's cruise in Alaska for July 30 to Aug. 6.
Ms.
Cooper said, "We have been operating voyages in Alaska for over 13 years and this is a personal effort to bring women from all over the continental United States to meet with the women of Alaska." For this, Elfin Cove, a community run mostly by women because the men are out fishing, is a particular destination.
The 70-passenger Sea Lion will sail from Sitka and return to Juneau.
The fare, in double occupancy, ranges from $2,860 to $3,980.
Special Expeditions: 123 South Avenue East, Westfield, N.J. 07090; (800) 348-2358 or (908) 654-0048.
Olivia Cruises and Resorts in Oakland, Calif., a company catering to lesbians, is offering a seven-night Alaska cruise departing from Seward, Alaska, or Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, on June 21 aboard the Royal Cruise Line's Royal Odyssey, with a capacity of 750 passengers.
Fares start at $1,595 in double occupancy.
Other charter cruises offered by this company are aboard the Seabreeze in the Caribbean, departing April 9, and aboard the Regent Spirit, cruising the French and Italian Rivieras.
The six-night fares in double occupancy start at $795 for the Caribbean and $1,895 for the Mediterranean.
Since it began in 1990 as an offshoot of Olivia Records, the company has sold 16 charters, 3 in Club Med villages.
Olivia: 4400 Market Street, Oakland, Calif. 94608; (800) 631-6277 or (510) 655-0364.
Adventure Tours
Toto Tours of Chicago will operate 21 small-group adventure tours this year, having started with one in 1991.
New trips include a 16-day yacht cruise of the Greek and Turkish islands, for men only, leaving Aug. 30; a trip to the Netherlands timed for the Queen's birthday at the end of April, which will include the ceremonies marking the liberation of the Netherlands in World War II, and a trip to New Zealand Feb. 15 to March 1, with an available extension to the Gay Mardi Gras in Sydney, Australia, the following week.
Toto Tours: 1326 West Albion Avenue, 3W, Chicago, Ill. 60626; (312) 274-8686.
Pied Piper Travel in New York is in its fifth year of selling blocks of cabins on cruises to gay clients.
This year it has three scheduled sailings on the Queen Elizabeth 2: April 27 for a trip from New York or Fort Lauderdale to Southhampton, England; May 15, a five-day cruise from New York to Bermuda and back, and July 3, a seven-day cruise from New York to Halifax, Nova Scotia, and back.
The trans-Atlantic prices, which include return air fare, start at $1,696.
Pied Piper: 330 West 42d Street, Suite 1601, New York, N.Y. 10036; (800) 874-7312 or (212) 239-2412.
A new company is Our Family Abroad.
It operated a short season of escorted tours in 1994.
In 1995, it will offer 23, 11 of them in Europe.
The tours are operated by Globus and are their standard trips, but they are kept separate from the others, according to Peter K. Schulze, Our Family Abroad's president.
Specific brochures, maps and coupons are provided to his clients.
He uses Globus escorts who have volunteered for his tours, he said, to avoid homophobic guides; they are given special training.
The brochure says that the tours are "discreet by design" and the groups appear "no different on the outside" from the many others touring the world.
Single-country tours of Costa Rica, Egypt, Ireland, Israel, Italy, the Netherlands and Portugal are offered, as well as multi-country tours.
Our Family Abroad: 40 West 57th Street, Suite 430, New York, N.Y. 10019; (800) 999-5500 or (212) 459-1800.


In the Maw of the Death Machine
ADMITTING THE HOLOCAUST  Collected Essays.
By Lawrence L. Langer. 202 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $23.
ART FROM THE ASHES  A Holocaust Anthology.
Edited by Lawrence L. Langer.
Illustrated. 694 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $30.


They Wear Masks and Mug for the Camera
On night safari for wild game in Central Park: a mysterious form emerges in the shadows by the Swedish Cottage.
It's furry, but too big for a house cat, too plump and round for a dog.
The camera clicks, and the flash reveals a masked face and rings on its bushy tail.
A raccoon.
No one knows exactly how many raccoons reside in Central Park, but Henry J. Stern, the Parks Commissioner, estimates 20, and says the number of sightings has risen in recent years.
"The population seems to be growing," he said.
"The fact that they're thriving shows the park is a healthy place to live."


City Ballet's New Strong Suit: Men
"BALLET IS WOMAN," George Balanchine's most quoted aphorism, came too early for the sound-bite era.
It was nonetheless a terse esthetic manifesto that summed up his self-declared faith in a feminine ideal; it also expressed an anything but universally shared view that classical technique, given its emphasis on pointe work, was best suited to women.
Yet this season and 11 years after his death, some of the world's finest classical male dancers are performing his works in his company, the New York City Ballet.
Never have so much strong technique and stylish polish been seen among the men on every level -- from relative newcomers like Christopher Wheeldon in the corps to soloists and principals like Ethan Stiefel and Damian Woetzel.
Paradoxical as it may seem, this overall striking improvement is also in line with Balanchine's thinking.


Technology; Do Deep-Water Diving Fans Have Deep Pockets?
MOVE over Humvees and night-vision goggles.
Another piece of military equipment has joined the amateur arsenal: the rebreather, underwater ally of Navy combat swimmers, which is now reaching the consumer market for $3,000 to $15,000.
Until now, consumers with a passion for expensive military toys could tool around town in a Humvee, the rugged all-terrain vehicle made famous in the Persian Gulf War and now available in a $50,000 civilian version known as the Hummer.
Or one might go prowling after hours with demilitarized infrared binoculars, available for about $2,400.


A Turandot Who Finds No Need Of Revenge
BY NOW, DAME GWYNETH Jones is used to tough critical treatment.
Her voice, in its prime a burnished dramatic soprano that could slice through any Strauss orchestra, was never a perfect instrument.
But lately the assessments of its imperfections have become pretty blunt.
"Colorlessly overblown upper register"; "explosions of raw, ugly sound"; "the now unavoidable sour and ragged notes"; "chancy intonation, hooty tones, scooping attacks": reviews of Dame Gwyneth's performances are littered with such phrases.
They come even from critics who balance their reports with glowing accounts of her viscerally powerful portrayals, her affecting phrasing and her full-throttled commitment to her art, the qualities that have kept her a leading figure on the international stage for 30 years.


No Headline
"In parts of Southern California there is definitely enormous peer pressure to be very cool and wear the right clothes. In San Francisco you're under pressure to avoid being cool as much as possible." NICK CARROLL, editor of Surfing Magazine.  [ 28:1 ]


New AIDS Rule Divides District
A new city policy that limits the number of homeless AIDS patients who can be housed on the Upper West Side has created a great deal of controversy, with AIDS advocacy groups vowing to sue the city and some community leaders trying to distance themselves from the policy even as others applaud it.
Under an order issued quietly in December by Deputy Mayor Fran Reiter, the number of AIDS patients permitted in single-room occupancy hotels covered by Community Board 7 was capped at 395, 100 fewer than were living there at the time.
The population is being reduced through attrition, Ms.
Reiter said, and new patients are being placed in hotels in other parts of the city until the goal is reached.


Keenan's New Life on the Mississippi
After four games of this lockout-shortened National Hockey League schedule, Mike Keenan's old team was 1-3 in the Eastern Conference and his new team was 3-1 in the West.
In that the truncated schedule won't include interconference games until the final round of the Stanley Cup playoffs, does this controversial and successful coach, now with the St.
Louis Blues, regret that he won't be able to return this season to Madison Square Garden to play the Rangers, and to all the friends and enemies he left behind in New York?


In Coed Football, X's and O's vs. X and Y Chromosomes
I tore the ligaments in my shoulder going for the game-winning touchdown in a football game.
It wasn't as if I had a choice.
I waited and waited for a pass, but the quarterback wasn't throwing to me.
When the ball finally came, I had to chase it down at all costs.
Before my recent injury, I played Sundays in Central Park in a fun, challenging, coed pickup game.
But when I went outside that circle of friends and played others, it turned from exercise into existentialism.
I was on a team, yet felt abandoned and alone, running out for passes which never came, playing against opponents who couldn't see me.
Was I really invisible?
Maybe I simply didn't exist.
If I keep going out for the ball and no one has any intention of throwing to me, then am I playing a lie?
Am I playing at all?


Florida Hopes Super Bowl Shows State Is Safe
While the San Francisco 49ers and the San Diego Chargers play for glory today, Florida officials say they have almost as much at stake in Super Bowl XXIX: a better image.
After a spate of tourist killings more than a year ago, Florida has improved security and there has been a drop in tourist-related crime.
Still, state officials say, many people remain fearful to visit Florida.


The Executive Life; Advice, and Attention, For Hollywood Stars
For the kind of hand-holding that their agents and lawyers are often too busy to provide these days, Hollywood's big stars are turning increasingly to personal managers.
These celebrity handlers help shape careers and nurture talent, and the most successful also develop and produce projects for the actors, writers and directors they represent.
Unlike an agent, who is licensed to negotiate contracts, a personal manager supervises every facet of a client's career.


Ecosystem Management Is Policy, Not Province of One Agency
To the Editor:
"Timber! A New Idea Is Crashing" (Week in Review, Jan. 22) asserts that the National Biological Survey is charged with making the ecosystem management concept work.
This is simply wrong.
The Biological Survey is a research agency, not a land management agency.
It is charged with gathering, analyzing and circulating biological information to insure stewardship of natural resources in the United States.


Making Major Repairs
To the Editor:
Your article on Dec. 4 headed "Making Major Repairs" brings back painful memories of disruptive and negligent contractors.
Anyone undertaking a renovation or construction project needs to be aware of the delays due to the lack of contractor response and diligence.


Injured Devers to Miss Millrose Games
GAIL DEVERS, the Olympic and world champion at 100 meters, has withdrawn from the Millrose Games after aggravating a hamstring injury during practice.
Devers's coach, BOB KERSEE, said yesterday that the sprinter had reinjured her left hamstring doing block starts on Thursday.
"It was her first time in the blocks in about six months," Kersee said.
"She was driving hard for the first time in a long time."


Nordstrom Looking for 800 to Fill Jobs
EIGHT HUNDRED jobs, available to Westchester residents, have become available.
The employer is Nordstrom, which plans to fill the 800 positions locally for its new store in the Westchester Mall in White Plains.
The store is to open on March 17.
"At Nordstrom we feel it is important to support the communities in which our stores are located by recruiting locally as much as possible," said Cody Kondo, Nordstrom vice president and general manager for the Northeast region.
"We are looking for goal-oriented people with a 'can do' attitude to be part of the Nordstrom team."


The Furs Are Frankly Fake, But the Humor Is Genuine
Fashion has propelled fake furs into the big time with imaginative styling, a sense of humor and, at times, an almost campy opulence.
Some sweeping opera coats, for example, could cover a twin bed.
Designers like Vivienne Westwood, Karl Lagerfeld and Isaac Mizrahi starred fake furs in their winter collections, and women in large numbers are wearing them.
They are inexpensive and light in weight, and their styling is often whimsical.


Vocalists in Demand
VOCAL music, both solo and choral, dominates the concert schedule this week in Connecticut, starting with two free recitals this afternoon.
The tenor William Hite will sing Purcell and Haydn with the fortepianist Peter Sykes at 3 P.M. in the Yale Center for British Art in New Haven (call 432-2850 for more details).


James P. Grant, 72, Director of Unicef
James P. Grant, the American foreign aid expert who in 1980 became executive director of Unicef and made it into a major force for helping children, died yesterday at Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco, N. Y. He was 72 and lived in Croton, N.Y.
The cause of death was cancer, Unicef officials said.
Mr.
Grant resigned from the United Nations Children's Fund last week.


A Call for Sacrifice
To the Editor:
I was encouraged to learn from "Speaking the Unspeakable to Retirees" (Jan. 1) that so many older Americans support limits on Social Security.
The present minority of such Americans must grow, and I think it can grow if the future of Social Security is explained to retirees in personal terms.
A critical year will be reached around 2030, when Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid and Federal pensions alone will consume the equivalent of all presently collected Federal tax revenues.


The Nation: Underwear and All; Dignifying the Presidency
IN the spring of 1992, Bill Clinton was the presumptive Democratic nominee for President, but his campaign was floundering, crippled by doubts about his character and his core, not to mention his fidelity.
He put on his shades, picked up his sax, and reintroduced himself as a regular guy in the pop-culture, mass-media, talk-show territory where Presidents had almost never trod.
It worked, but at a price.
By his early months in the White House, Mr.
Clinton had not only told Americans he felt their pain.
He had so conspired in defining down the dignity of the Presidency that the public knew what kind of underwear he wore, needled him in the same informal settings where he had once wooed them and often regarded him not as a figure of distant majesty but as Elvis, Slick Willie, Bubba or Bill.


Letter: On Mr. Quayle's Accuser; Why Would the Media Glorify a Felon?
To the Editor:
Re "Mr. Quayle's Accuser Gets His Day" (editorial, Jan. 22):
There they go again.
More than six years after Brett Kimberlin, a convicted felon known as the "Speedway bomber," falsely claimed he sold marijuana to me when I was a student, the national media are once again doing the bidding of this devious con man.


Wild Things on Display
THIS will boggle your mind," said James Mazzarelli. "It's going to be very, very educational." What he did not say, and really did not have to say, was that what he was talking about was going to be very, very different for Litchfield County.
The county, as is well known, is a mostly rural area in western Connecticut populated mostly by ordinary folks but also in increasing measure by movie stars and business tycoons who love its scenery and charm, even if only for a vacation retreat.


Co-ops and Subletting Of Units
Q Because of the many sublets in my co-op, the board of directors is considering forbidding any and all subletting in the near future.
The board says this is necessary because most banks will not grant loans to prospective shareholders if a building is more than 20 percent non-shareholder occupied, thus making it very difficult for shareholders to sell their apartments, except in all-cash transactions.


The Names Are Familiar Even if the Faces Aren't
UPTOWN -- If you love art or use certain hospitals, you've probably run into the names of Iris and B. Gerald Cantor.
They are everywhere.
At the Metropolitan, Brooklyn and Los Angeles County museums, there are galleries and sculpture gardens, as well as a plaza, auditorium and other structures, named in their honor.
Stanford University has 187 Rodins donated by Mr.
Cantor, who is the chairman of Cantor Fitzgerald Securities, as well as a pledge of $10 million for the Iris and B. Gerald Cantor Center for the Visual Arts, scheduled to open on the campus in 1997.
The U.C.L.A.
Medical Center has an Iris Cantor Chair in Breast Imaging and a B. Gerald Cantor Research Fund in End-Stage Renal Disease, a sort of matching his and hers set.


Remembering Poland's Jews
IN a shiny, German-built minivan, on a sparkling clear day last summer, we drove down a road in Cracow, Poland, paved with Jewish gravestones.
The stones were fake -- and I knew it: just concrete casts of real tombstones, they led into a fenced enclosure of crumbling barracks and rusting barbed wire that were also, I knew, simply stage sets.
My knowledge, however, did little to dispel my acute uneasiness.
Three other tourists and I were on a guided tour of sites related to Steven Spielberg's movie "Schindler's List," released in late 1993.
The movie, based on the documentary novel "Schindler's Ark" by Thomas Keneally tells how Oskar Schindler, an unscrupulous German businessman and Nazi Party member, saved the lives of some 1,100 Jews by putting them to work at his enamelware factory.
For nearly two hours we followed in the footsteps of both Oskar Schindler and Mr.
Spielberg, sometimes tangled in a disconcerting mixture of celluloid and reality.


Costa Rica Gets Two New Hotels
Two new hotels, the Camino Real San Jose and the San Jose Hampton Inn, have recently opened in Costa Rica.
The Camino Real San Jose, an eight-acre resort about 10 minutes from downtown San Jose in the suburb of Escazu, opened in November with 260 rooms, a nightclub, casino, two restaurants, an outdoor pool, spa and a tennis court lighted for night play.
The price for a double room is $150.


Religious Leaders Call for Greater Mutual Understanding
As the nation's religious diversity becomes more pronounced, religious leaders must seize the opportunity to deepen their own faiths by understanding other traditions.
So Karen Armstrong, a British religious scholar and author of "A History of God," told 200 members of the Protestant, Catholic, Jewish and Muslim clergy at Congregation Emanu-El on Fifth Avenue on Thursday.
"Appreciation of other people's insights, history and traditions is the great challenge that faces us," she said.
"On that, in our day, our religious traditions will stand or fall.'


Jan. 22-28: Canadian Shock Troops; Elite Corps Disbanded After Abuses Disclosed
The armed forces of many nations have an elite corps of paratroopers, chosen for daring and a willingness to kill.
In Canada, that force was the 600-man Canadian Airborne Regiment, which traced its roots to World War II.
But after shocking Canadians with disclosure of hazing rituals, racial incidents and the torture killing of a Somali teen-ager during a 1993 peacekeeping mission, the regiment was disbanded last week.
Weeks before, the peacekeepers, in a widely televised video, talked about their desire to kill "niggers." In an earlier video, drunken Airborne soldiers ate vomit and feces in the hazing ritual and dragged a black soldier on a leash with


Two Notorious Cases: The Politics of Penalty
To the Editor:
In deftly puncturing the hype accompanying the O. J. Simpson trial, Frank Rich ("Send In the Clowns," column, Jan. 22) overlooks a primary reason for the hype: covering O. J. was good for business.
Last June and July, coverage improved the ratings of CNN and the network magazine shows, and boosted circulation of newspapers such as USA Today and The Daily News, and of magazines like The New Yorker.
In almost a vicious circle, coverage begat more coverage, even if there was not much happening beyond legal posturing.
TOM GOLDSTEIN  Dean, Graduate School of Journalism University of California Berkeley, Calif., Jan. 22, 1995


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimate
(IDEA INC)
Mon.
Personal income, Dec., pct. chg.
-0.1
0.5
Tues.
Consumer confidence index, Jan.
102.2
101
Wed.
Leading indicators, Dec., pct. chg.
0.3
0.2
Purchasing managers index, Jan.
57.5
56.5
Construction spending, Dec., pct. chg.
0.7
0.4
Thur.
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
325
330
New-home sales, Dec., thous., ann. rate
693
685
Fri.
Nonfarm payroll, Jan., chg., thous.
256
235
Unemployment rate, Jan., percent
5.4
5.4
This Wks Develop.
Tues.
Fed Reserve Open Market Committee meets
Wed.
Qrtly Treasury refunding announcement


Met Opera Members in Local Appearances
THOSE who cannot get to the Metropolitan Opera can take heart.
More than two dozen members of the Met's chorus and orchestra are coming to Westchester, with performances today and next Sunday.
This afternoon at 3:30 at the Ossining Public Library, a choral foursome -- Irwin Reese, Robert Linder, Roger Andrews and Ross Crolius -- sings spirituals, Stephen Foster songs and pieces by Poulenc, Stravinsky, Falla, Copland and Stravinsky.
Admission is free.
The library's number is 941-2416.
Next Sunday the Met invasion is considerably more substantial, as a pair of matinee benefits offers 9 singers and players at the South Presbyterian Church in Dobbs Ferry and 14 more at the Reformed Church of Bronxville.
Both fund-raisers were arranged by Westchester performers but are intended to support organizations operating in New York City.
The 3 o'clock Dobbs Ferry concert is for Midnight Run, which distributes food and clothing to the homeless; the Bronxville concert at 4 is to help the Elmendorf Opportunity Center continue its reading, tutoring and other programs for children in East Harlem.


Knicks Seek Momentum as the Suns Wait
The Knicks started a difficult weekend with a dismal performance in Charlotte.
And the torrid Phoenix Suns (33-8) are next, set to invade Madison Square Garden for a nationally televised Sunday matinee.
Did Pat Riley expect the Knicks to shake off Friday's doldrums with a passionate effort against the Suns, who have the second-best record in basketball?


It's a Dirty Job, but Somebody's Got to Do It


Adornment
Silver glitter: A splash on the cheekbone is generating sparkles at dance clubs and rock shows.
But unlike the nighttime accessories of bygone glam-rock days, this is less of a David Bowie-like streak and more of a demure dusting.


Soothing Springs Of Montana
VISITORS to Montana have dipped into the state's hot springs for as long as visitors have been passing through.
In 1806 members of the Lewis and Clark expedition enjoyed a spring-fed pool at the place they called Traveller's Rest.
According to their journals, the explorers joined their Shoshone guides in alternating hot soaks with plunges in an ice-cold creek nearby.
Today the hot waters of Traveller's Rest are channeled into the two swimming pools of Lolo Hot Springs and Resort, a roadside hotel and campground near Missoula.
Throughout southwest Montana more than a dozen hot springs have been tamed for the guests of one hostelry or another.
These places range from a modern full-service resort with a golf course to a cluster of simple cabins deep in the forest.


Pictures at an Unveiling
Studio Museum in Harlem starts a program, Jan. 24.


Airlines Raise Levels On Frequent-Flier Plans
Several airlines will change their frequent flier programs on Wednesday.
Where levels required for a free ticket are rising, an award can still be claimed on the old basis until Tuesday; the award certificate is then good for a year.
American Airlines is raising the requirement for a ticket usable in the continental United States and Canada to 25,000 miles from 20,000 on Wednesday.
On April 1 the airline will raise the level for a coach ticket to Hawaii to 35,000 from 30,000, and for a coach ticket to Europe to 80,000 from 75,000.
United and Continental are also raising the mileage levels for a domestic coach ticket to 25,000 from 20,000, effective Wednesday.
USAir raised its level in the same way, but on Jan. 1.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the resignation of Deputy Commissioner Walter S. Mack Jr. of the New York City police misstated the date and the circumstances of his dismissal as a Federal prosecutor.
He was relieved of that position in 1985, several years before his public criticism of Rudolph W. Giuliani, then the United States Attorney in Manhattan.


The Ideal Family Vanishes on Film
IF YOU LISTEN LONG ENOUGH TO THE conservative ode to family values -- in the Quayle or Limbaugh or Gingrich version -- you realize that it celebrates not the shape of the family but the restraint of the individual.
In fact, the ideal conservative family is the smallest state, a paternal state strong enough to withstand the anarchic pressures that every family member puts upon it.
To conservatives, the family is a hierarchy -- father, mother and cadets -- and the conservative dream is a lifetime within the crystalline bosom of a perfect family, where individual liberty (always a disruptive force) has been sacrificed to familial coherence.
It goes without saying that in a nation of perfectly ordered families, small government is a sure thing.


Second-Guessing and More After Opening Week of the Simpson Trial
Before 12 jurors and surely the largest gallery of critics and kibitzers in history, three of the lawyers in what Judge Lance A. Ito invariably calls the Simpson matter delivered their opening statements this week.
Then they, along with Judge Ito, sat back and were second-guessed.
At the end of the week, lawyers and commentators debated the respective performances of the performers: how well they had articulated their themes, their very different styles of advocacy, how they had played to the jury and how well their arguments would hold up over a trial that might take six months or more to decide the fate of O. J. Simpson, who is accused of killing his former wife Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend.
They debated, too, how well Judge Ito was controlling the lawyers and his courtroom.


For G.O.P. Freshmen in the House, Political Reality Arrives All Too Quickly
For the 73 Republican freshmen whose only taste of Washington has been the sweetness of victory that comes with being part of the majority, this week brought the first bittersweet dose of Capitol Hill reality.
Bowing to the pressure and cajoling of the Republican leadership, all but two of the freshmen joined their more senior party members on Thursday in voting to pass a balanced budget amendment that had been watered down to make it more politically palatable to House Democrats whose votes were also needed and Republican moderates in the Senate.


Malone Is Still the Man As Utah Takes No. 12
They stood nose to nose, two of the league's premier power forwards exchanging glares and then shoves.
Derrick Coleman mouthed some foul words.
Karl Malone smiled, flexed his massive arms and declared war the only way he knows how: by dominating his understudy.
Utah and its basketball team threw another party at the Delta Center tonight.
The main event was Coleman vs. the Mailman, with John Stockton skittering through the lane and inching closer to Magic Johnson as the co-feature as the Jazz won its 12th straight.


POSTINGS: Church Begins $200,000 Replacement Project; From Cupolas to Copper Towers
Two distinctive -- but crumbling -- cupolas are being removed from the roof of the Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
"With the fierce winter last year, we started to lose large pieces of terra cotta -- the size of your fist," said the Rev.
Thomas P. Leonard, the pastor of the church, which is at 213 West 82d Street, between Broadway and Amsterdam Avenue.


Soup du Soir
Ignoring the fact that soups have become stylish lately, serving them as the centerpiece of a dinner party or a family meal does have a certain enduring logic.
It is the rare winter chill that persists in the face of a well-made soup.
Obviously, warmth is a major factor.
But the generous spirit that seems to guide the hand of the soup-making cook also presides over the dinner party where soup is the main attraction.
Maybe it's the perfume that lingers after hours of simmering on the stove.
Or the steam that covers the kitchen windows.
Or the calm that enters the cook's soul when dinner has been assembled leisurely over days, not in a last-minute panic.
But whatever it is, when soup is served, a mood of easy intimacy prevails.


Residents of a Brooklyn Enclave Create Their Own Renewal Plan
In a city of skyscrapers and shadows, people have always talked about the natural light that drenches Red Hook.
The Brooklyn neighborhood has almost no tall buildings and sits squarely on New York Harbor, and so residents, artists and visitors have long regarded the abundance of available light to be one of Red Hook's greatest physical gifts.
But for all the light, it has for decades been hard for anyone to see much of a future for the neighborhood.
Isolated, abandoned, damaged by poverty and decay, Red Hook has long been in decline.
Its 1950 population of 21,000 has shrunk to 11,000.
The old rough-and-tumble waterfront, once bustling with factory workers and stevedores, is not only inactive, but inaccessible.
Half the people live below the poverty line, and nearly a quarter of the neighborhood's 343 acres stand vacant.


A Bow to Balanchine
To the Editor:
Like too many writers on music, Richard Taruskin seems oblivious of the dance world  [ "In Search of the 'Good' Hindemith Legacy," Jan. 8 ] .
In 1940, George Balanchine commissioned a score from Hindemith for one of his Sunday-afternoon musicales.
The ballet Balanchine subsequently choreographed to this music, "The Four Temperaments," was given its premiere by Ballet Society in 1946.
Since 1951, when the ballet lost its cumbersome costumes and decor, it has seldom been out of the repertories of both New York City Ballet and the Dance Theater of Harlem.


TRANSACTIONS
Hockey  National Hockey League
HARTFORD WHALERS -- Assigned Ted Drury, center, to Springfield of the American Hockey League for conditioning.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Whose Memory Lives When the Last Survivor Dies?
"THE past is not dead," William Faulkner once said.
"It's not even past." He might have added that public memories of the past are also the battlefields of the present.
Last week, controversies erupted over how to remember two singular events in the history of this troubled century -- the liberation of the Auschwitz death camp in January 1945 and the dropping of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima in August 1945.


More Changes Made In Amtrak's Schedule
Following its December announcement of schedule cuts, Amtrak has further modified its service effective Feb. 1.
The daily Palmetto train between New York and Tampa, Fla., will be discontinued.
The schedules of two daily train services -- the Crescent, which runs between New York and New Orleans, and the Gulf Breeze, operating between Birmingham and Mobile, Ala. -- will be changed to three times a week.


Celebrating Hansberry in Her Words
IT isn't being called a Lorraine Hansberry festival, but why not?
The rush of the playwright's power and lyricism, in convergence at the Crossroads Theater Company and at the George Street Playhouse, is an occasion for the whole New Jersey theater to take pride in.
At Crossroads, "To Be Young, Gifted and Black," a collage of Ms.
Hansberry's words gathered from diaries, lectures, letters and plays, opened last Saturday.
Next door at George Street, a soul-satisfying production of "A Raisin in the Sun," reviewed last Sunday, plays one more week.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Lauren J. Frank And Neil I. Brody
Lauren Justine Frank, the daughter of Lea J. and Robert H. Frank of Muttontown, L.I., and Dr.
Neil Irwin Brody, a son of Beatrice and George Brody of Boca Raton, Fla., were married last evening in Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Martin Rozenberg performed the ceremony at Temple Beth-El of Great Neck.
Mrs.
Brody, 28, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the office manager of Dr.
Brody's dermatological practice in Manhasset, L.I.
Dr.
Brody, 49, is also an associate professor of dermatology and pathology at the State University Health Science Center at Brooklyn.
He graduated from Boston University and received his medical degree and a Ph.D. in immunology from New York University.
Dr.
Brody was a widower.


For the Files: New Rules On Manicures
On Saturday mornings for the last six years, Melissa Pordy had to remember only her wallet when she dashed out for a manicure at one of the half-dozen salons between 70th and 72d Streets from Second to York Avenues, a sort of nail salon headquarters on the Upper East Side.
But beginning this week, because of new state rules intended to avoid the spread of infections at nail salons, she will have to remember one more thing: her personal manicure kit, including an emery board, a disk pad for rounding nails, a sponge buffer and a wooden orange stick.


Rebirth Seen for Decaying Pier
The pier at Dyckman Street and the Hudson River has been crumbling into the water since the 1930's, when the city opened the George Washington Bridge and put the sidewheel ferry that shuttled passengers to New Jersey out of business.
Now, a private marine operator, Dyckman Marine, has begun reconstruction of the pier, with plans to turn it into a public fishing pier by this summer.


The World, From the Top Down
FOR the photographer, accustomed to a vocation of intrusion, a few hours examining the world from a high window or ledge can provide a sense of liberation.
Up high, undetected, the photographer recedes into a safety zone, freed both from the nagging feeling of being unwanted and from the risk on lower ground that the camera itself will alter the behavior of its targets.
In this more relaxed state, the photographer can take on a more philosophical air.
Below, the city scurries about in poses from work to repose.
The flow on the streets, as in lower Manhattan above, breaks down into miniature plots and subplots.
There are blessed events and struggles.
Friends meet and embrace, as if separated by decades from their last encounter.
Gratitude is extended to a police officer.
Through teamwork, a heavy crate gets from one point to another.
Eschewing the conversation of his co-workers on lunchbreak, a construction worker slips to the side and takes a 20-minute nap.
A teen-ager, defying boundaries, slips under a barricade, as if for the joy of it.


Lowly Banana Has a High Profile in a Trade Dispute
HAS GATT slipped on a banana?
Despite the signing last year of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the monumental world pact to reduce trade barriers and disputes, all it takes is a garden variety fight over a humble product like the banana to show how little things have changed.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
A PLACE AT THE TABLE: The Gay Individual in American Society By Bruce Bawer.
Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $12.
The author, a cultural critic, writes of his own life as a gay man in this work, which argues that homosexuality is innate, not chosen.
Denouncing political and religious sanctions against homosexuality, he also criticizes militant gay activists.
This work is "a model polemic," Margaret O'Brien Steinfels said here in 1993.


Off or Off Off? Where to Go
IT'S easy to tell you're on Broadway -- you're in midtown, your seat is upholstered and you paid about $65 for it.
Unless you got it at TKTS.
Or it's a big hit, and you paid a scalper, even a nicely dressed concierge-type scalper, $150.
Below that, the distinctions get fuzzy.
In general, an Off Broadway production has between 100 and 500 seats, and Off Off has fewer than 100.
The seats themselves are sometimes comfy, sometimes folding, sometimes Dickensian.
But theater size isn't everything.
This season, "Girl Gone" was an Off Off Broadway show for six weeks, as Off Off was defined by its Actors' Equity contract.
When it stayed open two more weeks it became technically Off Broadway because the pittance for the actors was larger.


More Than Just a Victorian
To the Editor:
Cynthia Ozick's re-evaluation of Anthony Trollope deserves to be placed alongside Lord David Cecil's of Barbara Pym.
Ms.
Ozick correctly identifies the responsibility borne by Trollopean cultists for the serious neglect of their favorite novelist; she is spot on, too, in her focus on "The Way We Live Now" to reassert Trollope's claim to status.


The Nation; How Foreigners Invest, And Lose Their Shirts
FOREIGN investors have lost billions of dollars in Mexico, and the recriminations are flying.
American investors want to know why their Government didn't warn them that the Mexican economy was sicker than it looked.
The Mexican finance minister says things would not have gotten this bad if investors on Wall Street hadn't been so eager to send money.
And as the United States Congress began balking at the Clinton Administration's proposal to bail out Mexico with $40 billion in loan guarantees, the Mexican stock market and the peso took another plunge.
So what else is new?
The history of foreign investing is littered with disaster stories.
Governments fall, and their successors renege on their debts.
Currencies are devalued.
Bull markets collapse and in the rubble evidence of fraud emerges.
The supposed experts who should have been on the lookout for problems were in fact too busy selling securities to pay attention.


Corrections
The Frugal Traveler column on Jan. 1, about New Orleans, misstated the location of Algiers, La.
It is on the west bank of the Mississippi, not the south bank.


An N.B.A. Coach at 24: You Could Look It Up
In the Jan. 1 article describing the life of a National Basketball Association scout ("For a Pro Basketball Scout, It's on the Road Again and Again") it was nice to read of Brad Ceisler's hope to become the youngest N.B.A. head coach ever.
However, unless Ceisler has enlisted the aid of Dr.
Emmett Brown (of "Back to the Future" fame), he will (at age 33) never replace Dave DeBusschere in the record books.
DeBusschere was only 24 when he was named head coach of the Detroit Pistons in 1964.


Jan. 22-28: Pacific Wake-Up Time; Reports of This Speaker's Demise Were Just Wrong
Call him brutal, devious, even dictatorial -- but call him Mr. Speaker.
In a bitter, post-midnight session, Willie Lewis Brown Jr. reclaimed the speakership of the California Assembly last week, effectively reversing the November elections in which Democrats lost their majority in the 80-seat chamber.


Why the U.S. Silence on India's Rights Abuses?
To the Editor:
The Clinton Administration has engaged in much hand-wringing over its trade policy toward China, a country universally condemned for its atrocious human rights record.
The Administration has, however, as you note in "Democracy in India: Now You See It . . ." (Week in Review, Jan. 22), said nothing at all in this regard about India, a country with its own egregious pattern of human rights abuses and with which the United States (as indicated by Commerce Secretary Ron Brown's recent visit) is seeking to improve trade ties.


A Hospital Copes With the New Order
G.
AUBREY SERFLING doesn't sound like the chief executive of a hospital that hemorrhaged $500,000 a week through most of 1994; a hospital that since 1991 has laid off 1,500 of 4,300 employees, including 23 of 34 senior managers; a hospital that over the last two years saw its patient revenues plummet by $36 million, more than 10 percent, even as it kept the same one-fifth share of the city's admissions.
Mr.
Serfling, the 50-year-old leader of the California Pacific Medical Center, one of the state's largest and most prestigious private hospitals, can hardly contain his exuberance as he runs through the dire facts, and the drastic changes they have triggered.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
THE FROG PRINCESS: A Russian Folktale.
Retold by J. Patrick Lewis.
Illustrated by Gennady Spirin.
Dial. $15.99. (Ages 4 to 8) The lavish illustrations in this retelling of the familiar tale set it in czarist Russia.
Not only is the frog a princess, but she turns out to be Vasilisa the Wise.
Even Baba Yaga appears.
The text appears to be set in lush embroidered borders.


THIS ABSOLUTELY FREE* ARTICLE WILL EXPLAIN EVERYTHING ABOUT THE WORLD OF ADVERTISING!**
Specifically, it is about how asterisks and fine print have become fixtures in advertising, and about the efforts by some to rein them in.
Last week, for example, Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena announced that his staff would spend more time scrutinizing airline ads for deceptive or misleading claims.
Candidates for tougher regulation, he said, include promotions of one-way fares that require travelers to buy a return ticket, and sales that make only a few seats available at the discounted price.


New Orleans Is Hopeful About Police Overhaul
Tucked away in a corner of Mary Howell's law office are four bags of clothes, all encrusted with dried blood.
The clothes are evidence, not to be used by police officers but against them.
For 17 years, Ms.
Howell has been battling the New Orleans Police Department in the courts, representing the victims of its crimes.
The lawyer has represented people who were beaten, shot, kidnapped and tortured.


Melissa Georges, Carter Williams
Melissa Elizabeth Georges, the daughter of Mrs.
George Peter Georges of St.
Louis and the late Mr.
Georges, was married there yesterday to James Carter Williams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Williams of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
Donald G. Howland, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at Ladue Chapel.
Mrs.
Williams is the secretary and treasurer of the Fielding Pharmaceutical Company in St.
Louis, which her father founded and of which her mother, Patricia Georges, is the vice president.
The bride is also the vice president and a founder of the MB Packaging Company in St.
Louis.


Giving Hardship and Poverty a Human Face
"THE POWER OF FACT is the mightiest lever of this or of any day," Jacob A. Riis said a century ago.
But after a decade of newspaper reporting about the horrific poverty in New York City's tenements, Riis, who lived from 1849 to 1914, discovered a vehicle that would elevate his skillful manipulation of fact to a previously unimaginable dimension.
That vehicle, of course, was photography.
His writing, he later recalled, "did not make much of an impression -- these things rarely do, put in mere words -- until my negatives, still dripping from the dark-room, came to reinforce them." From that indisputable photographic record, Riis wrote, "there was no appeal."


Hartford Premiere For 'Four Dogs'
HERE'S yet another tell-all tale about the movies, what a "cold heartless business" it is, run by nasty mercenary talentless people.
And what else is new?
Not much except this one is called "Four Dogs and a Bone" and John Patrick Shanley wrote it, which means that expectations are in place for something that is new.


The World; A Language Divided Against Itself
THE calls for holy war that adorn the walls in slums throughout the Middle East, and fill the speech of Islamic militants, are written in a special brand of Arabic.
This is not the classic language of 1,500 years of science, poetry and philosophy.
It is a far simpler argot, of cliches, religious verses and slogans.
Expressed in the cruder rhythms and pronunciations of street language, they become almost incomprehensible to educated Arabs, only widening a dangerous gulf between an elite that looks to the West and an enraged underclass from which suicide bombers and murderers of tourists can be recruited.
The cliches and slogans are made to burst with emotion, leaving them ill suited for reflection or debate.
How, for example, is an outsider to answer a shout of "Islam is the solution"?
Where does "There is no god but God" fit into the political discourse?
And how can those with a different point of view communicate with sloganeers like those in Gaza who last week applauded a curbside massacre in central Israel as "the killing of 20 pigs and the injuring of 60 monkeys?"


Tomato Talk: You Say Big Beef, I Say Brandywine
IT was heartbreaking watching George Ball, the president of W. Atlee Burpee &amp; Company, pushing a tomato around on his plate of roasted vegetables at the Paramount Hotel in Manhattan the other day.
The tomato was thick-skinned and mealy.
Tasteless, probably.
Wisely, Mr.
Ball just ate around it.
With a pained expression.


Padre Executive Hopes to Tap That Charger Spirit
Larry Lucchino could never have imagined having trouble deciding which team to root for in a game between the Pittsburgh Steelers and the San Diego Chargers.
Lucchino, after all, was a lifelong resident of Pittsburgh before he went off to become a lawyer and later became involved in baseball.
But when the Steelers and the Chargers played two weeks ago to determine the American Conference representative in today's Super Bowl, Lucchino was in a quandary.
Only weeks before, he had become president and minority owner of the San Diego Padres.
Suddenly, he had reason to want the Chargers to win, too.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
NATURE THURSDAYS


Jenny Brookreson, Joseph Baumer A
Jenny Leigh Brookreson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David K. Brookreson of Huntingdon Valley, Pa., was married yesterday to Joseph Anthony Baumer, a son of the Rev.
Judith T. Baumer and Herman D. Baumer of New York.
The bridegroom's mother, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of Our Savior in Jenkintown, Pa.
Mrs.
Baumer, 21, until recently was a student at East Stroudsburg University.
Her father is a director of sales marketing for Kanzaki Specialty Papers in Ware, Mass.


Smoke and Mirrors
The corn pone story of Dave's cigarettes begins: "It all started with a few tobacco seeds . . . and a dream." Dave, the package reports, cleared 20 acres, put a down payment on a tractor, traded his lawn mower for a weather radio and grew his own.
Then he swapped his smokes for a delivery truck and a few ads, and named the whole thing Dave's Tobacco Company.
Only thing is, Dave and his hand-cut tobacco are really the products of Philip Morris, a corporation that's about as down-home as midtown Manhattan and as homespun as marketeers at a focus group.
"The idea was," says Karen Daragan, a Philip Morris spokeswoman, "the underdog takes on the establishment."


The Violence Bowl: One Woman's View
THE first thing she noticed was the noise not the intensity of it, but rather the sound and the shape of it.
Mariah Burton Nelson does not attend many football games, and she watches them on television mainly for research.
The noise, though, did not surprise her.
On this day, a rainy Sunday two weeks ago in Pittsburgh, the voices were predominantly loud, predominately male and frequently angry.
Seated in the upper level of Three Rivers Stadium on the afternoon of the American Football Conference championship game, Ms.
Nelson found herself in a sea of Pittsburgh Steelers fans, most dressed in the black and gold colors that signify their team.
Many were loud, many were drunk.


Oh, Those Wacky (18th-Century) Royals
"TO BE PRINCE OF WALES," says the Prince of Wales, "is not a position; it's a predicament." The line is spoken in 1789, but it leaps out of "The Madness of King George" like a giant poke in the ribs.
Who could fail to connect his words with a more familiar Prince of Wales, whose life seems to be one constant predicament?
The audience barely has time to absorb this sly allusion before another character whispers about the Prince's wife, "She has more sense than he does." Nicholas Hytner's film, based on Alan Bennett's play "The Madness of George III," is glittering, swift, entertaining and eloquent.
It is also a movie for people who can't get enough of those wacky Windsors.
"The Madness of King George," of course, concerns the Hanoverian monarch who lost the Colonies and occasionally seemed to lose his mind, an ancestor of the current Windsors we have come to know and scrutinize with the best voyeuristic intentions.
George III's symptoms of derangement have since been diagnosed as a metabolic disorder called porphyria.
As an on-screen note at the end of the film explains: "The disease is periodic, unpredictable -- and hereditary." The harsh emphasis on heredity offers another nudge, as if to say, "Now, that would explain a lot."


WELFARE MEETING ENDS IN AGREEMENT ON COMMON GOALS
After meeting with President Clinton, governors and members of Congress from both parties said today that they had significantly narrowed their differences on welfare policy, but could not agree on one of the biggest questions in the debate: how much freedom states should have to design their own welfare programs.
Specifically, they said they had profound differences over whether the main Federal-state welfare program, Aid to Families with Dependent Children, should remain an entitlement program, guaranteeing cash assistance to anyone who meets certain eligibility criteria set by Federal law, regardless of the total cost or the number who apply.


OFF THE GRID
Your "They've Had Enough" cover looks more L. L. Bean than Grant Wood.
But it did get me to read Weiss's article.
And what did I find?
More retired "colonels," receiving substantial checks from the government; "revolutionaries" who tore up all of their "contracts with government," except for their food stamps; tight-lipped young women who are beginning to realize that they've made the biggest mistakes of their lives, and militant "skinheads" who wouldn't last two weeks in any self-respecting Waffen SS training camp.


JINGLE HELL
How can someone named Holly be so down on the beauty expressed by traditional Christmas trimmings ("Jingle Hell," by Holly Brubach, Dec. 25)?


Fern Schair, Alexander Forger
Fern Schair, the chief executive of the New York City bar association, was married yesterday to Alexander D. Forger, the president of the Legal Services Corporation in Washington.
Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye performed the ceremony at the bride's home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
The bride, 52, holds the titles of executive secretary and chief administrative officer of the bar association, the first woman to do so.
She is also a chairwoman of the New York State Alternate Dispute Resolution Project, a mediation program.
From 1974 to 1982 she was the executive director of the Fund for Modern Courts, a watchdog organization that examines court procedure in New York City.
She is a graduate of Cornell University and received a law degree from St.
John's University.
The bride's two previous marriages ended in divorce.


An Architect With a Knack For Synthesis
THOSE WHO TRY TO KEEP UP with contemporary architecture may savor a fling with "On Flirtation," the title of Adam Phillips's recent collection subtitled "Psychoanalytic Essays on the Uncommitted Life." The book (published by Harvard University Press) is a good antidote to the despair that can easily overtake those trying to make coherent sense out of a field that has become increasingly fragmented in recent years.
And Mr.
Phillips's insights have sharpened my appreciation for one of the field's most gifted practitioners, the Los Angeles architect Franklin D. Israel.
Mr.
Phillips, a British therapist, describes how the stories people tell themselves can end up limiting their lives.
Habitually, he observes, people try to fit their attachments to others into narratives of commitment and permanence.
But what do the prince and princess do with all that happily-ever-after time on their hands?
Mr.
Phillips asks what it would be like if we stopped measuring the value of things by the standards of fidelity and duration.
Flirtation, he proposes, is a way of keeping things in play, of cultivating wishes, of making room for the open-endedness of life.


Taking the Bus to the Plane
Airport-bound travelers in Manhattan's financial district have a new option.
This month Gray Line started van service to Kennedy and La Guardia Airports, available daily from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
The bright-red 11-seat vans, equipped with two-way radios, leave from three Lower Manhattan hotels -- the New York Vista, the Millenium Hilton and the Marriott Financial Center -- and run according to demand.
Fares are $13 for La Guardia and $16 for Kennedy, and reservations are required.
Call (212) 315-3006 or (800) 451-0455.
TERRY TRUCCO


See 3PO
The Center for the Arts in Yerba Buena Gardens, Calif., has quadrupled its daily attendance, to 1,200, with "The Art of Star Wars." The characters from George Lucas's movies -- including Yoda, the gnomish Jedi master; Jabba the Hutt, the sluglike crime lord, and Darth Vader, the knight-errant with a face like a '57 Buick grille -- occupy a place in the popular consciousness somewhere between Paul Bunyan and Ronald McDonald.
"Star Wars has become a part of our visual vocabulary," says David Perry of the museum.
"It's time to take a look at it." The life-size models, miniatures, matte paintings, aliens and masks created by Lucas's special-effects wizards are on view through March 12.
For those with transgalactic date books, the exhibit is to be presented in Washington at the National Air and Space Museum sometime in 1997 and a new movie trilogy is scheduled to begin in 1998.
Business at the gift shop, offering a virtual delirium of figurines, holograms and other extraterrestrial artifacts, is skyrocketing.


By Amtrak
To the Editor: Cheryl Zoldowski's article "Crisscrossing the Country Aboard Amtrak" (Nov. 6) was a welcome neutrally reported article, considering the general treatment Amtrak receives.
As a frequent traveler aboard Amtrak, I would like to add a couple of things.
Amtrak's beautiful television advertisements and travel planner may lead the public to expect a level of luxury that does not exist.
Travelers should plan on an experience closer to camping than a cruise.
That is not to say the experience is without merit.
The train shows you the detail of American life in a way no other transportation mode can.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 29, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
ICEBOUND, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The world's future is threatened by a tidal wave, storms and a psychopathic killer.
2
20
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
3 *
1
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Warner, $6.99.) A doctor stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
4 *
1
TOM CLANCY'S OP-CENTER,
created by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik. (Berkley, $6.99.) The operations of a secret Government agency.
5
1
PRINCE CHARMING, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $6.50.) A lady in Victorian London discovers the man of her dreams, a Montanan.
6
1
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $6.99.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a Vermont town.
7
33
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
8
2
LOVERS, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $6.99.) Romance, rivalry and fun as experienced by half a dozen couples.
9
22
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's death.
10 *
10
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young student's mysterious drowning in Victorian England.
11
37
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
12
5
NATURAL CAUSES, by Michael Palmer. (Bantam, $5.99.) A physician is accused of being responsible for the deaths of pregnant women.
13
18
THE VAMPIRE LESTAT, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Eerie carryings-on in a tale ranging from ancient Egypt to the 20th century.
14
13
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery writer's happy family life -- and the madman determined to take his place.
15
3
LORD HARRY, by Catherine Coulter. (Topaz, $5.99.) A 19th-century woman disguises herself as a man to avenge her brother's death.


Two Styles of Photography That Are Both Alike in Dignity
THE situation at the John Froats Gallery here is as follows: Aaron Rose's show of toned silver prints closes today; Robert Kozma's display of platinum-palladium prints does not open until next Saturday.
The two are equally deserving of attention, but all is not lost, for no matter which photographer's works are on the walls, visitors can see a portfolio of the other's works: they need only ask.
About all that is known about Mr.
Rose is that he has been taking photographs for years but has only now decided to exhibit them.
Technically, what is obvious about the prints is that they have been subjected to darkroom manipulation.
The result, known as the Sabattier effect, resembles solarization.
Without a step-by-step demonstration, the procedure defies understanding by the lay mind.
But it seems safe to say that it involves reversing the image, can be performed on positive and negative alike and produces something that seems neither one nor the other.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
'STAR TREK' EXHIBITION
"Star Trek" will beam into the Morris Museum in Morristown on Wednesday with the opening of an exhibition that features scientific displays in U.S.S.
Enterprise settings, "Star Trek" costumes, phasers, communicators and other artifacts and life-size models of aliens.
A series of special events, including lessons in the Klingon language and an "Off-World Festival," will be held while "Star Trek: Federation Science" is on view through April 30.


Theresa M. Chambers, Scott M. Kunz
Theresa Mary Chambers, the daughter of Carol Lynn Clifford of New York, was married yesterday to Scott Michael Kunz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Kunz of Shinnecock Hills, L.I.
The Rev.
John Scanlon performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Star of the Sea of City Island in the Bronx.
Mrs.
Chambers-Kunz, 34, is the booking agent for the Mercury Lounge, a nightclub in New York, and is the United States manager for Something Happens, a rock band based in Dublin.


World Markets; For Asia, Opportunity From Calamity
A POWERFUL new locomotive of economic growth will soon be getting up steam as a result of the savage earthquake that shattered Japan's Kobe province.
From the market's reaction last week, the disaster didn't seem to have much of a silver lining.
Investors immediately dumped Japanese stocks although the market later recouped some losses.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
WORDS AND ART
Kevin Stiles and Gerry LaChance are teachers at Avon High School whose art and prose are on view in a provocative collaborative exhibition at the Norfolk Library.
It opens on Wednesday and remains through Feb. 26.
Inspired by an increasingly popular practice of pairing the two disciplines, the two teachers developed the concept for this exhibition and for an interdisciplinary teaching unit linking creative writing and visual art.
The Stiles portraits and surrealistic works have been executed in a variety of mediums, including woodcuts, sculpture, oil pastels, and graphite and wax drawings.
The latter is a technique perfected by the artist to achieve a photographic effect, and the models were either students or family members.


From Hummus To Beef Carpaccio
CAFE CROCODILE


Travel Agencies Try the Personal Touch
BUYING travel today is a cinch.
"In a matter of minutes, anyone plugged into the information superhighway can find the lowest air fare to anywhere and buy a ticket," said Norman S. Sherman, vice president of the Hudson Valley chapter of the American Society of Travel Agents, an industry group made up of 124 agencies.
"And this has caused vast changes in the industry."
Especially among travel agencies, he emphasized, adding that only those agencies that are well-equipped to give clients personal, professional service are likely to thrive.


Republicans Finding Dissension in Ranks on Military Issues
Sharp divisions have begun to emerge among the Republicans running Congress on two of the topics on which they have seemed most unified, foreign policy and military issues, as differences bubble up on topics ranging from Bosnia to the revival of "Star Wars."
Most Republicans support the national security tenets outlined in the House Republicans' Contract With America, including restrictions on the use of American troops under the United Nations command and a commitment to rebuild America's military establishment.


Emanuel Grunberg, Bacteriologist, 72
Emanuel Grunberg, a bacteriologist who developed drugs against infectious diseases, died on Jan. 16 at his home in Delray Beach, Fla.
A former resident of North Caldwell, N.J., he was 72.
The cause was cardiac arrest, according to the Dancy Funeral Home in Caldwell.


ENDPAPER


THE CONCEALMENT OF SEX
William Safire's column "The Concealment of Sex" (On Language, Jan. 1) is an apt critique of the efforts of the language police to eradicate gender.
It is strange that their reformist zeal has not extended to unflattering terms.
No one has yet complained that the news media continues to use "confidence man" instead of the politically correct "confidence person"; or that hired assassins similarly remain "hit men," not "hit persons"; that no one has yet been reported to be swallowed by a "person-eating tiger," nor any soldiers gunned down in "no-person's land." FRANK RETTENBERG San Rafael, Calif.


A Hobbled Iverson Still Helps The Hoyas
Georgetown 71, Pittsburgh 60
Allen Iverson, Georgetown's injured freshman star, wasn't his usual self yesterday.
But he still managed to make a contribution in the Hoyas' 71-60 victory over Pittsburgh in Landover, Md.
Iverson, limping on the right ankle he injured two weeks ago against Connecticut, had his second-lowest scoring game of the season, getting just 11 points in 37 minutes.
But he helped No. 14 Georgetown in the end, hitting six consecutive free throws to give the Hoyas (14-3, 7-2 Big East) their biggest lead of the day, 68-56, with 37 seconds to play.


At Pinelawn, a New Golf Course


Valid Wager Captures Hutcheson
Valid Wager, who has raced the best colts on the West Coast, made a smashing debut on the East Coast today when he ran down Mr.
Greeley in the homestretch and won the $75,000 Hutcheson Stakes at Gulfstream Park.
The Hutcheson was billed as Florida's first major stepping-stone on the road to the Kentucky Derby on May 6, but it's a long and tortuous road, even for a horse like Valid Wager.
He is owned by Beverly and Robert Lewis, who are part owners of the juvenile champion, Timber Country.
He finished second in the Hollywood Prevue Stakes to the speedy Afternoon Deelites, rated second to Timber Country in the nation.
And this afternoon, he stalked Nick Zito's Mr.
Greeley for six and a half furlongs and then put him away.


Affirmative Action
To the Editor:


Scientists Seek Way to Enrich Basic Crops In Poor Lands
An international group of researchers is working to develop nutrient-enriched varieties of rice, corn and other common food crops to help prevent malnutrition, disease and death in millions of the world's poorest people.
Wheat varieties that are twice as adept as commonly grown strains at extracting zinc and iron from the soil and packing the minerals into seeds have already been developed by Robin Graham, a plant scientist at the University of Adelaide's Waite Agricultural Research Institute in Australia.


TriBeCa's 'Downzoning': So How Low Can You Go?
In 1970, TriBeCa was a no man's land, with just 370 residents.
Today, it is a chic, family-oriented neighborhood with about 9,000 inhabitants.
A 1976 zoning change, which permitted residential warehouse-loft conversions, drew many artists and entrepreneurs to the low-crime, low-density area.
Now, some residents say proposed zoning changes, if adopted, may drive them away.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 8 about a nonprofit rehabilitation center in Millington for injured wild birds of prey misstated its name.
It is the Raptor Trust, not the Raptor Center.


Q AND A
Tierra del Fuego
Q.
We will be in Ushuaia, Tierra del Fuego, soon and would like to know if there are any special attractions outside the town that we should see.
Can we visit Chile from there without a visa and how long is the flight from Buenos Aires?
We are interested only in day trips. -- Ann Lockwood, Alexandria, Va.


Efforts By Rangers Adding Up To Zero
Glenn Healy got the nod from Colin Campbell tonight instead of Mike Richter.
Different goalie. Same result.


POSTINGS: Agents to Represent Buyer; A Reversal Of Roles
In a reversal of the previous legal relationship, major residential real-estate brokerages in New York City will now represent the buyer -- not the seller -- when they bring customers to an apartment listed by another broker.
The annual brokerage agreements sent this month by the 73 residential brokerage companies who are members of the Real Estate Board of New York specify that they will now owe their fiduciary responsibility to the potential purchaser of an apartment when the "exclusive" on the property is not their company's.
If the agent is bringing a buyer to his or her company's exclusive listing, the traditional relationship will still apply: The agent will represent the seller.


Truth About Flossing Welcomed by Nonflosser
To the Editor:
I was delighted to see Jane Fritsch ("Coping," Jan. 8) present some harsh truths about flossing, that bane of every dental patient's existence, namely that those who claim to be regular flossers are simply lying.


A Lament for the Products of Our Past
Change is inevitable in the world of consumer culture.
But I wonder if some product alterations ask us to sacrifice too much in the name of progress.
For instance:
*
Say It Ain't So, Joe.
Remember Bazooka Joe, the comic-strip character in the bubble gum package?
He was a runty little kid who wore a mysterious eye patch and looked like Popeye Jr.
He was the coolest guy on his block.


County Should Have Better Theater Fare
It is a shame that Westchester is incapable of supporting good theater.
Alvin Klein's complaints on Jan. 15 ("Suburban Stages: An Assessment") are valid.
I live within the borders of New York City, 20 minutes from either Westchester or Manhattan.
I would, and I assume thousands others would too, rather see a play in Westchester than in Manhattan.
It is easy, hassle-free, cheaper and safer.
Since local groups seem to be unsuccessful in attracting sufficient sponsors and spectators, why not bring New York shows to Westchester for short runs before or after their Manhattan engagements?


Corrections
An article last Monday about rebuilding Kobe, Japan, misstated the cost of removing rubble created by the earthquake.
It is expected to cost nearly $1 billion, not nearly $1 million.


'Spunk' On Stage In Hartford
THE tone of a regional theater is not dependent on this show or that.
It derives from a continuum, reaching from production to production, sending out communal vibrations.
A pre-performance rush, a felt anticipation confers a sense of occasion upon what otherwise might have been just another obligatory subscribers' night out.
At the Hartford Stage Company this season, all that is happening.
The karma is excellent.
Attend a performance of "Spunk," if you can get in; the jubilation of theater is palpable.


Habitats/112 West 18th Street; Large Loft for a Tall Man
IT'S the splashes of green and yellow paint, either slapped freely onto the giant walls or carefully brushed onto door frames, that provide the first clue that a renovation is being planned.
Then there are the corresponding paint chips, and the stack of coffee-table books on the wide window sills, photography books with names like "Colors" and "Lofts."


Jan. 22-28: Questions Unanswered; Report on Arm Sales to Iraq Clears Bush Administration
During the Presidential campaign, Bill Clinton and Al Gore expressed suspicions that the Bush Administration had secretly armed Iraq and then covered it up after Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait in August 1990.
But last week the Clinton Justice Department published the conclusions of its 18-month investigation: the Bush Administration never conspired to arm Iraq.


Uganda Strongman a Favorite of World Lenders
He does not believe that multiparty democracy is right for Uganda today.
His critics call him authoritarian and at times dictatorial.
But Uganda's President, Yoweri Museveni, an articulate and charismatic leader, is still very much a favorite of the World Bank and international powers.
Diplomats here call Mr.
Museveni, a former guerrilla commander, "America's darling" and "Africa's new man." Nine years ago he took power in a country battered by decades of civil war and killings that eclipse even the Rwandan massacres.
In that period, his focus on building and liberalizing the economy has brought new life to Uganda, though the country is still not an economic power.


Word for Word: Martyrology; Brutalized in Colonial Africa, 1909; Beatified in Rome, 1994
A QUICK browse through the Martyrology, the liturgical book that registers all saints, martyrs and Christian mysteries celebrated by the Roman Catholic Church, shows that in recent years the business of making saints has been booming.
Since the papacy of John XXIII began in 1958, the Martyrology has added nearly 1,100 names to the list of those beatified and canonized.
Only 125 of these were beatified or canonized by John XXIII and Pope Paul VI; the rest have been added in the 16-year papacy of John Paul II, sometimes in groups of 100 or more.
Many are from the developing world -- an indication of the Pope's desire to strengthen the church there.
Over all, about 850 of the roughly 10,000 recognized saints were canonized by John Paul II.
Tighter Standards
Making saints, a tradition that goes back to the early years of the church, is no easy business.
At first, saints were popularly proclaimed and all martyrs were canonized.
Despite the Vatican's attempts to control the process, grass-roots saint-making continued for centuries.
Then came the Protestant Reformation, with its disdain for the cult of saints.
It provided new pressure to codify the circumstances --the miracles or martyrdom -- needed for sainthood.


Questions for Police in Subway Incident
It was a signal 10-13 (police officer in need of assistance) followed by an Emergency Medical Service code M.C.I. 42 (multiple casualty incident-civil disturbance), and it brought scores of police officers, radio cars, ambulances and even an emergency mobile operating room flooding into a scene in which hundreds of pedestrians and subway passengers were scattering or cowering in fear.
It was all touched off by what seemed to be a routine attempt to arrest three pickpocketing suspects.


Meredith Phillips, Eugene Klein Jr.
Meredith Lee Phillips, a production assistant for NBC News, was married yesterday to Eugene Francis Klein Jr., a financial analyst at Home Box Office.
The couple work in New York.
The Rev.
Michael Driscoll performed the ceremony at St.
Jude's Roman Catholic Church in Boca Raton, Fla.
Mrs.
Klein, 23, graduated from the University of Florida.
She is a daughter of James and Maureen Phillips of Boca Raton.
Her father is a pilot for Delta Airlines.
Her mother is a realtor with Prudential Realty in Boca Raton.


The Arrangement
Never has collecting been so popular.
But after the thrill of the search and capture, what to do with the bounty?
Hands-off used to be the norm: collections were not so much displayed as laid out in a vault or vitrine.
Today's approach is less passive; it's simply more modern for object and owner to interact.
A case in point is this small Manhattan apartment belonging to Bob Hiemstra, a fashion illustrator and photographer, who, with the help of Michael Formica, arrived at a fairly dramatic way to present his collections.
Believing that collectibles are the raw material of "personal landscapes," Formica focused his efforts on a wall, the design of which is so riveting and complex in texture that the entire room now feels like its frame.


More Than Just a Victorian
To the Editor:
While I was delighted to see Anthony Trollope on the front page of the Book Review, I was not sanguine about Cynthia Ozick's gratuitous attacks on those of us who have enjoyed reading Trollope.
To place the blame for Trollope's being less popular than Dickens or George Eliot on "Trollopean zealots" and "Trollope cultists" is just plain silly.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about living in the Inwood section of Manhattan misstated the ownership of the Cafe Kafka.
It is owned by Michael Patelka.
The caption and the article also misspelled the given name of a neighborhood resident.
He is Federico Camilo, not Frederico.
The name of a community organization was also misspelled.
It is Mannahatta, not Manhatta.


JINGLE HELL
As a convert to Christianity, I become filled with despair during Advent.
Mine is not the happy family exclaiming over the Christmas goose, which puts us in company with most of the people I know.


An Inventor Who Kept Lights Burning
EVERYONE thinks that Thomas Edison invented the light bulb.
And he did -- but not by himself.
"People are surprised when they find out an African-American played an important role in the emergence of that technology, especially during that time, the late 1800's, when black people were just emerging from slavery," said Janet Schneider, project director at the Queens Borough Public Library.


Old School Approach to Special Education
A MORNING spent at the Windward School here may give some visitors a topsy-turvy feeling.
A private day school for students in grades 1 through 12 with learning disabilities, Windward goes against current trends: manners are taught; acquiring skills takes precedence over creativity, and children at a similar level of achievement are grouped together, although groups change often as students master skills.
The topsy-turvy feeling intensifies when Dr.
Judith C. Hochman, the school's head, describes the world of special education, in which students with learning disorders receive the kind of direct instruction that might benefit any child.


Only Doubt Endures
DEATH IN ROME  By Wolfgang Koeppen.
Translated by Michael Hofmann. 202 pp.
New York: Penguin Books.
Paper, $10.95.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE AMERICAN WEST  By Dee Brown. Scribners, $25.


Why the U.S. Silence on India's Rights Abuses?; Indigenous Democracy
To the Editor:
"Democracy in India: Now You See It . . ." (Week in Review, Jan. 22) makes a compelling case about the erosion of civil liberties in India.
Ravi Nair, the Indian human rights activist you cite, has played an important role in documenting human rights abuses.


Richard Moore, 81, Nixon Aide And Former Ambassador, Dies
Richard A. Moore, a lawyer and communications executive who served as special counsel to President Richard M. Nixon and was Ambassador to Ireland, died Friday at his home in Washington.
He was 81 years old.
The cause of death was prostate cancer, said his daughter, Kate L. Moore.


Celebrating the Arts All Around Town
Theater, music and photography took center stage at three recent events.


Lessons in High Seriousness, Low Parody and Borrowing
THE ART WORLD HAS CON- trived to flatter the egos of its followers by simplifying connoisseurship.
All that is necessary to judge that an object is a Major Work of Art or a Major Photograph is to recognize that it has been (1) enshrined or (2) quoted or (3) spoofed.
Art appreciation has never been so easy.
When it comes to enshrining, museums have pride of place.
They can boast a certain sanctified atmosphere and have some claim that Apollo, the Muses and the higher institutions of learning have appointed them keepers of the flame.
Many galleries also exude a temple-of-art atmosphere with their white spaces, reverent installations and air of luxe and calm, if not volupte.


See 3PO
The Center for the Arts in Yerba Buena Gardens, Calif., has quadrupled its daily attendance, to 1,200, with "The Art of Star Wars." The characters from George Lucas's movies -- including Yoda, the gnomish Jedi master; Jabba the Hutt, the sluglike crime lord, and Darth Vader, the knight-errant with a face like a '57 Buick grille -- occupy a place in the popular consciousness somewhere between Paul Bunyan and Ronald McDonald.
"Star Wars has become a part of our visual vocabulary," says David Perry of the museum.
"It's time to take a look at it." The life-size models, miniatures, matte paintings, aliens and masks created by Lucas's special-effects wizards are on view through March 12.
For those with transgalactic date books, the exhibit is to be presented in Washington at the National Air and Space Museum sometime in 1997 and a new movie trilogy is scheduled to begin in 1998.
Business at the gift shop, offering a virtual delirium of figurines, holograms and other extraterrestrial artifacts, is skyrocketing.


Ex-Vikings Employee Tells of Claims
News reports out of Minneapolis yesterday said a fired Minnesota Vikings executive is claiming the team paid a former employee to settle a sexual harassment claim against the assistant coach RICHARD SOLOMON.
KSTP-TV also reported that DAN ENDY 3d, who was dismissed as director of team operations in 1993, contended that he notified the Vikings about inappropriate sexual behavior by Coach DENNIS GREEN involving a second woman.
The station quoted an unnamed Vikings official as saying that Green denied the allegation, but that the team negotiated a settlement.
Neither Green nor Solomon could be reached by The Associated Press yesterday.
Solomon told The Star Tribune of Minneapolis: "I've got nothing to say."


At 20, Pierce Captures Title And a Dream
Her tennis story started half her lifetime ago, when she was just 10, when the sport was a way to have fun with her friends after school.
Mary Pierce never once thought tennis would become not only her livelihood, but a family obsession.
She thought Australian Opens such as the one she commandeered for the last two weeks without surrendering a set and ultimately converted into her first Grand Slam crown on a stormy Saturday afternoon was the province of distant stars she had watched on television.
She never envisioned that she could be one of them.


Bear Hunting in Oscar Season: Five Strategies
EACH YEAR, WHEN OSCAR SEAson begins about the same time as bear hunting in the Adirondacks -- the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences warns the studios to be polite, well-mannered and tasteful in bagging nominations.
"Items that begin to tread dangerously close to the definition of a bribe" have been sent to Academy members in recent years, Arthur Hiller, the Academy president, wrote on Aug. 26, adding that the Academy frowns on CARE packages that include books, music videos, CD's and clothing.
His letter implied that studios committing such bribery would find themselves with fewer tickets to the Academy Awards ceremony and ball, which this year are on March 27.


Reporter's Notebook; Touring the Chechen War Zone, by Car and by Tank
There are essentially two ways to watch the battle for Grozny, which rages on despite all the Russian claims of pacification and victory.
One can drive into town in a beat-up old car, as almost all Chechen soldiers do, and hope that nobody stops or shells it.
The other way is to hitch a ride in a Russian tank.


Harold Fieldsteel, Seagram Official, 72
Harold Fieldsteel, formerly a top financial strategist for the Seagram Company, died last Saturday at Winthrop Hospital in Mineola, L.I.
He was 72 and lived in Garden City, L.I.
The cause of death was cancer, a spokesman for the company said.


Batteries in Winter: The Cold Wave Acid Test
ON the whole, your car battery would rather hibernate until spring.
Frigid temperatures and icy conditions are hard on cars in general, and often prove fatal to aging batteries.
"People make the mistake that the battery in their car will work every time they turn the key in the ignition," said George Giek, managing national director of engineering and road service for the American Automobile Association in Heathrow, Fla.
On average, throughout the year, "40 percent of our emergency calls nationwide are due to engines that won't start," he said.


It's a Good Thing Mutual Funds Don't Have Feelings
NO group of mutual funds has ever been rejected as badly as were Government bond funds and mortgage-backed funds in 1994.
As interest rates rose and losses mounted, the withdrawals from mortgage funds came to 28 percent of average assets.
For Government funds, the figure was 21.8 percent.
That kind of investor exodus is unprecedented among any of the 18 classifications of funds for which information is available over the past decade.


Catastrophe? It Can't Possibly Happen Here
YOU would think that with the horrific rash of catastrophes -- devastating earthquakes in Kobe, Japan, and in Los Angeles, just to name two -- most companies would be signing up for disaster contingency plans.
But despite recent scenes of devastation straight out of a World War II newsreel, the big temblor in Kobe is expected to add only 5 percent to the growth of the disaster recovery business.


More Than Just a Victorian
To the Editor:
With regard to Cynthia Ozick's front-page essay on Trollope, about his being, in your words, "ripe for rediscovery," is the Book Review aware that there have been four major biographies of Trollope in the last five years, two of them reviewed on the same front page?
Or that the Book Review published in March 1993, on the occasion of Trollope's installation in Poets' Corner of Westminster Abbey, an essay by one of the biographers, N. John Hall, demonstrating beyond quibble from publishers' records that Trollope has long had an enormous readership outside of academia and far beyond what Ms.
Ozick sneeringly calls the Trollope cultists?
Take a look in "Books in Print." DANIEL K. LOWENTHAL New York


Farewell, My Suite
I have spent much of my working life trying to convince people that it's "the mix, not the match" that makes for great-looking interiors.
A radical suggestion coming from someone who was born and bred on perfectly matched furniture.
But then, weren't we all?
Furniture suites were the backbone of bedroom communities all across America: their stiff bearing made possible by chemical preservatives, their pseudo-historical styling as close to the original as Spam is to roast pork.
But after years of editorial finger-wagging, the furniture suite is finally receding from the interior landscape.
The ultimate proof of this came at this year's furniture mart in High Point, N.C., where even the most mass-market purveyors were pitching mixed sets over cookie-cutter ensembles.
Now that a new era is dawning, I feel it's safe to wax nostalgic about the old, for the furniture suite may have lacked style but it had plenty of raison d'etre.
To the postwar homesteaders who believed most ardently in it, a matched set stood for progress, convenience, economic well-being and durability.
More important, the furniture suite relieved an entire class of upwardly mobile suburbanites from the stress of having to make design decisions on a dime.


On Sunday; Striking Nurses Turn to Prayer And Fasting
IT looks fairly nonmilitant on a gray winter day at noontime as the striking nurses pray the Angelus here on East Main Street outside the hospital.
Several dozen nurses gather and rally daily at a Madonna lawn grotto, taking stock of their rough maiden voyage into unionism.
"This strike is the toughest I've ever seen," said Theresa Alaimo, a union organizer.
"The toughest."


The Nation; Now You See Death, Now You Don't
THERE was an odd non-graphic moment in the O.J.
Simpson trial last week that was, in its way, the first respite from the six-month bacchanalia of tabloid imagery provided by the murder case.
There, in the opening hours of the trial, a vast national audience hungry as Shakespeare's groundlings was gorging on the televised details of the crime scene -- the color photos of bloody socks, the bloody homicide drippings, the visceral motes of morbidity -- when the screen was suddenly blacked out, preventing viewers from seeing the knife-torn remains of the two victims.
Exhibit A -- A for appalling -- was not to be allowed beyond the courtroom.
The blank screen seemed strangely sensational: Television viewers happened upon an attempt at good taste after months and months of traipsing the prurient heights.
After all the time invested in peering and delving most freely, the public was denied the sight of the broken, bloodied victims themselves, the very humans whose tragic demise was theoretically at the heart of all this attention.


Balancing Space, Variety and Vegetables
THE recent mild weather and the arrival of new seed catalogues have caused gardeners to yearn for spring.
But patience.
There still is February to get through, and March can offer some weather challenges, too.
Even April, for that matter.
Meanwhile one can hope and dream and try to make decisions.
There usually is a strong desire to grow everything.
Then reality strikes; garden space is only so big and backs only so strong.


Sampras Calms Nerves Before Final
In the Australian Open final billed locally as a dream matchup, the defending champion, Pete Sampras, the player who refers to himself as "the guy next door," went up against the guy on the billboard, second-seeded Andre Agassi.
Agassi hadn't lost a set and had so far displayed the vulnerability of a Sherman tank in his first-ever Australian Open adventure.
For the world's top player, however, this title defense has been the most nerve-racking of his exceptional career.


Turning the Tables On Turnip Bias
TURNIPS are a much underrated vegetable.
But their sweet, distinctive flavor is a perfect complement to rich meat like duck, goose, pork or ham.
At the Union Square Cafe in Manhattan, one of my favorite winter dishes is mashed yellow turnips (rutabagas) topped with crisp fried shallots.
I also like white turnips grated and sauteed or roasted like potatoes.
Baby turnips, available at fancier food markets, are especially good glazed.


Memories of '55 Renew Push For Hodges
If Brooklyn ever had a hometown hero, Dodgers first baseman Gil Hodges was it.
Schools, parks and even a bridge bear his name.
Forty years ago, when the city's biggest borough had its biggest dream come true -- the Bums beat the Yankees to become World Champions -- Hodges knocked in the final game's only two runs.
In 1969, when the Mets made a miracle, Hodges was the manager.
And when it was over, he went home to Flatbush, where he lived with his wife, Joan, nearly his entire life.
But while other greats of his era have made the Hall of Fame, Hodges has not.
Fans have pleaded for his induction for years.


Turning the Tables On Turnip Bias
TURNIPS are a much underrated vegetable.
But their sweet, distinctive flavor is a perfect complement to rich meat like duck, goose, pork or ham.
At the Union Square Cafe in Manhattan, one of my favorite winter dishes is mashed yellow turnips (rutabagas) topped with crisp fried shallots.
I also like white turnips grated and sauteed or roasted like potatoes.
Baby turnips, available at fancier food markets, are especially good glazed.


Streetscapes/The Master Apartments; A Restoration for the Home of a Russian Philosopher
THE seasoned New Yorker is used to spurious stories about unusual buildings.
But if someone tells you their Art Deco apartment house was built by a Russian philosopher-explorer-painter as his personal museum, and that it has the first corner windows in New York, don't laugh -- because they're talking about the Master Apartments at 103d Street and Riverside Drive, built in 1929 for the charismatic Nicholas Roerich.
The co-op is now beginning a facade and lobby restoration of the building from which Roerich's museum and followers were evicted in 1938.


La Fontaine's Bestiary Amid the Stacks
MAXIMS FROM THE FABLES of La Fontaine like "The Tortoise and the Hare" have endured for three centuries and are as familiar today as those from Disney's vivid morality tales of mice, deer, a mermaid and a lion.
And the stories of the French author continue to spawn new editions, operas, ballets and artworks.
Now, traditional fables in which animals parade as humans are explored in "La Fontaine: The Power of Fables," an exhibition at the New York Public Library, opening on Saturday and remaining through April 15.
The show commemorates the 300th anniversary of Jean de La Fontaine's death; it was organized by Paul LeClerc, the library's new president, a scholar of French literature and long an admirer of La Fontaine.
Coincidentally, the exhibition is one of seven at New York museums and libraries this season focusing on animals in art; several such shows -- on animals in Egyptian, African, Asian and medieval art -- will be on view during a conference on the subject at the New School for Social Research in April.


Southwestern Snap Moves Into Westport
WITH the arrival of the Durango Grill, it looks as though Westport finally has a winner and permanent occupant for a hillside location near the railroad station well known for revolving-door tenants.
The interior has been transformed into a Southwest inn, with soft amber lights on pale lemon rough-plastered walls, oak floors and terra cotta pots of cactuses.
Blue denim shirts on cheerful, well-trained staffers add to the Western look.


What Winter Mulch Really Accomplishes
This is a reply to "Mulch Early and Mulch Often"  [ Letters, Dec. 18 ] .
I agree there are many horticultural old-wives' tales that have no significance in the modern garden.
Unfortunately, the timing of the application of winter mulch is not one of them.
There are good solid reasons for applying mulch after the first hard freeze.
Your roses can distinguish between proper and improper mulching, which may show up in their performance next season.
Plant roots are found in approximately the top foot of soil for herbaceous plants and the top two feet for shrubs.
The only reason for roots to grow lower is to find moisture, not for constant temperature.
Mulch does not cause roots to grow deeper, but rather allows them to remain at their natural depth by retaining moisture in the upper levels of the soil.


CHINA TRADE RIFT WITH U.S. DEEPENS
The latest round of trade negotiations between the United States and China broke down in Beijing today, and the United States Trade Representative, Mickey Kantor, threatened to impose steep tariffs on Chinese goods if an agreement was not reached by next Saturday.
The United States is demanding that China crack down immediately on the pirating of copyrighted American computer software, movies and music, and that it stop Chinese businesses from putting phony American labels on consumer products.


Jaspers Stop Fairfield Rally
Manhattan, one of the top defensive teams in the nation, got a major dose of its own medicine in the second half against Fairfield yesterday, but the Jaspers held off an impressive rally for a 62-58 victory at their Draddy Gymnasium in the Bronx.
Fairfield (10-8), which trailed by 15 points early, actually went ahead, 41-38, then managed to make only 5 of its last 18 field goals.
Manhattan (16-2), up by 49-48 with 4 minutes left, then went on a 7-0 run, 5 of the points by the sophomore Jason Hoover, who had 15 points.


ROGER AILES
I can certainly offer Roger Ailes more than "carefully calibrated praise." When I was a copywriter at CNBC's ad agency, I wrote a TV and print campaign for Ailes, working closely with him for several months.
Instead of dictating, as experienced clients tend to do, Ailes listened.
He was one of the few clients I've worked with who went with his gut instinct, instead of group consensus.


A Rock Soundtrack That Underscores A Tale of Sisterhood
THE MOMENT THAT THE screen lights up with Whoopi Goldberg's face, the theater fills with the sound of Ms.
Goldberg singing Janis Joplin's defiant anthem "Piece of My Heart." It isn't hard to suspect that the film "Boys on the Side," which opens on Friday, is meant to be heard as much as seen.
Indeed, by the time this story about sisterhood concludes, moviegoers will have heard 24 rock songs by arguably every leading contemporary female vocalist. (Those who enjoy what they've heard can listen to the music again on the soundtrack album, which will be released this week by Arista Records.)


Religious Form of Yiddish Is Where It All Started
To the Editor:
Isidore Haiblum's bizarre elegy for Yiddish -- the secular Yiddish of his Brooklyn lost, spirited from the religious life from which it sprung -- is an odd valediction indeed ("A World of Yiddish, Lost," Soapbox, Jan. 15).


Grand Central Makeover Is Readied
FROM floor to star-speckled Sky Ceiling, a $113.8 million makeover of Grand Central Terminal is poised to begin this year, after almost a decade of planning, rethinking, deal making and just enough actual restoration to have whetted the appetites of many commuters and visitors for more.
The rebuilding project would be the most ambitious in the landmark's 82-year history.
It would fundamentally alter the way people use the terminal, opening new spaces, passages and vistas throughout the structure, with more staircases and escalators to integrate the different levels.
The plan would increase by as much as 80 percent the areas devoted to stores and restaurants.


The View From the K.G.B.
MY FIVE CAMBRIDGE FRIENDS  Burgess, Maclean, Philby, Blunt, and Cairncross by Their KGB Controller.
By Yuri Modin with Jean-Charles Deniau and Aguieszka Ziarek.
Translated by Anthony Roberts.
Illustrated. 282 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $23.
THE PHILBY FILES  The Secret Life of Master Spy Kim Philby.
By Genrikh Borovik.
Edited by Phillip Knightley. 382 pp.
Boston:  Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.


Esthetic and Sentimental Aspects in Two Shows by Women
AT the Zimmerli Art Museum in New Brunswick is "A View of One's Own," a show of 80 works drawn from the collection bestowed by the National Association of Women Artists, formed in 1889, on Douglass College at Rutgers University.
The collection ranges from Mary Cassatt's drypoint of a woman, illustrated on this page, to a painting by Judy Chicago, well known for her 1970's installation of a dinner table set with plates shaped like female genitals.
Her work here is a folk art-style painting of childbirth, covered with embroidery by another hand.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SOLITARY PLACES  By Joan Vannorsdall Schroeder. Putnam, $22.95.


From Brass Shield to Business Card
WHEN Richard Thompson retired from his old life in 1989, he traded his policeman's blues and brass shield for business cards and a stake in the new South Bronx.
The cards say "R &amp; R Security," and the "R &amp; R" stands for "Respectable and Reliable," which pretty well describes this man, from his gray wool sweater to his outspoken devotion to his Baptist church.
"Security" is his entrepreneurial niche, his slice of a burgeoning business that has grown up to protect the borough's still-struggling rebirth.


Spain Changes System Of Taxing Hotels
Spain has changed its system of applying value added taxes to hotels and restaurants.
All hotels, no matter what their classification, are now subject to a rate of 7 percent; previously the rate was 15 percent on five-star hotels and four- and five-fork restaurants and 6 percent on others.
A number of five-star hotels had elected in recent years to drop to the four-star classification to become eligible for the 6 percent rate.
According to the tourist office, several hotels that dropped a star have expressed interest in reapplying for their former, luxury status.


For Legal Aid And the City, Peace at Last
Nearly four months after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani smothered a strike by lawyers at the Legal Aid Society, the city has agreed to a contract that will require Legal Aid to do just as much work for 16.5 percent less money, city and society officials said.
In October, Mr.
Giuliani denounced the striking lawyers, saying they had walked out on clients and were trying to "hold the city hostage." He threatened to hire permanent replacements unless Legal Aid accepted a contract with an 18-percent cut in spending, more productivity and a no-strike agreement from its lawyers' union.


Jan. 22-28; The Republican Week That Was
As the third week of their control of the Congress ended, Republicans found themselves on the defensive and hastily working on political damage control after the House Majority Leader, Dick Armey, referred to Representative Barney Frank, a Massachusetts Democrat and an openly homosexual congressman, as "Barney fag" in a radio interview.
Mr.
Armey quickly apologized, saying he had mispronounced Mr.
Frank's last name.
But to the dismay of the six-term conservative from Texas, who is second in power in the House of Representatives only to Speaker Newt Gingrich, the incident became fuel to a wildfire of a political controversy.
Mr.
Armey's comment came only two days after a fellow Republican, Robert K. Dornan of California, was banned from speaking on the House floor for 24 hours after he delivered a speech in which he accused President Clinton of giving "aid and comfort to the enemy" during the Vietnam War.


More Than Just a Victorian
To the Editor:
It is gratifying to see an appreciation of Trollope's undeservedly overlooked novel "The Way We Live Now." As John Sutherland noted in his introduction to the 1982 Oxford edition, "To assert in the 1980's that 'The Way We Live Now' is Trollope's masterpiece is to state the critically obvious." It is indeed a masterpiece, deserving of a wide audience.


Civic Groups Rise in Number And Influence
The Cedar Grove Civic Homeowners Association was born last April, the creation of two men who, using their home computers and fax machines, bombarded news organizations and elected officials with grievances.
They rallied forces to oppose a group home for the mentally disabled and, more recently, proposed a quixotic plan to wall off the small neighborhood from outsiders in an effort to reduce crime.
The group home opened last fall, and critics of the newer proposal have accused the association of being divisive and isolationist.
But instead of being dismissed for its setbacks, the civic association is gaining attention from elected officials.
Last week, its members met with Borough President Claire Shulman for two hours, and then spent an equal amount of time with Mayor Giuliani's criminal-justice coordinator, Katherine N. Lapp.


Savoring the World, Cup by Cup
AS a native Viennese who in my youth spent too much time in coffeehouses, I have sought out substitutes in my travels around the world ever since.
I have found some in unlikely places.
One was in what is now Kinshasa, Zaire, (then, in 1960, Leopoldville) near the post office; it was actually an ice cream parlor, but it had strong coffee, a sidewalk terrace and, during the sudden tropical sunset, something of a mellow mood.
Fink's on Hahistadruth Street in Jerusalem -- also not strictly a coffeehouse but a bar with a small restaurant attached -- somehow combined restfulness with exhilaration.


See 3PO
The Center for the Arts in Yerba Buena Gardens, Calif., has quadrupled its daily attendance, to 1,200, with "The Art of Star Wars." The characters from George Lucas's movies -- including Yoda, the gnomish Jedi master; Jabba the Hutt, the sluglike crime lord, and Darth Vader, the knight-errant with a face like a '57 Buick grille -- occupy a place in the popular consciousness somewhere between Paul Bunyan and Ronald McDonald.
"Star Wars has become a part of our visual vocabulary," says David Perry of the museum.
"It's time to take a look at it." The life-size models, miniatures, matte paintings, aliens and masks created by Lucas's special-effects wizards are on view through March 12.
For those with transgalactic date books, the exhibit is to be presented in Washington at the National Air and Space Museum sometime in 1997 and a new movie trilogy is scheduled to begin in 1998.
Business at the gift shop, offering a virtual delirium of figurines, holograms and other extraterrestrial artifacts, is skyrocketing.


Ireland and Britain at Odds Over Ulster Talks
The Irish and British Governments failed this week to resolve serious differences on a plan they hope will eventually allow representatives of the Irish Republican Army to take part in full-fledged peace negotiations on Northern Ireland.
But Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the I.R.A., which has accused the British of delaying approval of the plan, said the organization's attitude was "positive and pragmatic," although the Sinn Fein goal was still "some new Irish jurisdiction" to replace British rule in Northern Ireland.


Brokers, Backgrounds and Investors
To the Editor:
"Getting the Lowdown on Brokers" (Wall Street, Dec. 18) was a timely article about the integrity of stock brokers, but it stopped short of revealing how unlevel the playing field still can be in securities litigation.


Congress Investigating Forgiveness of Loan to Commerce Head
Congressional investigators are examining a transaction in which a former business partner of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown forgave a $78,000 loan made to him, a Congressional official said today.
The cancellation of the loan in late 1993 was one of three transactions with the former business partner, Nolanda Hill, with a total benefit to Mr.
Brown of at least $400,000.
The three transactions are all described by Mr.
Brown's aides as part of the sale of his stake in First International Inc., a small investment and consulting company in which the former business partner gave him stock even though he had put no money into the company.


Susan P. Metta, Roar Gangdal
Susan Patricia Metta, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony K. Metta of Malba, Queens, was married on Wednesday to Roar Gangdal, the son of Capt. and Mrs.
Haakan Gangdal of Bergen, Norway.
The bridegroom's father, who is the captain of the cruise ship Norway, performed the ceremony aboard the ship in the waters off St.
Thomas, one of the United States Virgin Islands.
Mrs.
Gangdal, 26, graduated from Gettysburg College.
She was until recently a manager in the branch sales processing department at Citibank in New York.
Her father is the president of the FCC National Bank in Wilmington, Del., and of First Card Services Inc., a credit-card company in Uniondale, L.I.


A Beleaguered Stadium Showed Rookie Promise
A long time ago, when $2.5 million was real money instead of a year's salary for a .237-hitting infielder with stone hands, a stadium was built in the Bronx.
It was, newspaper readers of the day were assured, "just about the last word in baseball plants."
It was, of course, Yankee Stadium.
It may not be the last word in stadiums anymore -- George M. Steinbrenner 3d, the Yankees' principal owner, complains that traffic and neighborhood crime make it just about the last place many fans want to be -- but a brief visit to the past is still worth the trip.


Two Soirees One Day Apart to Usher In Mall
IF your invitation hasn't come, don't worry.
Twenty-three thousand are in the mail, and yours is surely on the way.
But in case you don't get invited to one of the two hottest parties in recent Westchester County history, you can come anyway.
Everyone is welcome: $75 is all you need.
The occasion is the opening of the Westchester, the $250 million, 1 million square-foot megamall here, and there will be two competing parties.
First, on March 15 at 7 P.M., will be Nordstrom's gala toast to its first store in New York State, a 200,000-square-foot, three-floor, fashion-specialty store, which anchors the mall's north side.


Message in Support Of Arts Group Head
As a parent whose sons have participated in Northern Westchester Center for the Arts programs, including summer camp and Young People's Ensemble, for the last six years, I was greatly interested in your Jan. 1 article "Arts Group Faces Suit by Ex-Director."
I have continued over the years to admire Bira Rabushka's vision and ability to implement that vision: gathering the funds to employ talented and caring teachers and support staff, working successfully with a board over many years to expand programming, creating an environment that respects the whole child rather than focuses on specific skills in isolation and establishing long-term relationships with consummate professionals who have inspired children, staff and parents with their talents.


Corrections
An article last Monday about the collapse of a peace proposal for Algeria misstated the year in which Islamic militants achieved power in Iran.
It was 1979, not 1978.


The Loneliest of Apes
REFLECTIONS OF EDEN  My Years With the Orangutans of Borneo.
By Birute M. F. Galdikas.
Illustrated. 408 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  MOSCOW, CAPITAL OF RUMORS  Awash in rumors and wild stories, from shipments of poisoned vodka from Chechnya to a mutation in the gene pool caused by war stress, Russia is a bundle of nerves.  1  Reporter's notebook: Hitching a ride in a Russian tank.  12


'I Am a Genius,' She Said
GERTRUDE STEIN  In Words and Pictures.
A Photobiography.
Edited by Renate Stendhal.
Illustrated. 286 pp.
Chapel Hill, N.C.: Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill.
Paper, $19.95.
GERTRUDE STEIN REMEMBERED  Edited by Linda Simon.
Illustrated. 195 pp.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. $20.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.


Helicopters Over Hawaii: Dogfight on Safety Rules
A BITTER dispute has erupted over new rules intended to increase the safety of tourists who take low-flying helicopter tours over the seas and volcanoes of Hawaii.
The helicopter operators and others in the tourism industry say the rules, which require helicopters to fly at higher altitudes, where it is safer but less spectacular, are wreaking havoc in an industry that generates tens of millions of dollars and provides hundreds of local jobs.
The rules, imposed by the Federal Aviation Administration in October, also require flotation equipment to be aboard and other safety measures.


The Islanders Keep Shooting and Hitting a Brick Wall
Just five games into the season, the Islanders bolted their locker room doors tonight and addressed some negative trends that they want to keep from snowballing after two straight losses.
New York fell to 2-2-1 with a 4-1 defeat by the Tampa Bay Lightning (2-3-0) in front of 11,808 at the Nassau Coliseum.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
NATURE THURSDAYS


Pasta and More
ALLA SERA ++ (212) 717-5131; 1481 First Avenue, near 77th Street; $; all major credit cards


San Antonio
To the Editor: I had just returned from a conference in San Antonio when your article appeared.
The Menger Hotel, where I stayed, was not mentioned.
The Menger was built in 1859 next to the Alamo to allow patrons of the Menger brewery a place to stay.


Nebraska Moves to Bar Homosexuals From Being Foster Parents
Foster children in Nebraska can no longer be placed in the homes of people who identify themselves as homosexuals or in homes where unrelated, unmarried adults live together, the State Director of Social Services has announced.
The move was widely viewed as a victory for conservative Christian groups, which have made gay foster parents a political issue.


Chefs Return to Old Kitchens
THE return of the chefs is not a motion-picture title, but a description of what is occurring along the Larkfield-Laurel Road corridor in East Northport.
Rob Haddow, who apprenticed under Bruce Grassley, the first chef at Peter's Inn before taking the reins himself, recently bought the Laurel Road restaurant and changed its name to Crossroads Cafe.


Murder of a Partnership; Detective's Family Bitter at Police and Wounded Survivor
In the dangerous world of undercover detectives, close bonds between partners are a hallowed practice and often a prerequisite for survival.
On a January night nine years ago, Anthony J. Venditti and Katherine Burke were just beginning to forge such a relationship as they shadowed a mobster through the streets of Queens.
Although both were veteran detectives, they had been partners only three weeks when they were suddenly enveloped in gunfire outside a diner in Ridgewood.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Vintage Suds
AT the Arkind household in Hicksville today they will be watching the Super Bowl and drinking Mark's Magnificent Beer.
All right, maybe it's not magnificent.
But the beer that Mark Arkind brews in his basement is pretty darn good, he says.
As president of the Paumanok United Brewers, the largest beer-making club on Long Island, Mr.
Arkind is a beer connoisseur.
Beer offers as many subtleties as wine, he maintains.
And to prove it, his club sponsored a beer tasting at the Long Island Marriott in Uniondale.


DON'T SCAPEGOAT THE GERRYMANDER
In "Don't Scapegoat the Gerrymander" (Jan. 8), Lani Guinier is right in referring to the Voting Rights Act's "simple command: do not exclude," but she then appears to condone a quite different interpretation, premised on a belief that the act requires purposeful inclusion.


A Thousand Traditions Bloom


The Goldilocks Recovery
ECONOMICS WAS LABELED "THE dismal science" in 1850 by the historian Thomas Carlyle, and its metaphors are suitably fearsome and depressing.
An arrangement in the 1970's for exchange rates to fluctuate within a band within another band was called the snake in the tunnel, and the total of the unemployment and inflation percentages was called the misery index.
In the 80's an aborted economic recovery was called a dead cat bounce.
Even its euphemisms for recession give the users a sensation of seasickness, as in rolling readjustment.
How pleasant it was, in this sad trope-a-dope, to hear an economist introduce a happy figure of speech to the droopy discourse.


More Than Just a Victorian
To the Editor:
How nice to be able to know both that Trollope was a wonderful writer and that all those who admired him before Jan. 1, 1995, were eccentrics and simpletons with no understanding at all of his actual talents.
I think there was a bit more of Slope than of Harding in Cynthia Ozick's little sermon.
WALTER HORN Watertown, Mass.


Jan. 22-28: Republican Initiative; Commerce Secretary Brown Faces the Prospect Of Renewed Scrutiny
Call it Washington water torture.
For more than a week, House and Senate Republicans have dribbled out disclosures about Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown's financial dealings.
The two biggest questions involved Mr.
Brown's former stake in First International Inc., a small consulting and investment banking company.
It emerged Monday that the company's main source of income was a promissory note from a television company, Corridor Broadcasting Corporation.
Mr.
Brown had repeatedly denied any link to Corridor, which defaulted in 1991 on a Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation loan at a cost to taxpayers of $23.3 million.


The Executive Computer; Browsers Make Navigating the World Wide Web a Snap
SURE, getting there takes up gobs of memory, a special kind of Internet connection and a modem that's probably twice as fast as the one you bought just last year.
But once you've made your way onto the World Wide Web, getting around is getting easier all the time -- thanks to a new class of Web "browser" software programs.
Unless you've been oblivious to current affairs -- including the cyber ruminations of Newt Gingrich -- you doubtless know by now that the Internet's World Wide Web is an electronic amalgam of the public library, the suburban shopping mall and the Congressional Record.


INSIDE
Brown Loans Detailed
Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown gained at least $400,000 from the sale of his stake in a company, and Congressional investigators are focusing on a $78,000 loan forgiven by a former business partner.
Page 21.
Hanoi Files Reopened
A new book based on Vietnamese military archives asserts that Hanoi withheld considerable information on American prisoners of war for decades.
Page 8.
New Hope Against AIDS
Even though results are preliminary, a new class of drugs is showing itself highly effective against AIDS, at least in the short term.
Page 24.


Moorer Cancels Bout After Hurting Knee
The former heavyweight champion MICHAEL MOORER was forced to cancel his first fight since losing the title after suffering an injury to his left knee.
Moorer, scheduled to face JIMMY THUNDER on March 11 in Las Vegas, Nev., was diagnosed with a partial tear of the medial collateral ligament.
Dr.
DANIEL R. KANELL recommended that Moorer refrain from training for the next six weeks.
Moorer, 27, who beat EVANDER HOLYFIELD and became the first left-hander to win the heavyweight title, lost in his first defense when he was knocked out by GEORGE FOREMAN last November. (AP)


Commercial Property/Long Island; 6 Downtowns Form Business Improvement Districts
RIVERHEAD wants to capitalize on the area's tourist economy.
Huntington needs to do something about the kids who hang around its bars.


What to Do With Sherman Creek? The Fight Is On
As the Harlem River makes a notch in the east coast of northern Manhattan, it meets a ghostly waterfront: a massive brick Con Edison building that is slowly being dismantled, blocks of sprawling gas stations and seedy-looking auto-repair shops, and a city tow lot known for its auctions of abandoned vehicles.
But now this neighborhood, called Sherman Creek, is looking more attractive as it draws attention and debate as a candidate for Federal money under the city's new empowerment zone.
Everyone agrees that the 100-acre tract of land east of 10th Avenue, from Dyckman Street to the top of the island, should be used to generate jobs.
But not everyone agrees how.


AIDS Patients in S.R.O.'s Will Not Be Relocated
To the Editor:
The Jan. 22 article "Pressured, City Quietly Cuts AIDS Patients in S.R.O.'s" mischaracterizes the Giuliani Administration's plans to house people with AIDS in commercial S.R.O.'s in Manhattan Community Board 7.


Monet Travels to New Orleans
Waterlilies on streetcars?
Certainly, if it's New Orleans celebrating with its usual verve an unusual exhibition of paintings by the French Impressionist Claude Monet.
In honor of the show, which opened at the New Orleans Museum of Art this month, the city's streetcars have been decorated with pastel plywood lilies recalling the flowers painted by the artist in his later years at his studio in Giverny near Paris.
The exhibition, which runs through March 12, includes 22 paintings of Monet's gardens and house at Giverny from the collection at the Musee Marmottan in Paris.
Eight of the group have never before been shown in the United States.
Monet created the paintings, some as large as murals, from 1903, when he was 63, to 1926, the year he died.


Russian on World Court
The General Assembly and the Security Council, voting independently, have elected a Russian judge and legal scholar to the 15-member International Court of Justice.


Balancing Space, Variety and Vegetables
THE recent mild weather and the arrival of new seed catalogues have caused gardeners to yearn for spring.
But patience.
There still is February to get through, and March can offer some weather challenges, too.
Even April, for that matter.
Meanwhile one can hope and dream and try to make decisions.
There usually is a strong desire to grow everything.
Then reality strikes; garden space is only so big and backs only so strong.


Denouncing the Death Penalty's Return


Advanced Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Comdata Holdings (CMDT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A simple yet captivating image in the campaign to curb violence.
A COALITION of outdoor and out-of-home advertising companies, in an unusual public-service initiative, is hoping that 20,000 posters bearing a compelling antiviolence image might help stem the plague of violence infesting the world.
The image will start appearing today on posters displayed on billboards and out-of-home media, like subway placards, airport walls, bus-stop shelters and other sites in 30 countries, representing as much as $20 million worth of donated ad space.
By the time the posters come down at the end of February, they are expected to be seen by about a billion people.


No Headline


Interlake Corp.(IK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


CACI International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sun Energy Partners L.P.(SLP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Personal Income . . .
Dec.
Tuesday  Consumer Confidence . . .
Jan.
Wednesday  Leading Indicators . . .
Dec.
Construction Spending . . .
Dec.
New-Car Sales . . .
Jan.
Thursday  New-Home Sales . . .
Dec.
New-Home Prices . . .
Dec.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Employment . . .
Jan.
Factory Orders . . .
Dec.


Pataki to Call For Tax Cuts To Be Phased Over 4 Years
Gov.
George E. Pataki said today that the budget he will release on Wednesday will propose a four-year tax cut that would remove 400,000 people from the tax rolls and reduce state revenues by $6.8 billion a year by 1998.
The plan is essentially the same as the one Mr.
Pataki, a Republican, proposed during last year's campaign: to reduce the top tax rate by 25 percent over four years, keep the bottom rate at 4 percent, reduce the number of people paying the top rate and provide a range of credits and deductions that would benefit lower-income taxpayers.


Ecuador Downs a Peruvian Helicopter in Border Clash
Ecuadorean troops shot down a Peruvian helicopter today after its military charged that Peru had "launched a massive offensive, using mortar fire and supported by helicopters."
The military said that seven Peruvian soldiers aboard the helicopter were killed.
A Peruvian official confirmed that a helicopter had been shot down but gave no casualty figures.


NovaCare Inc.(NOV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Outrunning the Wind?


McCarver Stays With Mets
TIM McCARVER has re-enlisted as the Mets' analyst on Channel 9.
"We're very happy, we got what we wanted," said BOB ROSEN, McCarver's agent.
The deal was sealed after several months of uncertainty and protracted talks.
Rosen, who did not disclose the terms of the deal, said: "What took so long is I've been dealing directly with FRED WILPON, who has been occupied with other things." Wilpon is the co-owner of the Mets.


Cray Research (CYR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Morgan Products Ltd.(MGN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Devils Set a Record For a Delay in Scoring
Three losses and a tie in their first four games is not a good start to a season, especially for a team like the Devils, which has aspirations of challenging for the Stanley Cup.
The Devils have not only failed to win a game but they also have had a great deal of difficulty in getting the puck into the net.


Lost Dolphins Escorted Out of Flushing Bay
Two dolphins appeared to be on their way back to familiar waters yesterday after a small fleet of Harbor Patrol and Coast Guard boats spent four hours gently herding them from the shallows near the runways of La Guardia Airport.
The errant dolphins, which appeared to be a mother and her calf, were first spotted in Flushing Bay at about 11 A.M. by Police Department Harbor Patrol officers, who saw them swimming in circles and breathing rapidly just east of Rikers Island, police officials said.


Peso's Plunge May Cost Thousands of U.S. Jobs
The plunge of the peso and the sharp drop in Mexicans' purchasing power will cost tens of thousands of American jobs, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas has estimated, and private economists say the damage to the United States economy will be even greater.
The peso's drop is expected to slash about $10 billion, or more than 20 percent, from American exports to Mexico this year, business and Government economists say -- turning a healthy trade surplus with Mexico into a large deficit.


Albany International Corp.(AIN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wake Up, Malone Advises Coleman
Long after the Jazz had won their 12th straight game and John Stockton had moved to 25 behind Magic Johnson's career assist record, Karl Malone had a message for Derrick Coleman:
Do something with your career. Before it's to late.


Prep Runners Race In West Point Event
Brad Barket, a senior at the Peddie School who will be in the Millrose Games invitational schoolboy mile on Friday, and Douglas Lin of White Plains High School won races yesterday in the West Point interscholastic track and field meet at the Gillis Fieldhouse on the military academy's grounds.
Barket captured the 800-meter run in 1 minute 57.04 seconds, beating Adyese Innis of Brooklyn's Wingate High.
Lin, a senior who was a half-miler last year, easily won the 1,500 meters in 4:09.73, equivalent to about a 4:27 mile.


Plan for Croatia Would Give Serbs Autonomy in Some Areas
With war looming again in Croatia, diplomats are about to offer an American-backed peace plan that would provide substantial autonomy to Serbs in some areas of the nearly one-third of the country they occupy in return for their recognition of Croatia's sovereignty and international borders.
"The plan is the last chance to avoid another war here," one Western diplomat said.
"It's going to be equally difficult for both sides to accept, but the alternative is a war in the spring."


Data Change May Distort Auto Sales
Just as investors and auto companies are straining to see signs of the strength or weakness of the auto market, one of the clearest signals -- monthly sales reports -- is vanishing in a statistical fog.
Changes that most companies are making in how they report sales mean that the January results, to be reported this week, are likely to look even limper than they actually are.
The changes seem arcane, but their effects may well panic investors, already edgy over signs that the market may be weakening as interest rates climb.


Princess Cruise Is Under Review
Princess Cruise Lines has placed its account in review after seven years at Lintas Campbell-Ewald in Warren, Mich.
The billings were estimated at $25 million.


Newhall Land &amp; Farming Co.(NHL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Steve Young Showcases His 21st Century Offense
IN his early years as Joe Montana's backup on the 49ers, Steve Young was a millionaire, but he wasn't living like one.
"He was staying in my house," offensive tackle Harris Barton recalled.
"One day late in the 1988 season I opened his dresser drawer to get a pair of socks, and there were 13 uncashed checks in there. More than a million dollars. I guess he didn't feel like he was earning those paychecks enough to cash them."


American Freightways Corp.(AFWY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Geon Co. (GON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Apple South Inc.(APSO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Merger of Shops For Spanish Ads
Two agencies affiliated with D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles that specialize in advertising aimed at Spanish-speaking consumers have agreed to merge, forming a shop with combined billings estimated at $111 million.
The terms were not disclosed.
Sosa, Bromley, Aguilar &amp; Associates in San Antonio and Noble &amp; Asociados in Irvine, Calif., said on Friday that the merged agency would be named Sosa, Bromley, Aguilar, Noble &amp; Associates and would become the largest of its kind in the country, according to rankings by Hispanic Business Inc.


Faster Than a Speeding Bullet, But Also Humanly Fallible
In his latest action epic, "Rumble in the Bronx," Asia's box-office king, Jackie Chan, heroically leaps from a bridge and onto a moving Hovercraft in hot pursuit of a gang of kidnappers.
What the film doesn't show, however, is what happened after Mr.
Chan landed on the boat.
He fell backward, his right foot twisted and pointing almost directly behind his body.
He was carried off in a stretcher to the nearest hospital, where he was confined to a wheelchair for weeks.
It's all just show business for Mr.
Chan, a 40-year-old Hong Kong action-comedy director, actor and choreographer who, for more than 20 years, has refused to let a stunt man fill in for him during dangerous scenes.
Unlike most late-night chop-socky movies, his are generally well filmed and well plotted, and known for their funny, fast-paced action scenes.


Mylan Labs (MYL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Second Ameling Recital
Elly Ameling, whose farewell recital on April 9 at Alice Tully Hall is sold out, has scheduled a second recital on April 2 at 8 P.M.
Miss Ameling, the Dutch soprano, will sing an all-Schubert program, accompanied by Dalton Baldwin.
Tickets, at $25 and $35, are available at the box office or through Center Charge, (212) 721-6500.


PATAKI IS GAINING SUPPORT ON EASING DRUG PRISON TERMS
In a major shift for the Republicans, Gov.
George E. Pataki and legislative leaders are in general agreement on a weakening of the 1973 laws that mandated stiff sentences for drug offenders but that have also propelled prison costs and quintupled the number of inmates since then.
The laws, enacted under another Republican Governor, Nelson A. Rockefeller, have survived two decades despite wide criticism and increasing attempts by Democrats, especially Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, to overhaul them.
But over the last week Mr.
Pataki, the new Republican Governor who ran on a platform of getting tough on crime, has floated the idea of an overhaul and, for the first time, leaders in the Republican-controlled State Senate -- who have been the main obstacle in the past -- said they could support revision.


La Quinta Inns Inc.(LQI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stiff Sentences and Crowded Prisons
The drug laws passed in 1973 under Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller were aimed at cracking down on the heroin trade, but critics say the measures have been far more effective at filling prisons with relatively low-level drug users and dealers who may benefit more from treatment than jail time.
Amended slightly over the years, the laws have two basic components.
The first are mandatory prison terms -- ranging from three years to life in prison -- for those convicted of various drug offenses.
The second requires judges to impose a prison term on anyone convicted of a second felony within 10 years of the first.
The shortest sentence is one and a half years.
For anyone convicted of possessing any amount of the drugs with the intent to sell, the term under the second felony law is four and a half to nine years.


Savoy Pictures' High and Low Roads
So you want to be in pictures?
That's just what Victor A. Kaufman wanted three years ago when he founded Savoy Pictures Entertainment, an independent film distributor.
Still looking for his first profits, he now wants to be in the film production and television station businesses as well.


Hijacking History
The atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki rest uneasily in the American memory.
As they should.
No decision taken by an American President so swiftly altered the world, conquered an enemy and leveled two large cities, killing tens of thousands of civilians.
It is no surprise that historians still sift through the records of the Truman Administration looking for new information about the decision, and that Americans still debate whether the use of atomic bombs was justified or wise.
To reduce the complexities or painful ambiguities of the issue to slogans or historical shorthand is wrong.
To let politicians and groups with a particular interest frame the discussion and determine the conclusion is worse.
But that is precisely what is happening as the Smithsonian Institution tries to prepare an exhibit at the National Air and Space Museum of the Enola Gay, the plane used to drop the first atomic bomb over Hiroshima 50 years ago this August.
The Smithsonian effort, while not without its own missteps, is in danger of being hijacked by a band of Congressmen and veterans outraged that the exhibit does not tell just their side of the story.


Clinical Trials Giving Glimpses of Abortion Pill
All afternoon, the two women sat in a small examining room at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan and waited -- anxiously but patiently -- for the bleeding and cramping that would signal that the French abortion pill was working.
The 21-year old college student, six weeks pregnant and referred to Columbia-Presbyterian's obstetrics and gynecology department by her college health service, was convinced it would work: she had had some nausea and bleeding since taking the three small white pills two days earlier.
And two hours after taking the second round of pills, after 15 minutes of intense cramping, the tiny sac the doctors call "the products of conception" passed out of her, and relief washed across her face.


Levitz Furniture (LFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rival Co.(RIVL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Crown Crafts Inc.(CRW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Americana Sells Well at Christie's
The Americana collection of Eddy G. Nicholson, a New Hampshire investor who bought in the 1980's as prices escalated, was auctioned on Friday and Saturday at Christie's.
The sale total -- $13.6 million -- was $1.6 million above Christie's expectations.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about an agreement by the Nynex Corporation that would let a rival company offer competing telephone services in New York State misstated the name of the regulatory body for telephone service.
It is the Public Service Commission, not the Public Utilities Commission.


Philip Burton, 90; Taught and Adopted Richard Burton
Philip Burton, a stage director and actor and the foster father of Richard Burton, died on Saturday at the William Crane Gray Inn nursing home in Davenport, Fla.
He was 90.
He had had a severe stroke a few days earlier, a spokesman for the home said.


Filling Up Air Time: The Good, the Bad And the Truly Boring
In a Super Bowl decided at 1:24 into the first quarter, I wondered about:
1.
The spiritual connection between the Chargers' devastated safeties and the singer Tony Bennett.
None of them belonged on the field last night, most of all Bennett -- an inexplicable part of the inexplicably dreadful Disney-produced halftime show -- who lacked a nutty headdress like Patti LaBelle's.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  CHECHEN CAPITAL IN RUINS  After seven weeks of war between Russia and the breakaway region of Chechnya, the Chechen capital, Grozny, has been reduced to largely deserted ruins.
A1


Enron Oil &amp; Gas (EOG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


General Rose, and His Orders
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, whose one-year tenure as U.N. commander in Bosnia ended last week, had a thankless assignment.
He was supposed to protect civilians in Bosnia's besieged cities, but had neither the mandate nor the means to repulse their Serbian besiegers.
In theory, the U.N. is neutral between aggressors and victims in Bosnia's dirty war.
Even allowing for the toughness of the job, General Rose damaged the U.N.'s credibility.
His efforts to avoid confrontation and protect his troops went beyond the narrow dictates of neutrality.
He began well enough last January, cooperating with NATO efforts to get the Serbs to pull back artillery from the hills surrounding Sarajevo.
But when the Serbs shifted their attention to Gorazde, General Rose impeded effective NATO air strikes.
Later, he seemed to encourage Serbian military operations around Sarajevo's airport.
Most recently, at Bihac, he seemed to ignore the Security Council's instructions to protect civilians.


Knicks Turn It Around At the Suns' Expense
The Knicks entered the game in a sour mood, and they responded with a sweet performance.
Smarting from Friday night's one-sided loss to the Hornets in Charlotte, the Knicks had their way with the Phoenix Suns yesterday.
New York had its best rebounding game of the season.
Anthony Mason had the best rebounding game of his career with 19.
And while the Suns' Charles Barkley was not very impressed, it was fairly impressive to everyone else.


Mandela, Visiting India, Discusses Arms Exports and an Indian Ocean Trading Bloc
An emotional journey to India this week by Nelson Mandela, the South African President, was used by both nations to broach the possibility of an Indian Ocean trading bloc that could include perhaps a dozen other nations.
Mr.
Mandela's trip, his first to India since he became South Africa's leader last year, was used mainly to celebrate the links forged between the two nations during the struggle against apartheid in South Africa.


Golden Poultry (CHIK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 24


Arnell Group Wins Samsung Unit Job
The consumer electronics division of Samsung Electronics America has selected the Arnell Group in New York to handle its advertising and marketing account, which had been at Poppe Tyson in New York for the last four years.
The billings were not disclosed.


Golden Poultry (CHIK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 24


In Performance; POP
A 40-Member Orchestra With a Downtown Sound  Spit Orchestra The Kitchen
Many ensembles have popped up in the last decade with the intention of interpreting contemporary and experimental music, whether the work of composers in the East Village, scores from old television shows, ethnic folk songs or the grooves of rock records.
But the Spit Orchestra is a rarity: it has 40 members, which makes it larger than the audience one often finds at concerts of the composers whose work it is dedicated to performing.


Barkley Is a Role Model After All
A FEW minutes before 11 yesterday morning, one hour before tipoff against the Knicks, Charles Barkley looked and sounded as if he were operating on Pacific Standard Time.
He slumped in his seat and refused to say something Barkleyesque.
He seemed unfazed by the questions, and unmoved.
He put his guest tickets in the wrong envelopes and had to tear them apart.
He is less than one month from his 32d birthday and his body does not always cooperate the way it did.
It is not so easy being Charles Barkley every day anymore.


Scott Backs Up Words With Deeds
A week ago, James Scott stood in the bowels of Madison Square Garden and did what coaches hate most.
He went to the news media and publicly lobbied for a spot in the starting lineup.
"It's time for some changes," he said after a 94-87 loss to Pittsburgh that afternoon.
It was the Red Storm's fifth straight defeat in a losing streak that would grow to six two days later with a loss at Georgetown, where Scott again was not part of the starting lineup.


Micropolis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


F.B.I. to Study Why It Took So Long to Find Spy
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has begun reviewing whether its agents overlooked clues that might have unmasked Aldrich H. Ames as a spy inside the C.I.A. for Moscow long before his arrest last year, F.B.I. officials said today.
The officials said the review was in an early phase and would examine the bureau's role in the long efforts to find a reason for damage to American intelligence before the F.B.I. caught up with Mr.
Ames.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Jan. 12 about the resignation of the chief executive of Borland International Inc. misstated the peak price of the company's stock in daily Nasdaq trading.
Its highest closing price was $86 a share on Jan. 2, 1992, not the low 80's in late 1991.


To Some, Goal Is to Get Away From Football's Big Day
As the kickoff approached last night for what had come to be known as California's Interstate Highway Super Bowl, some New Yorkers prepared for the moment by dreaming of the mighty 1990 Giants or concentrating on the fine art of napkin folding.
There were some of the usual parties, of course, with Hollywood celebrities inexplicably fleeing the Golden State for an invitation-only beer and pizza bash at Sardi's that featured football raffles and referee waiters in black-and-white stripes.


Clinton Tests Cooler Congressional Waters on Raising the Minimum Wage
After a month of trial balloons and uncertainty within the Administration over how best to push for a higher minimum wage, this much has become clear: the White House is still grappling with the question of how best to act in a new political world dominated by a Republican Congress.
Just last Tuesday night, President Clinton promised that he would fight for an increase in the minimum wage, now $4.25 an hour, only to have his aides disclose the next morning that he had no immediate plans to submit legislation calling for that step.


New Rigas Bid Rejected
The owners of the Pirates have rejected a revised bid from JOHN RIGAS to buy the team, the Pittsburgh television station KDKA-TV reported yesterday.
Rigas, the cable TV entrepreneur with major league baseball's permission to negotiate a purchase, increased his initial $80 million offer Friday.
He and city officials said the new bid was worth nearly $90 million.
However, the Pirates said Rigas proposed no extra cash for the owners but instead offered stock in the team and a pledge to try to find other investors who want to buy its stock.


Commerce Group Inc.(COMG,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Dividend Meetings


Oxford Resources (OXFD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reporter's Notebook; It's Almost Jury's Turn in Zion Trial
On Friday, after 11 weeks of trial, testimony in the lawsuit against New York Hospital and four doctors in the death of 18-year-old Libby Zion concluded at last, leaving many questions unanswered.
Forty-five, and counting.


Essay; After Yeltsin, Who?
In the most recent poll of Russian voters, Grigory Yavlinsky -- his name means "The Man Who Appears" -- now draws more support for president than Boris Yeltsin.
That says less about the growing strength of the 42-year-old economist from Lvov, head of a reformist bloc in Parliament, than it does about the collapse of public backing for the president who ordered 60,000 troops to wipe out a few thousand secessionaries in Chechnya.


Callaway Golf Co. (ELY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Insteel Industries Inc.(III,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


L. M. Falicov, 61, Theoretical Physicist
Dr.
Leopoldo M. Falicov, a theoretical physicist and professor emeritus at the University of California at Berkeley, died on Tuesday at the Alta Bates Hospital in Berkeley.
He was 61.
The cause was cancer of the esophagus, the university said.


Food Fear Forces Jet To Return
Two hours after taking off from Kennedy International Airport, an American Airlines jetliner bound for London turned back to New York Saturday night after a flight attendant discovered that food being served to 61 passengers appeared to be contaminated, an airline spokesman said yesterday.
"The attendant noticed what looked like dirt, or some foreign material, inside the packaging and reported to the captain," Joe Crawley, the spokesman, said.
"The pilot was concerned that the food might be contaminated and didn't want to serve it to the passengers. He made the decision to return."


Give Juries Power To Dispense Mercy
To the Editor:
As Gov.
George E. Pataki and the New York Legislature try to create a system of capital punishment that can impose death fairly, they will be made aware of some features such a bill should possess, like provisions to minimize the influence of race in capital sentencing, to guarantee competent counsel and to present the sentencing jury with a meaningful alternative punishment to death, such as life without parole.


Bill Sales Set By Treasury
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills and an auction of 52-week bills on Thursday.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.73 percent, a six-month bill was 6.10 percent and a one-year bill was 6.35 percent.


Comair Holdings Inc.(COMR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nameless Menace In Latest By Foote
A menacing secret lazes around, sharklike, just beneath the comparatively placid surface of "The Young Man From Atlanta," the sorrowful, satiric new play by Horton Foote that opened on Friday night at the Kampo Cultural Center.
The secret is never mentioned by the characters whose lives it threatens to ruin.
Having no name, it can't be spoken even on a dare.
Instead, it's always referred to indirectly, and with a kind of puzzled Christian innocence that denies the secret's corrosive effects.
Mr.
Foote's characters say that everything's all right, but he knows better.
After "Talking Pictures" and "Night Seasons," the Signature Theater Company continues its season devoted to the playwright with a first-rate production of a work that will haunt you long after the performance.
"The Young Man From Atlanta" is both quintessential Horton Foote and, in terms of subtext, one of his least characteristic works.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Mexico's Financial Crisis
President Clinton's proposal to aid Mexico is all but dead in its present form, say Democratic and Republican leaders, who worry that the $40 billion loan-guarantee package would bail out investors but not save many jobs on Main Street.  [ Page A1. ]
Tens of thousands of American jobs could be lost as a result of the plunge of the Mexican peso and the resulting sharp drop in Mexicans' buying power, according to new estimates.  [ D4. ]


Iowa-Illinois Gas &amp; Electric Co. (IWG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Topics of The Times; Turning Points
The political "revolution" in Washington has inspired the Governors of New York and New Jersey to parade a little local pride in the real Revolution two centuries ago -- long before there was a beltway.
Gov.
George Pataki started the bidding at his inauguration in Albany on New Year's Day.
He recalled that "the battle on a farm not far from here near Saratoga was the turning point in that revolution" -- because the British surrender there in October 1777 led the French to ally with the colonies.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman trumpeted a different "turning point" in her response to President Clinton's State of the Union last week -- the Battle of Trenton.
"On Christmas morning in 1776," she said, "George Washington crossed the icy Delaware River and surprised King George's mercenaries in their barracks here on these grounds." That was a turning point because it followed a series of defeats.


49ers Crush Chargers in Super Bowl XXIX
The heavily favored San Francisco 49ers swept to a 49-26 victory over the San Diego Chargers in Super Bowl XXIX yesterday in Miami, extending the National Football Conference's Super Bowl domination to 11 straight victories, this one by a margin that made the latest triumph more rout than ritual.
The 49ers, favored by as many as 20 points, jumped to an 18-point lead in the first half (28-10) and led by as many as 31 points in the second half, coming within a touchdown of matching the team's own Super Bowl record of 55 points, set in 1990.


Crompton &amp; Knowles Corp.(CNK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about a proposal to cut Philadelphia's payroll tax misstated the party affiliation of Mayor Edward G. Rendell in some copies.
He is a Democrat.


A Window of Hope Slams on A.F.C. Fan
FOOLED again.
I'm sitting in half-empty Joe Robbie Stadium watching the final seconds of a game that was over at least an hour before, wondering how I got suckered this time.
Super duped into thinking that this would be the game.
That after 11 seasons, going back to 1984, the San Diego Chargers would break the shackles that have followed the A.F.C. through a time line that began eons ago when the American Football League and the National Football League were blood rivals.
After all these years, the Big Brother-Little Brother relationship persists.
The streak lives.
Once again the N.F.C. takes candy from a baby.
San Francisco 49, San Diego 26.


Rebel Capital in the Caucasus Now a City of Living Wraiths
The city of Grozny is gone now.
There are still roads, but they are marked by bomb craters, and there are buildings standing, but they are in flames.
There are landmarks and street signs and dogs and burnt trees.
There are even people, but they risk their lives each time they emerge from their basement shelters for a sip of muddy water.
After seven weeks of war between Russia and the breakaway region of Chechnya, this is no longer a city.


As a Prop for the 90's, the Cigar Flourishes
A decade after being left for dead, the expensive foreign-made cigar is back.
Imports of premium cigars have surged 29 percent in the last three years, even as cheaper machine-made cigars have been sinking in popularity.
Long the ensign of the fat cat and the power wannabe, premium cigars, which generally cost a few dollars and are nearly always handmade outside the United States, account for less than 6 percent of all cigars sold.


Regis Corp.(RGIS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Laclede Steel (LCLD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


QMS Inc.(AQM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Children's Magazines Seek Ads
The first comprehensive study of children's magazines and of the effectiveness of advertisements in these publications indicates that one reason children read magazines is they "like looking at the ads."
And -- sweet music to magazine executives -- 88 percent of the children said that compared with television commercials, "it's easier to show your parents" a magazine ad.


Stand Up, Again, to the N.R.A.
When he put together his "Contract With America," Newt Gingrich, though certainly no fan of gun control, had the strategic good sense not to call for the repeal of a provision in the 1994 crime bill banning 19 types of assault weapons.
Smart move: About four-fifths of the American public is on record as favoring the ban.
But there are plenty of House Republicans who yearn for repeal.
Their contract is not with America but with the National Rifle Association.


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI SEEKS TO EASE '73 DRUG LAWS
In a major shift for the Republicans, Governor Pataki and legislative leaders are in general agreement on a weakening of the 1973 laws that mandated stiff sentences for drug offenders but that have also propelled prison costs and quintupled the number of inmates.
A1.


Neo-Fascists Remodel Their Party in Italy
In the final hour of Italy's neo-Fascist party, which died here this weekend to make way for a more moderate successor, a wave of emotion swept through the delegates to a party congress.
Some wept openly, others sang the old party anthem, and a few leapt on their chairs to throw out their right arms in one last demonstration of the Fascist salute.
By Saturday morning, the Italian Social Movement -- a party formed in 1946 by Benito Mussolini's last followers -- was gone, replaced by the National Alliance.
As an embryonic umbrella organization, the Alliance passed its first test in Italy's elections last spring, with 13.5 percent of the vote.


The Ants Go Marching, Relentlessly
More than 30 million years ago, the ant went forth to be fruitful and multiply, beginning what Edward O. Wilson, the estimable Harvard University biologist, calls a great success story of natural history.
His engrossing account of how the ants did it, set to remarkable pictures of hordes of the insects breeding, battling and nurturing, makes "Little Creatures Who Run the World" a notable work even by the high standards of "Nova" and its British suppliers.
At the heart of the ants' achievement, as Mr.
Wilson, the world's most prominent ant aficionado, sees it, "is quite simply the way they work together." But that is not to say that ant society is a kibbutz.
It is more like a brave old world, rigidly structured, with robotic workers following the dictates of chemical messages and slaving endlessly in behalf of their ruler queen and her spawn.
Keeping the colony thriving is the sole object of lives that are individually short but collectively enduring: a model of individual sacrifice for the greater good.


Anadarko Petroleum Corp.(APC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


G&amp;K Services Inc.(GKSRA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Vision of a Rosy Future For Man and Machine
BEING DIGITAL  By Nicholas Negroponte  243 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
Nicholas Negroponte, the author of "Being Digital," is not a bookish sort of person.
For one thing, he introduces himself as a dyslexic who doesn't like to read.
For another, he is a professor of media technology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as well as the founding director of the M.I.T.
Media Lab.
Both roles involve him in modes of communication that are alternatives to books.


Newmont Gold Co.(NGC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Shredded and Stymied, Seau and the Defense Fall Silent
They would not hold back, the Chargers promised.
There was no way that the slick 49ers would finesse them.
The San Diego defense would attack.
The Chargers would stop the vaunted San Francisco offense from producing 40-yard gains after 8-yard completions.
They would spring linebacker Junior Seau into the running and receiving lanes, allowing him to manhandle anyone wearing an opposing uniform.
But in the end, San Francisco did anything it wanted to do.


American National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Geon Co. (GON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


LEADERS IN STATES PLEDGE TO REDUCE TAXES THIS YEAR
Taking a cue from the new Republican-controlled Congress in Washington, political leaders in more than half the nation's state capitals have pledged to cut taxes this year.
And the rancorous debate is less about whether to cut taxes than about which taxes to cut -- and by how much.
Paradoxically, though, many fiscal experts are warning that such cuts could prove perilous precisely because Congress itself is thinking of making major cuts in Federal aid to the states.


Detroit Edison Co. (DTE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about a border conflict between Ecuador and Peru misstated the number of reported deaths among Ecuadorean soldiers in some editions.
It was 3, not 13.


Martin Marietta Materials Inc.(MLM,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Smith Corona Corp.(SCO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


49ers Use Deception To Score Quickly
The San Francisco 49ers relied on deception to score two quick touchdowns today, then got into the end zone one more time on their third possession, becoming the first Super Bowl team to score the first three times they had the ball.
The 49ers' first two touchdowns -- a 44-yard pass play to receiver Jerry Rice and a 51-yarder to running back Ricky Watters -- came off play-action fakes to fullback William Floyd.


Corrections
The At the Bar column on Friday misstated the year of the Boston Massacre in some editions.
It was 1770, not 1768.


ResultsPlus
N.H.L.
Penguins Stay Perfect at 5-0  Jaromir Jagr extended his goal-scoring streak to five games and had two assists yesterday as the Pittsburgh Penguins kept their perfect record intact by beating the Washington Capitals, 4-1, in Landover, Md.
Kevin Stevens, Jagr and Ron Francis scored in the opening 7 minutes 44 seconds to propel the Penguins to their fifth straight victory, including four on the road.
Jagr has five goals and a team-best 9 points for Pittsburgh. (AP) FLYERS 2, CANADIENS 2: Ron Hextall made 30 saves -- including 6 in overtime -- and Rob DiMaio's goal early in the third period enabled Philadelphia to tie at Montreal.
DiMaio, replacing the flu-stricken Eric Lindros, tipped Mikael Renberg's pass over goaltender Patrick Roy's shoulder to tie the score with 17:55 remaining. (AP) MEN'S BASKETBALL  Wake Forest Rebounds  Tim Duncan broke double figures in points (22) and rebounds (14) for the 10th time this season as No. 16 Wake Forest overcame a sluggish offense yesterday for a 63-51 victory over Vanderbilt in Winston-Salem, N.C.
The victory was redemption after North Carolina beat Wake Forest, 62-61, Saturday on a last-second shot. (AP) WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  Tennessee Rips Mississippi  Nikki McCray scored 12 of her 19 points in the first 15 minutes 30 seconds, and No. 2-ranked Tennessee cruised to a surprisingly easy 83-48 victory at home over No. 16 Mississippi yesterday.
McCray's outburst gave Tennessee (19-1, 6-0 Southeastern Conference) a 30-9 lead. (AP) HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL  Lost Weekend for Lincoln  Lincoln High School of Brooklyn, the nation's No. 4 rated boys' high school basketball team, lost twice this weekend in the Charm City Classic at Dunbar High in Baltimore.
On Friday, Stephon Marbury scored 21 points in a 61-55 loss to Lake Clifton (13-1) of Baltimore.
Marbury was then held to 12 points in the Southeast consolation game, in which Lincoln (15-3) lost to Dunbar, 70-58.
Meanwhile, St.
Anthony (14-2) of Jersey City won the Southeast final by beating Dunbar (14-1), by 68-66, on Friday, and Lake Clifton (13-1), by 79-47, on Saturday.
HORSE RACING  Doubts About Mr.
Greeley  Nick Zito's star sprinter Mr.
Greeley, who ran second in the Hutcheson Stakes at Gulfstream on Saturday, was found to have suffered internal bleeding during the race, adding to doubts that the colt will run in the Kentucky Derby.
"Maybe he's just a sprinter," Zito said yesterday at Gulfstream Park.
"The doctor said on a scale of 1 to 10, the bleeding was in the middle range." The trainer said the colt would run on the drug Lasix in the Swale Stakes on March 11, a seven-furlong race held on the same day as the Florida Derby at a mile and an eighth.
After that, he was not certain about taking Mr.
Greeley to New York, where Lasix and other medications are outlawed.
Mr.
Greeley set lightning fractions in the Hutcheson, running the half-mile in 44 seconds flat and the three-quarters in 1:091/5 before yielding as Valid Wager caught and passed him in the homestretch.
In the Super Bowl Handicap, the 7-year-old horse Misil not only outran Turk Passer by 2 1/4 lengths but also knocked 2 seconds off the track record for a mile and three-eighths on the grass.
Misil, owned by Horafuki Kai and trained by Christophe Clement, led all the way as he won in 2:111/5 under Jose Santos and paid $7.40.
GOLF  Singh Wins Phoenix Open  Vijay Singh, coming off a year in which he was troubled by a bad back, two-putted from 50 feet yesterday to par the first playoff hole and win the Phoenix Open at Scottsdale, Ariz., defeating Billy Mayfair.
Singh and Mayfair started the round at 10 under and shot five-under-par 66's, finishing at 15-under 269. (AP) FLOYD PUTT EARNS $290,000: At the Senior Skins Game in Kohala Coast, Hawaii, Raymond Floyd rolled in an 8-footer yesterday at No. 17 to win $290,000, the richest hole in Skins history.
Floyd won $420,000 for the two-day event.
Jack Nicklaus won the four other Skins yesterday and $120,000, including $40,000 by sinking a putt for an eagle 3 at the final hole.
Arnold Palmer, who had won two of the past three Senior Skins, and Lee Trevino were shut out. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Morceli Just Misses Mark  Noureddine Morceli of Algeria barely missed his 1,500-meter world indoor record yesterday, falling short by only .13 seconds at an international track meet at Grenoble France.
Morceli, opening his indoor season, was timed in 3 minutes 34.29 seconds.
His record is 3:34.16, set at Seville, Spain, in February 1991.
Morceli holds the world outdoor mile, 1,500 and 3,000 world records. (AP)


Dorsey Trailers Inc.(DSYT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kennametal Inc.(KMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
BONNIE RAITT was happy to lend her name to a Fender guitar, in exchange for help with a program to encourage more girls to play.
The Bonnie Raitt Signature Series Stratocaster will be the first Fender named after a woman.
The electric guitar will be in stores next spring, priced at $1,500.


Laclede Gas (LG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pyramid Technology Corp.(PYRD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Working Against Type but Serving Balanchine's Ethos
The New York City Ballet soloists Ethan Stiefel and Albert Evans were named principal dancers over the weekend amid other promotions that raised the corps members Alexander Ritter and Jenifer Ringer to soloist rank.
As the season's first performance of George Balanchine's "Harlequinade" and "Four Temperaments" showed again on Friday night at the New York State Theater, the company's hierarchical labels serve to confirm talent rather than reveal it.


High Waters in Western Europe


James P. Grant, Unicef Chief And Aid Expert, Is Dead at 72
James P. Grant, the American foreign aid expert who in 1980 became executive director of Unicef and made it into a major force for helping children, died on Saturday in Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco, N. Y. He was 72 and lived in Croton, N. Y.
The cause of death was cancer, Unicef officials said.
Mr.
Grant resigned from the United Nations Children's Fund last week.


Burr-Brown Corp.(BBRC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Observing Auschwitz Anniversary, Pope Decries Anti-Semitism
Pope John Paul II, marking the 50th anniversary of the liberation of the Auschwitz death camp in his native Poland, issued a strong condemnation of anti-Semitism and the "arrogance of nationalisms" today, and called on the world to pray and work to prevent "other modern-day Auschwitzes."
The Pope has spoken out previously against the tragedy and horror of the Holocaust and today, in his regular Sunday address at St.
Peter's Square, he said that the anniversary brought back memories of "one of the darkest and most tragic hours of history."


Arizona Moves Up Its Primary To Catch Political Limelight
"I'm tired of Arizona being ignored by the rest of the country!" declared Gov.
Fife Symington, setting off one of the noisiest skirmishes between states since Long Island tried to send its garbage by barge to North Carolina.
"The West is rising!"
Indeed, in past years Arizona has been little more than a whistle stop for national candidates on their way to California.
The only attention it got was over the peculiarities of its governors, like Rose Mofford and her platinum beehive hair-do and Evan Mecham, a former Pontiac dealer who was removed from office for misuse of state money.


Gilbert Associates Inc.(GILBA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


A Sort of Cinderella Prevails at Sundance
Three weeks ago, Edward Burns was driving a van for a television program, living on peanut-butter sandwiches in a Greenwich Village tenement and struggling to put the final touches on his first movie, "The Brothers McMullan," for the Sundance Film Festival here.
By this morning, Mr.
Burns was not only celebrating his 27th birthday but also enjoying the role of Cinderella after unexpectedly winning the Grand Jury Prize for best dramatic film at Sundance, the nation's premier festival for independent movies.


Rise in Subway Fare Makes for a Tax Increase in Disguise
To the Editor:
Will subway and bus riders have to pay $1.50 for a token, the cost of a slice of pizza (news article, Jan. 22)?
They will if Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani persists in a "let them eat pizza" attitude to commuters.


Air Fares For Denver Will Rise
United Airlines, American Airlines and Continental Airlines said yesterday that they would increase the round-trip fares on flights starting or ending in Denver by an average of $40, to offset the much higher costs of operating at the new Denver International Airport.
The increases will take effect on March 6.
Frontier Airlines has said it will raise round-trip fares by $30 beginning on March 1.


Bandag Inc.(BDG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


At Forum, Peso Draws Attention
The off-the-record breakfast here on Saturday was palpably tense, as more than 60 executives from around the world gathered to listen to Mexican officials explain what went wrong with their management of the peso and the Mexican debt.
One participant said he thought an apology was expected from Mexico and when it was not received, people were upset.


2 New Sitcoms, 1 New Network
Trying to snag a share of the presumable profits on what is being envisioned, so far fuzzily, as an entertainment superhighway combining broadcast television and cable, an aspiring new network called United Paramount is dipping its toe in the treacherous electronic waters.
In New York, UPN is being carried on Channel 9 on Monday and Tuesday evenings.
New shows!
New faces!
The only thing missing so far is a hint of originality.
The centerpiece of the UPN dessert cart is the hourlong "Voyager," still another "Star Trek" spinoff, which can be seen Mondays at 8 P.M.
It is followed by two new sitcoms: "Platypus Man," which will remind viewers of "Home Improvement" and any other sitcom given life by a stand-up comic, and, at 9:30, "Pig Sty," which uses the old ensemble formula that, as the current hit "Friends" proves, is apparently indestructible.


Aid for Mexico Loses Backing In Both Parties
When President Clinton decided earlier this month that the United States urgently needed to bail out Mexico from a deepening financial crisis, he argued that his primary purpose was to save the jobs of hundreds of thousands of Americans who labor to produce exports to America's third-largest trading partner.
But after two weeks of public hearings and behind-the-scenes arm-twisting, leaders of both parties are declaring Mr.
Clinton's proposal all but dead in its present form, even though estimates of the number of American jobs at risk are growing.  [ Page D4. ]


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Bach on a High Plane, With Ornamentation  Sergei Schepkin, pianist Weill Recital Hall
Sergei Schepkin is an extraordinary young pianist who has made the keyboard music of Bach his central preoccupation.
On Friday night, two years after his New York debut, he played Bach's six Partitas with striking purity of tone, complete technical control and restless intelligence.
It was a long evening, even without repeats in many of the movements' second sections, but Mr.
Schepkin's lofty perspective held one mesmerized.


Rangers Peer Into Division Cellar
Five games. Four losses. Four goals scored in those defeats.
The Rangers were shut out, 2-0, by Stephane Fiset and the Quebec Nordiques Saturday night for their third consecutive defeat.


Arkansas Turns Back and Beats the Clock
Scotty Thurman's last shot was nowhere near as smooth as the one that won a national championship last spring.
It was about as smooth as this strange Arkansas season.
With Arkansas a point behind and in danger of a fifth defeat and Kentucky within seconds of preserving a perfect Southeastern Conference record, Thurman made the connection the Razorbacks desperately needed.
His 18-foot shot with 10.6 seconds to play, over the reach of Wildcat guard Jeff Sheppard, became the difference in a 94-92 Razorback victory that took Arkansas an essential step toward fulfilling its coach's request.


Goulds Pumps Inc.(GULD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2 Lowe Executives Take New Positions
Two top executives at Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York are leaving for other assignments.
Richard Villante, a vice chairman at Lowe, will become president at the Allied Communications Group, a new unit of Lowe's parent, the Interpublic Group of Companies.
Mr.
Villante, 53, who has been with Lowe for the last 24 years, will coordinate Interpublic's growing roster of related service companies, which include infomercial producers, television programmers and interactive joint ventures like All American Communications, Brockway Direct Response TV and Time Warner Interactive.


Battered Immigrants Find a Haven
The room was bright and smelled of strong coffee.
The women, seeking strength in one another's faces, huddled around a table laden with food they had cooked.
In this place where they felt safe, they discussed the problem that has made them feel so desperate and alone.
Anzhela, the first to speak, described how her husband would disappear for weeks in their native Uzbekistan, then abuse her when he returned.
After they immigrated to New York, the violence grew worse.


Ice May Be the Main Enemy on Leg III of BOC
For most sailors, rounding Cape Horn is a rite of passage equivalent to a mountain climber's reaching the top of Everest.
But for Steve Pettengill, the solo sailor who is second so far in the BOC yacht race around the world, the meaning of the Cape Horn runs deeper still.
He has sailed by that remote spit of land at the tip of South America twice before.
On the first occasion, a record-setting voyage from New York to San Francisco in 1989, Pettengill scattered the ashes of his dog, Frodo, into the roiling sea.


Great-West Lifeco reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Topics of The Times; Now, This Is Reality
For at least one soap opera devotee, the O.J.
Simpson trial came along at a very bad time.
Never had the plot of her TV passion of the moment been so riveting.
The show's heroine was possessed by Satan, in whose cause she had incinerated a Christmas tree, torn up a church and (in the guise of a woman for whom he had lusted in an earlier life) tried to seduce a priest.


Slopping the Hogs, the Assembly-Line Way
Barney Rhodes gave up his father's poultry and corn farm in 1983, trading the risks of working on the land for a construction business.
But about two years ago, he started getting other ideas when farmer after farmer asked him to build long, low cinder-block buildings for a mechanized, assembly-line system of hog rearing.


New Focus on Cable Competition; Latest Technologies Giving Communities Greater Leverage
One day, Harry Taubenfeld turned on the television in his daughter's house in Westchester County and discovered something that really ticked him off.
"I looked over her channels," Mr.
Taubenfeld recalled.
"She's got the Comedy Channel, this channel, that channel. Two C-Spans! She shows me the bill -- and she was paying one dollar less than me. For 60 channels! And I've got only 27!"


Timbuktu Journal; In a Fabled Faraway Place, No Escape From Fear
There were only four guests, all staying for a single night, during a recent week at the Relais Azalai, this town's one modern hotel, forcing disconsolate tourist guides to trudge through streets of deep sand in a vain search for clients.
Souvenir merchants, wearing turbans against the fierce sun and fine grit borne in the breeze, kept a determined lookout at the hotel's gate, hoping to unload some of their finely engraved sabers.
The museum's curator stays home these days, leaving the museum, with its 500-year-old manuscripts and other relics of a great but distant past, boarded shut.


CHRONICLE
What's in a name . . . when it's Helsenrott?
The Helsenrott Jewish Mortuary is the setting for "Grandma Sylvia's Funeral," a theatrical rendition of a funeral service in which audience members are participants.
The play has been running since October at the Playhouse on Vandam in Manhattan.


Northwest Natural Gas Co.(NWNG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Masland Corp.(MSLD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Paul de Rosiere, 87, A Cartier Executive
Viscount Paul de Rosiere, an international businessman who was an executive for the Cartier and Harry Winston jewelry companies, died on Jan. 19 at the Hospice of Palm Beach, in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 87 and had lived in Palm Beach since his retirement in 1988.
The cause was endomyocarditis, said his wife of 38 years, Viscountess Harriette de Rosiere, the former Harriette d'Arbonson Moeller of Columbus, Ohio, and New York.


Abroad at Home; On Madison's Grave
"Miracle at Philadelphia," Catherine Drinker Bowen called her book on the Constitutional Convention of 1787.
And it was a political miracle.
The delegates produced a document that has ordered a huge country for 200 years, balancing state and nation, government power and individual rights.
The Constitution has been amended 27 times.
Some of the changes have been profound: the Bill of Rights, the end of slavery.
But none has altered the fundamental structure, the republican system designed by James Madison and the others.
Until now.


Newspapers Forging North-South Links Via Satellite Printing
In a gritty factory zone here, the press links binding North and South America took a quantum leap recently when the international edition of The Miami Herald began to roll off the presses of a Peruvian newspaper.
By transmitting pages by satellite to printing plants throughout the region, the publishers of The Herald hope to expand the paper's presence in Latin America, in the process bringing to Latin America what already exists in Europe and Asia -- a low-cost, late-closing, English-language daily newspaper.


Coachmen Industries Inc.(COA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New York City's Fire Alarm Boxes Save Lives
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani should consider carefully the loss of human life that will result from the removal of fire alarm boxes from New York City streets.


Career Horizons (CARH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Producer Says Big Bird Is Hardly a Cash Cow
David V. B. Britt, president of Children's Television Workshop, says that as part of a campaign "to discredit public television," critics of the Public Broadcasting Service are deliberately misrepresenting financial results for his company, which produces "Sesame Street" and other children's programs.
In a telephone interview last week, Mr.
Britt said his nonprofit organization, while enormously successful in generating licensing revenue, was far from being a cash cow that could bail out PBS if part of that revenue was used to replace Federal allocations.


R.W. Nicholson, 78, Postal Official
Ralph W. Nicholson, a former advertising executive and senior assistant postmaster general of the United States, died on Jan. 1 in his home in Marshall, Va.
He was 78.
The cause was heart failure, said Matthew B. Coffey of Washington, a friend and former colleague


In Loud Political Week, Talk Radio Makes Itself Heard
As though House Speaker Newt Gingrich's dream of an America hooked on policy had come true beyond his wildest imagination, Americans from shore to shore were tuned in to talk radio last week, quickly digesting President Clinton's State of the Union Message on Tuesday, then settling down to a full meal of the political wrangling on the House floor that followed.
Hour after hour, from makeshift studios in the Capitol basement and switchboards across the country, on talk shows stretching from band to noisy band, Americans talked about government and the revolution that this Congress could bring.


Metro-Richelieu reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 17


BC Telecom reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Offerings This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected to be among those issued this week:
AFC Cable Systems Inc., Providence, R.I., 1.75 million shares. Tucker Anthony Inc.


A Stripped-Down 'Wozzeck' Produces Unexpected Effects
Something odd and quite wonderful happened at Carnegie Hall on Saturday night when Berg's opera "Wozzeck" was stripped of its standard Expressionist sets, its traditional blood-red lighting and its sometimes grotesque makeup.
In a concert performance by the Cleveland Orchestra, conducted by Christoph von Dohnanyi, this tale of a hapless, disturbed soldier beaten down by poverty, sleeping in sordid barracks, earning pennies by subjecting himself to perverse medical experiments and by submissively shaving the beard of a pompous military officer -- this tale of the archetypal modern victim -- actually became hauntingly lovely.
Its horrific exclamations, sickly dances and unnerving juxtapositions were not distressing but fascinating; its characters almost seemed to take on abstract roles in a large-scale symphony.
The cast for this unusual exploration of the score was one of the best that can currently be assembled.
The singers would have blossomed in a different direction in conventional operatic settings, but here they gave an esthetic polish to the jagged drama.
Hildegard Behrens's singing as Marie, the soldier's mistress, was unblemished by the intermittent difficulties that have plagued her during recent seasons; in fact, her voice seems to have passed through a refiner's fire.
This was unmannered, focused singing by one of our premier dramatic sopranos.
The pathos and the passion seemed to emerge out of an inner calm.


In Performance; THEATER
A Musical About Strippers That Bares the Soul, and More  'Body Shop' Westbeth Theater Center
"Fasten your G-strings, ladies," says a character in "Body Shop," Walter Marks's new musical.
"It's gonna be a bumpy night."


Alexander &amp; Baldwin Inc.(ALEX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gilbert Associates Inc.(GILBA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Network Equipment Technologies Inc.(NWK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Germany's Telephone Pie Is Just Too Big to Pass Up
With Germany's telephone service scheduled for deregulation by 1998, almost everyone who is anyone in telecommunications wants a piece of the German information superhighway these days.
So far this month, the BellSouth Corporation said it was forming a partnership with Thyssen, the German steel company, to compete against Deutsche Telekom, the state monopoly.
Northern Telecom has teamed up with Daimler-Benz Aerospace.
British Telecommunications P.L.C. announced a joint venture with the German utility Viag A.G. to provide voice and data transmission to corporations.
And Cable and Wireless P.L.C. of Britain is joining forces with Veba A.G., another German electric utility, on a telephone joint venture.


Brush Wellman Inc.(BW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Considers Providing Arms To Cambodia to Fight Guerrillas
The United States said today that it was willing to consider arming Cambodia for its war against the Khmer Rouge if the Government pushed ahead in overhauling its corruption-ridden armed forces.
The suggestion was made by Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott, who said after meeting here with King Norodom Sihanouk, "We do not rule out lethal assistance to the Cambodian military in the future."


No Headline
"At a certain point you have to wonder what it means to be alive in a city like this. I was born here and I have lived all my life here. I have nowhere to go. But can death be worse than Grozny?" -- ANYA PLETNOVA.  [ A8:4. ]


Scientific-Atlanta Inc.(SFA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Kerr-McGee Corp.(KMG,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Washington Talk; A Wallflower No More, Christopher Is Courted
Capitol Hill can't seem to get enough of Warren Christopher these days.
Just last week, the Secretary of State testified four times: once on North Korea, twice on the troubled Mexican peso and once on the state of the world.
This week it's on to talks on Start II, the treaty that would sharply reduce arsenals of nuclear missiles by both the United States and Russia, to be followed by five separate hearings on next year's budget.
To lay the groundwork, Mr.
Christopher has met privately with every member of the Republican leadership at least once since last November's election.


First, Tame the Enemy. Next, Confiscate Title. Then, Get Well Soon.
By the time Jerry Rice had caught his third touchdown pass, San Francisco had proven that (a) he had simply toyed with the San Diego Chargers all night, and (b) his flu symptoms and a sore shoulder might have been more of a problem for him than any defensive back.
His patterns were things of beauty and precision.
San Diego looked as if it had never seen any film of the guy.
But what was amazing about what Rice did tonight was not just what took place on the field but what had happened about 24 hours earlier and then again only two hours before a game that was basically over when Frank Gifford announced that his wife was singing the national anthem.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the aftermath of the shooting of two New York City detectives in 1986 misstated the given name of the one who survived.
She is Kathleen Burke, not Katherine.


Watters Predicted 3 Scores (He Says)
49ers running back Ricky Watters said he went around last week telling everyone that he was going to score three touchdowns against San Diego in the Super Bowl.
After the game there wasn't anyone around, other than Watters, to verify that.
"You can ask my mom," Watters said.


INSIDE
Clinton Testing Waters
The Administration's handling of a proposal to increase the minimum wage from $4.25 an hour shows that it is still struggling with how to deal with the new Republican majorities in Congress.
Page A15.
Pope Speaks on Auschwitz
Pope John Paul II made a statement marking the 50th anniversary of the liberation of the death camp at Auschwitz, and he appeared to straddle a controversy over how Poland handled the anniversary.
Page A5.
Technology Aiding Homeless
As part of a pilot program, homeless people are being given voice mailboxes to help them keep in touch with potential employers, easing a barrier to job hunting.
Page B1.
Revolution in Hog Raising
New ways of raising hogs has transformed the lives of many farmers in North Carolina and made the state into the No. 2 producer of hogs in the nation, after Iowa.
Page A10.
A Surcharge in Denver
United, American and Continental Airlines said fares to and from Denver would rise by an average of $40, because of their higher costs at the city's troubled new airport.
Page D1.


Dynatech Corp.(DYTC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Young Takes the Middle Ground
Although Steve Young used the whole field in his passing attack against the Chargers, he had the most success down the middle.
Not only did he have his best completion ratio in that area, but the 49ers got five of their six touchdown passes with routes to the middle of the field.
Slant patterns to Rice and Taylor, and curl patterns to Watters and Jones: All were effective as San Francisco shredded the Charger pass defense.


Destec Energy Inc.(ENG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Family Photos or Pornography? A Father's Bitter Legal Odyssey
In morning darkness last winter, the Feuer family was wrenched apart to protect the children from their father's camera.
Three of Ejlat Feuer's children were rushed in pajamas from their home in the upper-middle-class suburb of Bernardsville to the local police station, where they were interviewed about good touches and bad, the existence of God and 110 nude photographs of the 6-year-old daughter taken by their father.


Parole
States around the country are searching for ways to make their parole systems more effective.
Gov.
George E. Pataki wants to deny parole to violent felons and change New York's sentencing system so it would impose fixed flat sentences instead of minimum and maximum terms.
And last week he signed an executive order barring violent felons from work-release programs.
The Governor hopes to avoid the need for more prison space by loosening laws that require jail time for low-level drug dealers.
Connecticut abolished parole completely in the early 80's but brought it back because of prison overcrowding and fiscal difficulties.
According to the New York State Division of Parole, it costs about a tenth as much to supervise a person on parole as to house that person in prison.
Graphs show the number of parolees to parole officers, the number of parole violations in 1993, the parole budgets in New York and New Jersey, and the cost of supervision in N.Y., N.J. and Conn. (Sources: Criminal Justice Institute, Connecticut Board of Parole, New York State Division of Parole, New Jersey Dept. of Correction)


Corrections
An article yesterday about anxieties over the war in Chechnya misspelled the Russian translation of Time of Troubles.
It is Smutnoye Vremya, not Smutnaya Vremya.


Silicon Valley Group Inc.(SVGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


All Routs Lead to San Francisco: 49ers Win Fifth Title
The San Diego Chargers called tails.
The coin toss landed heads.


A Verbal Stumble, Not Intentional Bigotry
To the Editor:
"Hate Speech Comes to Congress" (editorial, Jan. 29) completely misrepresents the events of last Friday and my comments about Representative Barney Frank, and you owe me an apology for your accusation of "bigotry aforethought."


Is It the Next New York Miracle?
With stay-at-home consumers shifting their attention from Armanis to armoires, one question keeps popping up these days among people in retailing: Is ABC Carpet and Home poised to become the next Barneys New York?
Like Zabar's, Bergdorf Goodman and others, ABC Carpet, on Broadway at 19th Street in Manhattan, is one of those only-in-New York retailing institutions that also attracts crowds of customers from many other places.
They come for what is one of the best selections anywhere of rugs, unusual furniture and striking home furnishings.


Cedar Fair L.P. (FUN,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Sonat Offshore Drilling Inc.(RIG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For Homeless, Free Voice Mail Can Be a Key to a Normal Life
Carl Hygrant encountered no shortage of indignities as a homeless person in New York, but one of the worst was not having a phone number.
In his persistent hunt for work, he put on resumes the number of the Bronx shelter that was his temporary home.
Repeatedly, when a prospective employer called and learned it was a shelter, interest in him would evaporate in a matter of nanoseconds.
Then he got voice mail.


Bratton Plans New Strategy On Corruption
Bruised by criticism of his abrupt dismissal of the Police Department's chief corruption fighter, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton has pledged to escalate the fight to root out rogue officers.
He guaranteed that several investigations that have languished in recent months would soon bring a large number of arrests.
In an interview Saturday afternoon, Mr.
Bratton said he ordered Deputy Police Commissioner Walter S. Mack Jr. to leave his post at the Internal Affairs Bureau by Feb. 10, largely because of what he described as Mr.
Mack's inability to inspire investigators under his command.


A Big Leap in Pursuit of Smallness
When Satish Kumar first set foot in New York City half a lifetime ago on an 8,000-mile peace walk around the world, his only American acquaintance was a man from Philadelphia who had offered him a lift in the Khyber Pass.
Now Mr.
Kumar, a former monk and a kind of international catalyst for unorthodox thinking, is back in the New York area.
This time, his itinerary maps out dozens of meetings with Americans who consider him a friend.


Why Mentally Ill 'Walk Away' From Care
To the Editor:
In a sidebar to your Jan. 23 news article about psychiatric patients who "just walk away" from state psychiatric hospitals, you make the point that people with mental illness want what everyone wants: a job, a place to live, friends and freedom.


Citation Corp.(CAST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Imasco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bridge
The hottest performer on the international circuit in the last six months has been Michael Rosenberg, an options trader on the American Stock Exchange in Manhattan.
At the World Championships in Albuquerque, N.M., in October, he won the World Open Teams title playing with Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., and was second in the World Pairs with Bob Hamman of Dallas.
Nine days ago he won the Volmac World Top Pairs in the Hague in the Netherlands.
Last week, at the Macallan International Pairs in London, Rosenberg and Zia Mahmood split up and were in opposition on the diagramed deal.
Zia as North made use of a negative double, sensibly rejecting the popular view that such a double must promise four cards in spades.
This landed his partner, Omar Sharif, in two spades.


One of Downtown's Leading Lights


Medusa Corp.(MSA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Plum Creek Timber L.P.(PCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Attention Is Turning Governors' Heads
For governors, this is in many ways the best of times.
Congress is soliciting their advice as never before.
A major goal of the Republicans controlling Congress is to give power to the states.


History Standards Unsuitable for Schools
To the Editor:
Frank Rich's account of my testimony before the House Interior Appropriations Committee (column, Jan. 26) is as fraught with distortions as the National History Standards that he defends.
The facts are as follows.


What to Expect This Week
HOUSE: Today, the Ways and Means Committee's panel on human resources will hold hearings on proposed changes in the welfare system.
On Tuesday, the Economic and Educational Opportunities Subcommittee on Early Childhood, Youth and Families is to take up child welfare and care; the Small Business Committee meets on proposed tax changes, and the Resources Subcommittee on Native American and Insular Affairs will discuss the Contract With America's potential effect on territories.
On Wednesday, the Economic and Educational Opportunities Committee will hold hearings on how the contract relates to nutrition.
The effect of regulation on employment and the workplace will be taken up jointly on Thursday by two subcommittees.
And on Friday, the possible effects of the contract on child welfare and care will be discussed by two other subcommittees.
SENATE: The Armed Services Committee will hold hearings on Tuesday and Wednesday on military policy.
The Governmental Affairs Committee is scheduled to vote on Wednesday on legislation to reduce paperwork in the Government.


U.N. Encounters Resistance To Closing Camps in Rwanda
The United Nations has been trying to close camps for displaced people in southwestern Rwanda and to induce the people living there to return home by stopping food and water distribution, but many of them have been digging in their heels instead, officials say.
While some of the displaced Rwandans have returned home, many say they want to stay in the camps, where they have had supplies of food and the United Nations provides security.


Islanders Are Experiencing Reversal of Fortune on Ice
The season is only 10 days and five games old, but after a terrible two-loss weekend, the Islanders may have set a record with the quickest team meeting ever.
Eager to see their Jekyll (a 2-0-1 start) re-emerge after their weekend Hyde, the Islanders bolted their locker room door after Saturday night's 4-1 loss to Tampa Bay to talk about their effort and inconsistency.


Patents; A Detection Method for Breast Tumors May Add Fire to a Debate Over Patents for Medical Treatments
SCIENCE and technology greatly influence patenting trends, often creating whole new patent domains.
One of the hottest -- and most hotly debated -- is patents for medical methods or procedures.
Doctors, scientists and research institutions are increasingly winning ownership of ways of practicing medicine.
A patent issued last week for a method of detecting certain kinds of tumors could conceivably lead to more successful treatment of breast cancer.
But even its inventors say its usefulness is not at all clear.
Still, the method now belongs to Yale University, meaning that someone else wanting to use the technique in further research may have to license it.


Big Companies in Mexico Among the Peso's Worst Victims
The first reports detailing the impact of the peso devaluation on businesses in Mexico paint a brutal picture of huge foreign-exchange losses, steep declines in sales and an erosion of confidence so great that even the most ambitious expansion plans are being scuttled.
Wal-Mart, which was gung-ho on Mexico before the devaluation on Dec. 20, announced last week that it had shelved plans to open 24 new stores in Mexico in 1995.
"They are temporarily on hold," a Wal-Mart spokesman, Gerardo Ruiz, said.
"We are monitoring the situation daily."


All-Female Crew Gets 2d Victory
It was as if the America
all-female team found its own passing lane yesterday to win the first race of Round-Robin 2 in the America's Cup defenders' trials.
By defeating Young America, the team from Bangor, Me., by 14 seconds, America
logged its second victory in trial racing that began on Jan. 13 off San Diego.
The team, the first all-female crew in the 144-year history of the America's Cup, won its first race two weeks ago.


Agassi Finds Treasure In Australian Debut
Andre Agassi, reborn yet again this time as a balding pirate with a zealot's focus but a rational game plan -- completed his Australian Open debut run with a flourish today, winning his second consecutive Grand Slam tournament and dethroning the top-ranked Pete Sampras at the same time.
In scoring a 4-6, 6-1, 7-6 (8-6), 6-4 victory, the second-ranked Agassi performed the same baseline pyrotechnics that had hurtled him into the final without dropping a single set.
His return of serve proved to be more than twice as reliable as that of Sampras's; he committed half the number of unforced mistakes made by the world's No. 1 player and he contributed 10 aces of his own, the last on match point.


Market Place; For Lotus, a bright outlook overcomes a gloomy recent past.
THROUGHOUT its 13 years, the Lotus Development Corporation has given investors a roller-coaster ride.
But many analysts think Lotus may finally settle down in 1995, moving away from the vagaries of its declining business in packaged desktop software, which has been hammered by the Microsoft Corporation, to the potential of its solid communications products.


Daly Ties the Knot
JOHN DALY was married in Las Vegas, Nev., Saturday night, according to GREG SMITH, owner of the Little Church of the West.
Daly, 28, married PAULETTE DEAN, 23.
Both Daly and his new bride listed Memphis, Tenn., as their hometown.
Daly wore blue jeans, cowboy boots, a dark jacket and no tie, Smith said.
Dean wore white.
The marriage was the third for Daly and the first for Dean, Smith said. (AP)


In Performance; DANCE
Attention to Detail As a Choreographic Mandate  Ton Simons and Dancers St.
Mark's Church
Can choreography be too well wrought?
A strange question, but one that is prompted by "Q," which Ton Simons and Dancers presented on Friday night.


Dublin Journal; The New Lord Mayor: Color Him Light Green
In his seven months as the first Lord Mayor of Dublin from the Green Party, John Gormley has not turned this vibrant but gray, distinctly Georgian and somewhat grimy capital into a sparkling Emerald City.
Indeed, this city of almost 500,000 people still has much pollution, a public that does not clean up after its dogs and world-class traffic jams.
Mr.
Gormley and other environmentalists also fear that a British nuclear fuel reprocessing plant across the Irish Sea will pollute these shores, including Dublin Bay, which is already sullied with sewage bacteria.


Gingrich Vows Total Review Of Medicare for Cost Savings
Speaker Newt Gingrich told the nation's hospital officials today that "we are going to rethink Medicare from the ground up," arguing that the 30-year-old health program for the elderly was too bureaucratic, too centralized and too dominated by the government.
He also said that the proposed Constitutional amendment to require a balanced budget by the year 2002 "has a very profound impact" on efforts to reconfigure health programs.


Substance Hailed as Tool to Fight Neurodegenerative Disease
SCIENTISTS have announced with great fanfare that a substance discovered a year ago preserves and restores two kinds of nerve cells, one in the brain and one in the spinal cord that activates muscle movements.
Called glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor, or G.D.N.F., the molecule was discussed in four research papers in the current issue of the journal Nature.


Pataki Plans Aid Cuts at SUNY And CUNY, Forcing a Fee Hike
Gov.
George E. Pataki is expected to propose on Wednesday cutting state aid to the State University and City University of New York by about 10 percent, a move that would almost certainly force tuition increases this year, his advisers said today.
Mr.
Pataki, a Republican, is also expected to recommend that the State Tuition Assistance Program for New York State students who attend private colleges in the state be reduced, with the top award falling to $3,050, from $4,050 a year.


York College President Will Leave Post in June
Only hours before the trustees of the City University of New York were to consider a report charging her with financial misconduct yesterday, Josephine D. Davis, the embattled president of York College, offered to go on an unpaid leave of absence for the spring semester and to terminate her presidency on June 30.
Her resignation was immediately accepted.
James P. Murphy, chairman of the board of trustees, later said at a news conference that the report had not been presented to the trustees because Dr.
Davis wished to add comments to it.
He said the entire report will be made public in seven days.


R. L. Neas, 67, A Decorator And Muralist
Richard Lowell Neas, an interior designer and decorative painter known for his lyrical trompe l'oeil murals, died on Saturday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 67.
The cause was cancer, Dennis W. O'Brien, his partner and longtime companion, said.


Now a Film About You-Know-What
The O. J. Simpson public-relations juggernaut is operating at full steam these days with supporters and family giving exclusive television interviews and, most astonishing, Mr.
Simpson's own self-serving book complete with a mournful soundtrack.
Now, accidentally providing a semblance of balance, we get the television movie, Fox's "The O. J. Simpson Story," the first and, unfortunately, not likely to be the last.
This is another of television's scavenger productions, eager to pounce on the bare bones of any sensational story that might turn up a few gold fillings for the network bottom line.
We've had Amy and Joey and the Menendez brothers.
Could the Juice be far behind?
No way, although Fox sanctimoniously notes that it held off on the broadcast until the jury had been selected and sequestered.


Dominion Resources Inc.(D,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Israel Yields Land to Jordan In Keeping With Peace Pact
The quietest border realignment in Israel's turbulent history took place today when Israeli forces withdrew from desert patches south of the Dead Sea and turned them over to Jordan under the two countries' recent peace treaty.
In military ceremonies held in the Arava Valley, between the Dead Sea and the Gulf of Aqaba, Jordanians hoisted their flags on long-contested land, then burst into songs praising King Hussein.


Sports of The Times; 49er Lesson: Balanced Egonomics
AS the only owner of three consecutive Super Bowl rings, Ken Norton Jr. was glowing.
And after having been on the two-time champion Cowboys, he understood better than anybody why the 49ers now reign and threaten to reign again.
"Once I saw the writing on the wall in Dallas," the 28-year-old linebacker was saying, "once I saw the balance change a little bit, I said I better jump on over here. The way the organization respects the players here is second to none. It's the best in the league as far as the players and the fans are concerned, as well as the ownership."


Sports of The Times; The 'New Barbarians' Are Really Old Hat
SOME have called them "Petulant Prima Donnas." They like to call themselves "The New Breed." And maybe they're nothing more than simply a current version of an old tag known as "The New Barbarians."
They are the handful-plus in the National Basketball Association who have created waves among management, made coaches nauseated, disgusted some old-timers -- and even teammates -- and given many fans a sour taste about the current state of the game.
They whine about the coach, they throw tantrums as well as chairs, they are recalcitrant about practice.
Among them are Derrick Coleman and Isaiah Rider and Scottie Pippen and Christian Laettner and Dennis Rodman and Chris Webber.


Tokyo Magazine to Close After Article Denying Holocaust
One of Japan's most prestigious publishers said today that it would shut down a magazine that had printed an article asserting that there were no Nazi gas chambers and that the Holocaust was "propaganda."
Jewish groups had condemned the article, which appeared in the February issue of Marco Polo magazine and was timed to coincide with the 50th anniversary of the liberation of the Auschwitz death camp.


Year-Round Classes to Begin in Summer
In an attempt to ease what officials call a crisis in New York City school overcrowding, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that he plans to move even faster than his advisers recommend on an experiment in year-round schooling.
At least two schools, and probably more, will be placed on year-round schedules this summer, he said.
Mr.
Cortines, who compared recent increases in school enrollment to "a train roaring down the track," made his recommendation while releasing the findings of the commission he established a year ago to look at school overcrowding.


Banco Latinoamericano de Exportaciones (BLX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BancorpSouth Inc.(BOMS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jewish Leaders Opposed Bombing Auschwitz
To the Editor:
"Remembering Auschwitz" (editorial, Jan. 26) states that the rejection by senior British and American officials of pleas to bomb Auschwitz "seems incomprehensible."


Nets Score Late, Hold On Thanks to Missed Foul Shot
The polls were already closed when Derrick Coleman began his campaign.
He drove the lane with determination, he rebounded with ferocity and finger-rolled in the softest layups.
Four minutes of the fourth quarter were his and his alone as he helped battle a persistent Trail Blazer comeback attempt.
All that was left was a parting speech.
And then Rod Strickland, his friend and another prospective All-Star awaiting Tuesday's announcement of the seven reserves selected for each team, walked to the free-throw line with 1.6 seconds remaining and the Nets ahead by 2.


Banesto Head Freed on Bail
A Madrid judge today released Mario Conde, the former chairman of Banco Espanol de Credito, from prison on a bail of $15.4 million, the highest bail ever set in Spain.
The once flamboyant Mr.
Conde was arrested and jailed Dec. 23 on charges of fraud and embezzlement involving more than $53 million.


Car Bomb Kills 38 in Algeria


Sybron Intl. Corp.(SYB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Smithsonian Scales Back Exhibit Of B-29 in Atomic Bomb Attack
This spring, when the Smithsonian Institution displays part of the fuselage of the Enola Gay, the B-29 bomber that dropped the first atomic bomb on Japan, it will be accompanied only by a small plaque and perhaps a video interview with its flight crew.
Yielding to critics, the Smithsonian's Board of Regents voted today to eliminate the rest of the 10,000-square-foot exhibit that had been planned to commemorate the end of World War II and the 600-page script that was to accompany the bomber.


Unfamiliar and Masculine
There is a good reason why some fashion shows are held in dark places, curtains drawn to deny a glimpse to the outside world, windows blacked out as in wartime.
These shows demand that audiences deny all they know about what is really worn, what already exists.
What is too familiar isn't fashion.
And especially in men's dress, what isn't familiar will probably stay in these airless strobe-frozen rooms.
The entertainment world has Stephen Spielberg.
Fashion has Jean-Paul Gaultier.
On Saturday, he herded his audience into the stables of the Cirque d'Hiver, where livestock for the circus await their turns around the ring.
The red arched stables bore the names of his star models, their hair teased into manes, sometimes with tiaras with horse ears poised on their heads.
As their names were called by Lola, a drag performer dressed as a raunchy ringmaster, they broke from their paper-covered stalls with riding crops and paraded out.
Back in their stables, they stripped down to leopard print underwear in front of the audience to change into their next outfits.


Caremark Will Sell Home Infusion Unit to Coram
Caremark International Inc. announced today that it had agreed to sell its home infusion business to the Coram Healthcare Corporation for more than $300 million in cash and securities.
If the deal is approved by antitrust regulators, Coram would emerge as the clear leader in the highly fragmented business of administering intravenous medicines and nutritional products in the home to patients with cancer, AIDS and other chronic or acute diseases.


Cutting Capital Gains Tax Helps Investment; 'Don't Tax, but Spend'
To the Editor:
What "The Contract's False Tax Promise" (editorial, Jan. 23) fails to make clear is the outright duplicity of the Republicans and the "Contract With America" on finance.


Patterns
Pieces of Tokyo
Fashion photographers have an easy way to imbue computer-manipulated imagery, which they increasingly depend on, with a high-tech, neon-bright look: a Tokyo location.
Now, Sabotage, one of the first companies to produce the sort of silvery reflective clothing that ravers embraced, has used those images to make the clothes appear as technology-obsessed as the fabrics have always been.


Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos.(MMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


USX-U.S. Steel Group (X,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


By Design; Shapely Suits for Spring
The biggest trend to emerge from the spring haute couture shows in Paris was also one of the major trends in the ready-to-wear shows: the fitted suit.
As a result, this latest look can already be found in stores right here.
Bergdorf Goodman has Chanel's black-and-white plaid jacket with a molded-to-the-body shape ($2,740); Richard Tyler's fitted glen plaid jacket ($1,650) and matching skinny skirt ($675), and Gucci's elongated white linen fitted jacket ($1,158) that would be ultrachic worn with a pencil-slim black skirt.


Historian, Show Decent Respect
To the Editor:
Lynne V. Cheney cites in "History Standards Unsuitable for Schools" (letter, Jan. 30) a Senate resolution of Jan. 18 to bolster her opposition to proposed new standards for teaching American history.
The resolution, however, does more than disapprove of these voluntary guidelines for teachers.
It declares that funds developing future ones should only be awarded to those who "have a decent respect for the contributions of Western civilization, and United States history, ideas and institutions, to the increase of freedom and prosperity throughout the world."


Nova Corp.(NVA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Toys 'R' Us Splits With Thompson
Toys "R" Us said yesterday that it had parted ways with its longtime agency, J. Walter Thompson New York, and awarded a spring television project to Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York.
The billings were not disclosed.
"We've had a change in our strategy and direction for 1995, and we felt it was best to have a number of different agencies work on the account," Ernie Speranza, senior vice president for marketing at Toys "R" Us in Paramus, N.J., said in confirming a report this week in Adweek.
The company will assign agencies on a project basis, he added.


Recording of Pilots Offers Few Clues to Cause of American Eagle Crash
The last words from American Eagle Flight 4184 to air traffic controllers, spoken a minute before the plane rolled to the right, flipped and crashed last October near Roselawn, Ind., were "Thank you." The pilots had just been told they would have to wait 10 minutes to be cleared to land.
A transcript of their conversation, released yesterday by the Federal Aviation Administration, shows air traffic controllers trying to get the pilots to respond and asking pilots in the area about the weather, which included heavy rain and sleet.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Romantic Interpretation Of the Viola Repertory  Cynthia Phelps, Violist Mannes College of Music
Cynthia Phelps was already well-known as a soloist and chamber music player when she was appointed principal violist of the New York Philharmonic in 1992.
But she has not given up the solo spotlight entirely, and on Sunday evening, the New York Viola Society presented her in a recital with James Gemmell, a pianist.


Kemp Rejects Presidential Bid, Citing Dislike of Fund Raising
Jack F. Kemp, a former professional football quarterback who became a successful political figure as an apostle of conservative economic theories, said today that he would not seek the Republican Party's Presidential nomination in 1996.
In a meeting with reporters, Mr.
Kemp gave a variety of reasons for declining to enter the race.
But time and again, he emphasized his distaste for the business of raising money.
He said that for him to be a Presidential candidate he would have to start now to raise $15 million to $20 million, a task in which he had little interest.


Freight Trains Collide


Cubans in Limbo
Six months after the exodus ended, nearly 30,000 Cubans who set out for the United States in rickety boats or rafts are still being held in detention camps in Panama and at the American naval base at Guantanamo.
With incidents of rioting and attempted suicide increasing and the cost to U.S. taxpayers mounting, Washington and Havana should move quickly to lift these dispirited Cubans from limbo.
Those who are eligible should be resettled in this country; those who are not should be returned home.
Under new guidelines worked out in talks between Cuba and the United States, the only sure route now from Cuba to the U.S. is to apply for a visa inside Cuba.
The Administration has already made exceptions for about 3,000 of the refugees at Guantanamo and in Panama on humanitarian grounds.
With the remaining Cubans in Panama soon to be moved to Guantanamo, Washington must decide how to deal with those who are still in detention.


Time to Put Super Back in Super Bowl
You are Paul Tagliabue. You are the National Football League commissioner.
You settle in at your suite at Joe Robbie Stadium just before kickoff on Sunday, surrounded by family, friends and business associates.
You are anxious.
You are excited.
Another season is about to have its climax.
Another Super Bowl.
It is your biggest show.
You are ready for your league to strut its stuff.


General Motors Acceptance Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Judge's Ruling Chastising the Defense Could Later Backfire on the Prosecution, Experts Say
At first glance, Judge Lance A. Ito's rebuke today of O. J. Simpson's defense team before the jury looks and sounds like a stunning victory for prosecutors.
But if Mr.
Simpson is found guilty of the killings, Judge Ito's decision to allow the prosecution to reopen its opening statements could ultimately backfire, giving his lawyers a strong issue on appeal.
The downside for Mr.
Simpson's lawyers is that they may have raised doubts in the minds of jurors about their credibility.


S. D. Erulkar, Nerve Expert, Is Dead at 70
Solomon D. Erulkar, a neurophysiologist and professor emeritus at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, died on Jan. 19 at his home in Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., a suburb of Philadelphia.
He was 70.
His death was caused by complications from heart surgery, said his son Matthew.


What You Need to Do What You Need to Do
EVERYBODY with a computer in the home, home office or small business needs a word-processing program to write letters to Mom, term papers, reports to clients or romance novels.
A spreadsheet is handy for family budgets or business expenses.
A database manager's uses might range from names, addresses and phone numbers of relatives and friends to complex lists of customers and suppliers.
Charts explain some things better than words and numbers do.
There are suites offering top-notch programs in all those categories; Microsoft Office, for Windows fans, is one, and Novell's Perfectoffice is another.
But most of us will never get to the bottom of three or more full-featured applications.


Electronic Data Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tosco Corp.(TOS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Old National Bancorp (OLDB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Greater New York Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Quantum Corp.(QNTM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  A U.S.
TURN ON NUCLEAR TESTS  President Clinton has endorsed a policy shift to convince third world countries that the United States will never again conduct explosive tests of its nuclear arsenal.
A1


Creative Artists Gets New Coca-Cola Job
The Coca-Cola Company has awarded its second creative assignment to the Creative Artists Agency, the talent agency in Beverly Hills, Calif., that shocked Madison Avenue when it began working on the company's flagship soft-drink brand in 1991.
The billings were not disclosed.
Bob Bertini, a spokesman for Coca-Cola in Atlanta, confirmed a report this week in Advertising Age that the company had shifted the creative responsibilities for its Nestea tea brands to Creative Artists from McCann-Erickson Worldwide in New York.
"It's really a reflection of the quality of the work they've done," Mr.
Bertini said, referring to the "Always Coca-Cola" campaign that Creative Artists produced for Coca-Cola Classic and Coca-Cola.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief article on Friday about the resignation of James P. Grant as executive director of Unicef misstated the occupation of a possible successor in some copies.
The candidate, Dr.
William H. Foege, is a specialist in public health at the Carter Center in Atlanta, not the director of the center's program on child health. (Mr. Grant has since died, and his obituary appeared yesterday and in some editions on Sunday.)


Suspicious Deaths Investigated at Ohio Hospital
Minutes after a respiratory technician gave Emmett Harrison a vaporizer that blew a medicated mist in his face to help him with the ravages of emphysema, Mr.
Harrison's arms and legs went numb.
Just before he felt paralyzed and stopped breathing, he pushed his call light.
An emergency team of doctors and nurses revived Mr.
Harrison, but on the same night, Aug. 8, 1985, two other elderly patients died in the critical care units at Springfield Community Hospital: One just stopped breathing.


Jewish Leaders Opposed Bombing Auschwitz; Remember Liberators
To the Editor:
In your article on the separate Polish and Jewish ceremonies for the 50th anniversary of the liberation of the death-camp complex Auschwitz-Birkenau, there is no mention of the liberators ("Survivors Pray at the Crematories of Auschwitz," news article, Jan. 27).


Sickle Cell Trial Called Success, Halted Early
Calling an early halt to a national trial because of promising results, doctors today announced the first treatment for sickle cell anemia that attacks the underlying cause of the disease rather than simply combating its painful symptoms.
The National Institutes of Health said it was issuing a clinical alert to thousands of doctors nationwide informing them that the drug hydroxyurea should be considered for many adult patients with the crippling blood disease.
The institutes had sponsored the trial of the drug at nearly two dozen centers to see if it could reduce the painful episodes characteristic of the disease, which in this country primarily afflicts African-Americans.


Ex-Correction Chief Broke City Law, Report Finds
A week after the resignation of the Giuliani administration's Correction Commissioner, Anthony J. Schembri, the Department of Investigation released a report yesterday saying that Mr.
Schembri had violated city law by failing to live in New York City and by improperly spending more than $4,000 in overtime costs for drivers and for tolls.
When Mr.
Schembri resigned from his $110,000-a-year job, he said that family pressures prevented him from meeting the city's residency requirement.
His resignation came as the Department of Investigation was completing an inquiry into whether he had violated residency requirements and whether he had improperly attended to personal matters during working hours.


Iran's Currency Falls Sharply Against Dollar
The Iranian currency has been allowed to decline in value against the dollar by a record 30 percent in three weeks, and senior officials have called for measures ranging from confiscation of cash to prayer as means to resolve the crisis.
The latest drop in the value of the rial was set off when the Central Bank of Iran began selling a limited number of gold coins at a single outlet in downtown Teheran and gradually raised the price to keep up with the black market.


'Awestruck' Chargers Quickly Settle Down to Earth
The Chargers' general manager and head coach were frustrated today after their team was overwhelmed by the magnitude of playing in a Super Bowl.
"This game kind of let us know where we are," said Bobby Beathard, the general manager.
"We don't have the talent of the 49ers. If things had gone the other way, if we had won, we'd have fooled ourselves that we were better than we really are."


CNB Bancshares (CNBE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Appeals Panel Hears Case on Citadel's Ban on Women
In a case in which all sides are seemingly resigned to a Supreme Court battle, a clearly split three-judge panel from the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit today weighed whether to allow a woman into the corps of cadets at The Citadel, an all-male military college in South Carolina.
The panel's decision, which is not expected for several months, will help refine constitutional questions of equal opportunity.
At stake is whether the concept of "separate but equal" is appropriate for women though it was previously determined to be an unsuitable resolution for blacks in cases put forward during the civil rights movement.


World News Briefs; East German Communists Vow to Play by the Rules
The reformed East German Communist party, trying to broaden its appeal and become a force in national politics, has denounced Stalinism and pledged to accept the established conventions of German politics.
At a weekend convention, delegates overwhelmingly re-elected their party chairman, Lothar Bisky, who ran without opposition.
Mr.
Bisky, a moderate, had threatened to quit if the party did not approve a break with its Communist past.


USX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Charles Flood, 90, Gastroenterologist
Dr.
Charles A. Flood, a gastroenterologist who taught generations of students at the Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons and other institutions, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 90.
The cause was heart failure, said his son Charles Jr..


And a Tip Of the Hat To Graves's 3 Goals
Under most circumstances, beating a winless, last-place team would not spur a celebration in the home rink of the Stanley Cup champions.
But the Rangers were on a three-game losing streak, and their fans were disgruntled.
Everyone cheered up when two key Rangers sparked a goal explosion to lead New York to a 6-2 victory over the Ottawa Senators last night at Madison Square Garden.


Consolidated Freightways Inc.(CNF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Unocal Corp.(UCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. IN NEW PLEDGE ON ATOM TEST BAN
President Clinton has endorsed a policy shift intended to convince third-world countries that the United States will never again conduct explosive tests of its nuclear arsenal, the White House said today.
The move is part of the Administration's quest for a permanent ban on the spread of nuclear weapons.


Syracuse Surges Down the Stretch to Edge Georgetown
Syracuse ran through Georgetown's press, hit its free throws and kept its composure down the stetch tonight for a 76-75 victory at USAir Arena in a game that recalled the Big East's best days.
Allen Iverson's 3-pointer at the buzzer for Georgetown made the final score a 1-point triumph for the Orangemen, but Syracuse's superior execution in the final 3 minutes built a 5-point lead with 35 seconds left.


Aflac Inc.(AFL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CSF Holding Inc.(CSFC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Italy Suspends National Sports Events After Soccer Fan's Death
Italian sports officials today voted to suspend all national sports events next Sunday, in an unprecedented protest against the violence that has infected Italian soccer and led to the stabbing death of a Genoese soccer fan Sunday.
The decision taken by Italy's sports leaders, including the presidents of the soccer federation and the Olympic Committee, highlighted the emotional national reaction to the murder of Vincenzo Spagnolo, who died from a knife wound after being attacked by rival fans who had come to Genoa Sunday to root for AC Milan, the reigning national champion.


L. A. Gear to Acquire Ryka To Expand Product Lines
L.
A.
Gear said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Ryka Inc., a small but admired maker of women's performance athletic shoes, in a deal valued at more than $16 million.
For L. A. Gear, once a high-flying performer in athletic shoes but now plagued by losses, the acquisition represents an effort to expand its product lines and enter new niche markets.


Smugglers Shipping Drugs From Asia Through Canada to U.S.
The vast and sparsely populated coast of British Columbia is increasingly being used as a transshipment point for drugs that are smuggled overland into the United States.
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police, the national police force and chief law-enforcement agency against illegal drugs, attribute this to stepped-up coastal enforcement by the United States and to comparatively lenient Canadian penalties for drug offenses.


Workin' on the Railroad


Imperial Bancorp (IBAN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Albany Legislator Seeks Substitute-Player Ban
With President Clinton already on the record with his views of the baseball shutdown and Congress preparing for hearings on the game's antitrust exemption, state and city politicians are joining the battle to get striking players back on the field.
Richard Brodsky, Democrat from Westchester County, said yesterday that he would introduce a bill in the New York State Assembly today which would prevent the Mets and the Yankees from playing games with replacement players in Shea and Yankee Stadiums.


GM Hughes Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ito Shows Displeasure With the Defense
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson, their hands already slapped by Judge Lance A. Ito, finally completed their opening statement today.
But within moments of hearing defense lawyers assert to the jury that the evidence against Mr.
Simpson was "contaminated, compromised, and ultimately corrupted," the judge punished them again, saying he will allow the prosecution to reopen its opening statement, apparently for the first time in California history.
Judge Ito, outraged that defense lawyers had failed to turn over the names and statements of witnesses they were obliged to under law, postponed testimony in the case and gave the chief prosecutor, Marcia Clark, 10 minutes on Tuesday to challenge what Mr.
Cochran told the jury last week.


Paul N. Poling, 92, Presbyterian Leader
The Rev.
Paul Newton Poling, a Presbyterian clergyman who helped direct his church's agenda on peace and social issues in the years immediately after World War II, died on Jan. 19 at the White Acres Retirement Center in El Paso, where he lived.
He was 92.
The cause was complications from a series of strokes, said a son, the Rev.
David Poling of Albuquerque, N.M.


CT Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sideshows in Miami
A Las Vegas gambler bet $2.4 million on the San Francisco 49ers -- one man's way of saying, look, for 10 straight years the N.F.C. team has dominated the Super Bowl and this one will not be different.
At 8-to-1 odds, he got his $2.4 million back and pocketed an extra $300,000.
He had to be happier than anyone else who watched the game.
The Super Bowl represents unity of a sort: 120 million people watching the same game at the same time.
But what America got Sunday was a night when the trappings -- the announcers, the commercials and the halftime show -- were more interesting than the show on the field.


COMPANY BRIEFS
HARVEST PARTNERS INC., New York, a private equity firm, led a management buyout of Scandura Inc., Charlotte, N.C., and Scandura's Canadian division from subsidiaries of BBA Group P.L.C. in Britain.
The purchase price was $40 million.
RITE AID CORP., Camp Hill, Pa., completed its cash tender offer of $11 a share for Perry Drug Stores Inc., a chain based in Waterford, Mich., and now holds 94.5 percent of Perry's stock.


Clinton May Face a Rival From Party, Bradley Says
Senator Bill Bradley, the New Jersey Democrat who prides himself on being above the partisan fray, poked fun at President Clinton's long State of the Union address yesterday and said Mr.
Clinton might face a primary challenge in 1996 if his popularity did not soon improve.
In the most direct suggestion from within the President's own party that Mr.
Clinton may face competition for the nomination, Mr.
Bradley told the radio personality Don Imus what other Democrats have said only privately.
He complained that he got "tired of standing and clapping" because the 81-minute State of the Union speech was too long.


Promus Proposes to Divide Its Units Into 2 Companies
The Promus Companies, which owns Harrah's casinos and Embassy Suites, said yesterday that it planned to split its hotel and gaming businesses into independent corporations by the middle of the year.
Michael D. Rose, chairman of the Memphis-based company, said that splitting Promus in two "should help insure a strong correlation between management performance and shareholder value."


Florists' Group Puts Account in Review
The Florists' Transworld Delivery Association said yesterday that it had begun a review of its account, with billings estimated at $20 million, as part of an evaluation of business operations under its new owner, Perry Capital in New York.
The account had previously been divided among D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., J. Walter Thompson Detroit and Wunderman Cato Johnson in Detroit.


Thousands of Peruvians Flee Border Fighting
With bicycles, house fans and other household goods stacked in their pickup trucks, Peruvian civilians fled south from the Ecuadorean border to this city today as convoys of military trucks rumbled steadily north.
Fighting over a disputed section of the border is taking place in remote jungle 125 miles east of here, but there has been a heavy military buildup in this region, the most heavily populated stretch of the border.


Senate Democratic Leader Is Opposed to House Budget Amendment
The prospects for a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced Federal budget dimmed somewhat today when, as the debate in the Senate opened, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader, said that he opposed the measure in the form it was passed by the House last week.
Mr.
Daschle's position could be decisive, not just because of his leadership position but also because the matter is expected to be decided by no more than a vote or two.


Why a Presidency Hasn't Thrived
Among the coroners summoned by "Frontline" to do the autopsy for "What Happened to Bill Clinton?" are reporters like Elizabeth Drew, William Greider and Bob Woodward, analysts like Kevin Phillips and Garry Wills and a Clinton biographer, David Maraniss.
Their emphases differ, but they reach a fairly clear consensus about the reasons for the President's political demise between November 1992 and November 1994.
Mr.
Maraniss, who apologetically indulges in some plausible psychological speculation, reminds us that for most of his early career, Mr.
Clinton was a loser, an experience that strengthened the young politician's resolve to "do whatever it took never to lose again." As these Clinton watchers see it, the techniques of accommodation that served well enough in Arkansas proved disastrous in Washington, where tough players quickly found and exploited his weaknesses.


Cutting Capital Gains Tax Helps Investment; Owed to the Future
To the Editor:
In "State of the Union? Someday, Paralyzed," Op-Ed, Jan. 24) Paul Starr warns that a balanced-budget amendment would limit the ability of future representatives to act in the best interests of our country. The result would be undemocratic government, foregone programs and economic or national catastrophe.


Accelerating Chaos At One Edge of America
OPEN WATER  By Maria Flook  327 pages. Pantheon Books. $24.
Death and disaster haunt the characters in "Open Water" like insistent, implacable ghosts.
Rennie, the ailing heroine of Maria Flook's disturbing new novel, lost her first two husbands to the sea: the first went down on a ship that was overloaded with a haul of scallops; the second died in a boiler mishap, just 400 yards from shore.
Her stepson, Willis, lost his father (Rennie's third husband) to a heart attack and his mother to a monstrous practical joke.
And Willis's best friend, Fritz, lost his little brother in a freak accident, when a sand dune collapsed and consumed six people.


Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration Co. (LLX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ResultsPlus
MEN'S COLLEGE BASKETBALL  UMass Extends Its Winning Streak
Derek Kellogg hit two 3-pointers in a 10-0 run early in the second half as No. 1 Massachusetts extended the nation's longest winning streak to 15 games last night, beating visiting St.
Bonaventure by 79-62.
With the Minutemen ahead by 33-31, Kellogg's 3-pointer began the surge with 16 minutes 48 seconds left in the game.
He ended it with another 3-pointer, making the score 43-31 with 15:14 to go.
Massachusetts led by at least 9 points the rest of the way.
The Minutemen (16-1, 8-0 Atlantic 10) were led by Lou Roe's 21 points. (AP)


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $14 million of medium-term notes due in 1998 through BA Securities.
The noncallable issue is priced at par to yield 7.57 percent.


Cutting Capital Gains Tax Helps Investment
To the Editor:
"The Contract's False Tax Promise" (editorial, Jan. 23) was refreshing in its clear exposure of your ignorance regarding basic economics.
A general capital gains tax cut as proposed in the "Contract With America" would not "steer investment into unproductive assets" or encourage investors to "put their money where it would produce the biggest tax break."


Great Lakes Chemical (GLK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Three Clarks in the Family Business
The Clarks are becoming the first family of American track and field:
*At age 32, Joetta is America's fastest woman at 800 meters, with seven national titles and five Millrose victories.


Long Island Bancorp Inc.(LISB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bosnian Asks G.O.P. Lawmakers to Help End Arms Embargo
The Prime Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina plunged into American politics today, urging the Republican majority of Congress to pass legislation to end American participation in the international arms embargo imposed on his country if the Serbs refuse to make peace.
Both Vice President Al Gore and Secretary of State Warren Christopher told the Bosnian official, Haris Silajdzic, that the United States would never violate the 40-month-long arms embargo without the assent of the United Nations Security Council, which is not about to be granted.


Observer; It's Like Parole
Somebody on the Brinkley show Sunday asked Governor Whitman of New Jersey about the Republican "revolution" and she looked uneasy with the word, but then went ahead and accepted it, hedging that, well, it was "in some sense" a "revolution."
It was one of the few reassuring public moments we've had from a Republican since the media and Washington succumbed to Noot madness.


Eaton Corp.(ETN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chess
One cannot call the performance of the United States in the Olympiad in Moscow ordinary: the team tied for fifth place in a 124-team competition.
But only one player, Yasser Seirawan, a 34-year-old grandmaster from Seattle, had an outstanding result.
Boris Gulko scored a respectable 5 1/2-4 1/2 on Board 1; Alexey Yermolinsky had a strong 7-4 on Board 2; Joel Benjamin scored a good 6 1/2-4 1/2 on Board 3.
But Alexander Shabalov managed only 3-5 on Board 5 and Sergey Kudrin tallied only 3 1/2-2 1/2 on Board 6.


Signet Banking Corp.(SBK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cameras Will Stay in Court
The Legislature voted today to continue allowing cameras in courtrooms, but lawmakers registered their reservations by extending the practice for only two and a half years before reviewing it again.
Lawmakers today also approved a resolution to create conference committees, one of several measures to make the Legislature's business more open to the public.
The committees, composed of five legislators each from the Senate and the Assembly, would hammer out differences in similar bills in public hearings.
Now, compromise on legislation is usually reached in private meetings among staff members of the governor, Senate majority leader and Assembly Speaker.


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


Lucy D. Manoff, 81, Cultural Figure
Lucy D. Manoff, for four decades a leader in cultural and educational institutions in Israel, died on Sunday at New York Hospital.
She was 81.
She died of complications of pulmonary and heart disease, said her son Robert K. Manoff of Pound Ridge, N.Y.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Young Rebel With a Cause: He Doesn't Want to Sing  'The Amazing Adventure of Alvin Allegretto' and 'Marita and Her Heart's Desire' John Jay Theater
No one can guarantee that the young people attending the world premiere performances of Bruce Adolphe's opera, "The Amazing Adventure of Alvin Allegretto" last weekend will ever wait on line for tickets for "Lulu" or "La Traviata." But that hope helped inspire the Metropolitan Opera Guild to commission this work along with two others for children.
It may work: "Alvin" has more taste and imagination than many events for maturer audiences.


Glendale Federal Bank (GLN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Financial Corp.(FFHC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clinton Pushes Harder for Aid Plan
Scrambling to rally support for his proposed $40 billion in loan guarantees for Mexico, President Clinton asked the nation's governors to endorse the package today, and in a stepped-up publicity campaign released a bi-partisan list of past Presidents and Treasury Secretaries who supported it.
But while the President worked to get a bill introduced in Congress as soon as possible, the Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich, said he was not sure when the $40 billion package would be introduced.
Though he still favors the plan, which is intended to stabilize the Mexican economy, Mr.
Gingrich said it had "almost no support in the country at large," and added that Mr.
Clinton "has not adequately explained it to the country."


Airplane Food Scare Explained
American Airlines and its New York food caterer said yesterday that a sticky mass of old soda and coffee under the laminate of a cracked service counter on a London-bound jetliner had been identified as the source of contamination that prompted the plane's return to Kennedy International Airport on Saturday night.
The airline said on Sunday that Flight 104 had turned back two hours into the trip after an attendant found foreign matter in a package of food.


Amending Mindlessly
The House vote for a balanced-budget amendment demonstrates the political potency of a bad idea whose time has come.
That explains the overwhelming House vote for the amendment.
Attention now shifts to the Senate, starting today, and the state legislatures as outposts of common sense.
The amendment fails as a matter of politics.
It fails as social justice.
It fails as economics.
Yet 300 House members, including 72 Democrats, signed up anyway.
The amendment would be inequitable because budget cutbacks would single out the disadvantaged.
The G.O.P.-controlled Congress vows not to touch Social Security, defense or Medicare.
That means it must cut an astonishing 30 to 50 percent of domestic discretionary programs.
The first to go will be those housing and social-service programs whose only support is among the politically vulnerable.


Witco Corp.(WIT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Amid Glamor of the Ski Resorts Lurk Poverty and Exploitation
To the Editor:
Now that there's no doubt winter has arrived, another ski season is upon us.
In rural northern New England what this means is that thousands of vehicles with out-of-state plates are flocking north to the slopes.
Somewhat less spectacular but every bit as important is the fact that thousands more seasonal resort workers are earning another paycheck.


Rosenfeld, Sirowitz Shifts on Airline Job
Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss in New York said yesterday that it had withdrawn from a review being conducted by its largest client, America West Airlines, and would instead work to help another participant, Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York, land the airline's estimated $20 million account.
"We felt the best way to do it was to team up with a larger agency," Leonard Sirowitz, co-chairman and chief creative officer at Rosenfeld, Sirowitz said in confirming a report this week in Adweek.
The account, which has been at Rosenfeld, Sirowitz for the last 11 years, was placed in review earlier this month; a decision is expected sometime in February.


USX-Marathon Group (MRO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ESPN2 Adding Hockey Program
ESPN2 will broaden its hockey coverage next week when it launches a 30-minute hockey program that will be broadcast five nights a week at 11:30 P.M.
"NHL 2Night" will feature reports about National Hockey League games and off-ice transactions along with news from the colleges and minor leagues.
It will appear every night except Sunday and Monday or when ESPN2 is showing a live event.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: SUPER BOWL XXIX -- Advertising; Super Bowl Campaigns Break Long Losing Streak
Was the Super Bowl a super bore?
Then you must have watched the game instead of the commercials.
In a twist only slightly less astonishing than if the 49ers had returned to San Francisco ringless, many of the expensive and elaborate spots that ran Sunday during Super Bowl XXIX, seen by the estimated 120 million people who watched all or part of the game, were actually enjoyable and entertaining.


U.S. Demands Repayments From 9 States
The Department of Health and Human Services said today that nine states had improperly collected $449 million in Medicaid matching funds from the Federal Government and would have to repay the money.
The department also said that those nine states, as well as nine others and the District of Columbia, might owe the Government an additional $2.5 billion for their creative way of raising money to help pay Medicaid bills in 1993 and 1994.


AIDS Is Now the Leading Killer of Americans From 25 to 44
AIDS has become the leading cause of death among all Americans aged 25 to 44, new Federal data show.
The data were reported for the first time at a scientific meeting here today.
AIDS surpassed unintentional injury, the Government's category for accidents, which dropped to second place in this age group, said Dr.
Harold W. Jaffe, a top AIDS official at the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.
Cancer and heart disease were third and fourth, followed by homicides and suicides.


Newell Co.(NWL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Westamerica Bancorp (WABC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Telefonos de Chile
American depository receipts of Compania de Telefonos de Chile tumbled yesterday amid fears that the Mexican crisis would spread and that a local price war would hurt the Chilean phone carrier.
Each A.D.R. represents 17 shares.


No Headline
"In this important anniversary year, veterans and their families were expecting, and rightly so, that the nation would honor and commemorate their valor and sacrifice. They were not looking for analysis and, frankly, we did not give enough thought to the intense feelings such analysis would evoke." -- I. MICHAEL HEYMAN, secretary of the Smithsonian.  [ A1:4. ]


Gourmet Food Stores Merge
Hay Day Markets, a chain of specialty food stores in Westport, Conn., has merged with Sutton Place Gourmet, a Washington-based chain of fancy-food shops.
The merger is part of an expansion started six months ago by Sutton Place Gourmet, a privately held company that has received backing from Catterton-Simon Partners, a private investment group based in Bethesda, Md.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.


Peso Plummets Anew on Fears Congress Won't Assist Mexico
The battered Mexican peso plummeted today to its lowest point yet in the current crisis, driven down by mounting doubts that the United States Congress would approve the $40 billion in loan guarantees for Mexico proposed by the Clinton Administration.
The Mexican currency closed at 6.35 pesos to the dollar, down nearly 10 percent from Friday's close of 5.735.
Its continuing decline disrupted financial markets and provided ammunition for officials here and in Washington who have warned that Mexico needs a rescue package to keep its economic crisis from becoming a financial debacle that could affect the rest of the world.


Green's Job Is Secure
The job of Minnesota Vikings Coach DENNIS GREEN is secure despite allegations that he and an assistant sexually harassed women.
The Vikings' president, ROGER HEADRICK, told ESPN in an interview broadcast on Sunday that Green's job is "absolutely not" in jeopardy following the reports, which Headrick said contained many inaccuracies.
The Star Tribune, The Saint Paul Pioneer Press and KSTP-TV reported over the weekend that Green and an assistant, RICHARD SOLOMON, were named in a 1993 affidavit just made public by a fired Vikings employee, DAN ENDY 3d. (AP)


From Ski Slopes of Europe to a Rape Trial?; Eight Years After Fleeing, an Ex-Darien Athlete Surrenders in Switzerland
When Alex Kelly last saw his parents' home here, he was 18, just graduated from high school, a handsome athlete about whom the description all-American came easily.
He was also awaiting trial in the rape of two teen-age girls.
He went to Colorado to work at a ski resort, and didn't return.
Fleeing to Europe, the authorities say, for the next eight years he moved freely among ski resorts there while his parents dealt at home with the consequences of his flight.


G.O.P. to Start From Scratch In Revising Toxic Dump Law
The Republican lawmakers in charge of drafting changes to the Federal program that cleans up the nation's worst toxic dumps signaled today that they would start fresh when they review the law this year and would put aside a compromise negotiated with industry and environmental groups last year.
The remarks by the chairmen of House and Senate subcommittees that will draft new Superfund legislation suggest that the debate this year could be far more tempestuous than last year, when a compromise supported by the Clinton Administration gained bipartisan approval by five committees but never came to the House or Senate floor for final votes.


One Season, Four Coaches
You'll pardon the Runnin' Rebels of the University of Nevada at Las Vegas if they can't tell their coach without a scorecard.
They began the school year with ROLLIE MASSIMINO, then came TIM GRGURICH, then HOWIE LANDA and now CLE EDWARDS.
Over the weekend, Landa announced he was stepping down as acting coach.
He has been subbing for Grgurich, who left the team Jan. 6 and entered a hospital, complaining of medical problems related to exhaustion.
Edwards will serve as the new acting coach, assisted by DAVID RICE, until Grgurich returns. (AP)


Muslims Argue the Theology of Peace With Israel
An explosive argument over whether making peace with Israel conforms to the precepts of Islam is building among Muslim theologians in Saudi Arabia and Egypt, adding a new layer of complications to the Middle East peace talks.
The issue flared after Saudi Arabia's highest theological authority, Sheik Abdel-Aziz ibn Baaz, issued a religious edict, or fatwa, in December affirming the right of Saudi rulers to pursue normal relations with Israel.


Corrections
A picture in the Styles pages on Jan. 15 showing the Coco Loco restaurant in Washington, with an article about the new importance of restaurant lighting, carried an incomplete credit.
The picture was by Maxwell MacKenzie/Adamstein &amp; Demetriou Architects.


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI PROPOSES DEEP CUTS IN WELFARE
Governor Pataki proposed deep cuts in welfare programs in New York State, calling for tough new restrictions on eligibility, broad requirements for work and reductions in benefits for both able-bodied recipients and mothers with children.
A1.


Rate Rise Is Widely Expected
Some of the players will be new but the result, most analysts say, will be more of the same -- higher interest rates -- when the Federal Reserve meets Tuesday and Wednesday.
The Fed's chief policy-making arm, the Open Market Committee, is expected to raise short-term interest rates for the seventh time in a year.
Many analysts expect an increase of half a percentage point in the Federal funds rate, which is what banks charge each other when they borrow money overnight.
Such a move would lift the Fed's target for short-term interest rates to 6 percent, exactly double the level from which the increases started last February.


49er Fans, Welcome To the Seifert Dynasty
Fewer than 10 hours after putting on one of the most exhilarating displays of offense in Super Bowl history, the 49ers were still giddy.
And even though they could lose their offensive and defensive coordinators, it's likely that San Francisco will make a strong run for a sixth title next year.
Coach George Seifert, who said he was still numb this morning from all the excitement, was asked whether San Francisco had built a dynasty.


PATAKI PROPOSING DEEPEST CUTBACKS IN WELFARE PLANS
Gov.
George E. Pataki today proposed the deepest cuts in the 60-year history of welfare programs in state, calling for tough new restrictions on eligibility, broad requirements for work and reductions in benefits for both able-bodied recipients and mothers with children.
Mr.
Pataki, a Republican who made welfare policy a centerpiece of his campaign, insured that his proposals received singular attention by announcing them at a news conference two days before he is to unveil his budget for the coming fiscal year.
Normally, a governor would include the recommendations as part of his budget proposal to the Legislature.


Bringing Dante Into the Realm Of Contemporary English
It was not a late-born obsession with evil or the ways of damnation that drove Robert Pinsky to translate Dante's "Inferno," the 14th-century poet's odyssey through hell.
Rather, it was the challenge of tackling the first slice of the "Divine Comedy," perhaps the greatest poem ever written.
The "Inferno" had been rendered into English a hundred times by scholars and writers, and yet remained elusive, unmastered, poetry's Everest of the underworld.
Some, like Dorothy L. Sayers in the late 1940's, had gone for a strict line-by-line translation of the "Divine Comedy," and ended up with a work that sounded stilted to the English ear, lacking the momentum of the Italian original.
The poet Allen Mandelbaum, whose paperback version is widely used in university courses, worked 20 years to preserve the line-by-line sequence and diction of Dante, but did not attempt to match rhymes.
Charles S. Singleton's 1970 edition -- considered perhaps the most scholarly, with separate volumes for notes -- eschewed the poetic form altogether for a painstakingly literal prose translation.


CitFed Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cosmos's Missing Mass: Wispy Particle Weighs In
Particles so slight they were long thought to have no mass at all may be some of the most consequential matter in the universe, probably much more abundant and substantial than all the ordinary matter in planets, stars and galaxies.
In experiments aimed at answering one of the most intriguing questions in particle physics and cosmology, scientists at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico have produced especially strong evidence that these elusive particles, called neutrinos, do indeed have mass.


Khmer Rouge Insist They Killed Woman Visiting From U.S.
The Khmer Rouge, eager to take responsibility for the slaying of an American professor earlier this month in northwestern Cambodia, insisted today that they had rewarded the killers with 10 water buffaloes, 10 oxen and $4,000.
In a radio broadcast monitored here in the Cambodian capital, the Maoist-inspired rebels said that 10 Cambodians arrested last week for the killing of Susan Ginsburg Hadden, a professor at the University of Texas at Austin, were innocent.


Devils Ready to Hear Cheers of Home Crowd
The Devils have gone from the best season in their history to the worst start in their history.
They will play their first game at home this season Tuesday after going without a victory in four road games.
There was optimism from Coach Jacques Lemaire down to the players after today's practice that playing at home should be an advantage after losses in Buffalo, Boston and Montreal after a season-opening tie in Hartford.


CHRONICLE
Think no one remembers what's said (or sung) at those news briefings that occur every day at the State Department?
Fifteen years ago, HODDING CARTER 3D, the State Department spokesman during the Iran-hostage crisis, berated reporters for printing remarks he had made about the crisis -- off the record, he thought -- at Princeton University, his alma mater.
After news executives accused him of being irresponsible, he sang "Call Me Irresponsible" at a briefing and said there was nothing else to report.
Over the years, the song became something of an anthem for Mr.
Carter and his wife, PATT DERIAN, a former Assistant Secretary of State.


Valley National Bancorp (VLY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


You Say Boccie, I Say Boules


Peru: On the Very Fast Track
Which country recorded the world's highest growth rate last year?
If you thought it was China, Malaysia or Brazil, guess again.
It was Peru, which had been written off a few years ago as a bomb-scarred basket case.
In 1994, though, the Peruvian economy expanded 12 percent.
Foreign investors are suddenly big players in this $32 billion economy, more than doubling their holdings last year, to $5.8 billion from $2.3 billion.
Even Peru's current border skirmishes with Ecuador look unlikely to tarnish the nation's luster for investors.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
2 Divas on Display In Florid Puccini Work  'Turandot' Metropolitan Opera
Two of the Metropolitan Opera's more volatile stars helped launch Friday's revival of Puccini's "Turandot." Gwyneth Jones sang the title role, generating the amazement her recent performances have customarily inspired.
Miss Jones's soprano can still knock over a healthy man at 200 paces.
Not only are her attacks shattering to the ear; their intensity, further influenced by a wide wobble, push a good part of her delivery well above the pitch.


Governors Deadlocked on Replacing Welfare Programs With Grants to States
Split along party lines, the National Governors' Association could not agree today on whether to endorse Republican proposals to replace existing welfare programs with lump-sum payments of cash to the states.
The impasse represents a setback for Republican governors and House Republicans who support such lump-sum payments, or block grants.
The House of Representatives still appears likely to approve them; the outlook in the Senate is unclear.


Jubilant Visit of African Rhythms
West Africa is the land of griots, singers who carry history, homilies and praise on twinkling, open-ended patterns.
Griots are musical and conceptual ancestors of blues singers, rappers and various tuneful commentators around the Caribbean.
With fervent voices and intricate, hypnotic vamps, two West African groups played in New York last week.
Hadja Soumano and Leou Tirera, two women from Mali, were accompanied by a superb, unnamed band at S.O.B.'s on Wednesday, and two nights later, Baaba Maal, from Senegal, and his band, Daande Lenol ("voice of the people"), were at Irving Plaza.


Market Place; QVC rebounds on the belief that some sort of takeover is certain.
STOCK in QVC Inc. took a gentle dive when news came out in mid-January that the Federal Trade Commission was likely to oppose a plan by Tele-Communications Inc. and the Comcast Corporation to take over the television shopping network.
But since then, the stock has made up about half of what it lost.
It closed yesterday at $43.625, off 25 cents, in Nasdaq trading.
The rebound, several cable analysts say, reflects a belief that despite the F.C.C.'s reservations, QVC will be taken over, either by Tele-Communications and Comcast or by Comcast and a new partner.


Pearl Lang Remembers the Holocaust Her Way
Pearl Lang's accomplishments in the world of modern dance have been unusually varied and enduring.
Her luminous presence graced the Martha Graham Dance Company, in which she danced leading roles (including Graham's), from the 1940's to the early 70's.
As a star teacher, her influence has been felt at the Graham school, among aspiring actors at various drama schools (she is married to the actor Joseph Wiseman) and even by rock stars (Madonna was in her company).
Major revivals in the Graham company have benefited from her stagings and coaching.
Since 1952, she has choreographed for her own troupe.


NL Industries(NL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Restart by Mercedes
Mercedes Benz Mexico S.A. said it has restarted operations at its two plants in Mexico after stopping production Jan. 4 following the plunge in the Mexican peso.
Mercedes said it would hire a larger number of Mexican suppliers to take advantage of cheaper Mexican auto parts.


Lawyer Is Convicted of Assaulting Officer
A Bronx lawyer who accused two Greenburgh police officers of beating him and using racial slurs has been convicted of assaulting one of the officers in the same incident outside his Greenburgh apartment.
The lawyer, Lijyasu Monty Kandekore, 50, was found guilty of assault, resisting arrest and driving with impaired ability by a Westchester County Court jury on Saturday.


Giuliani Is Looking at Social Services for More Budget Cuts
In a third round of cuts to balance the current budget, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the City Council are considering a $206 million reduction that would fall heavily on the departments that oversee social services and programs for the homeless.
The deficit-reduction plan calls for cutting the Human Resources Administration by $34 million and the Department of Homeless Services by $6 million, according to Council members.
The plan may come before the Council for a vote as early as Thursday.


How to Improve America's Handwriting
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 25 article on handwriting, "Can You Read This?", notes that in the 19th century, "good handwriting was considered a measure of intelligence and the mark of social status as well."


EAB reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hercules Inc.(HPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tyson Foods Inc.(TYSNA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pataki's Move to Unclog Prisons
In a breakthrough for common sense, Gov.
George Pataki has persuaded Republican legislative leaders to consider changing at least some of the sentencing rules that have clogged New York State prisons with nonviolent drug addicts who might be better served by drug treatment and other cheaper alternatives to incarceration.
The changes will target the so-called second-felony-offender law passed in 1973, under which sentences rise sharply for anyone convicted of two felonies within 10 years.
That law mandates stiff prison terms for hordes of young, low-level drug users and dealers who are caught twice.


Q&amp;A
Snail Diets
Q.  I found a snail in the garden and am keeping it in a terrarium. What do snails eat?


L.I.R.R. Trial Has Adviser 'Disgusted'
By continuing to serve as his own lawyer and to cross-examine victims of the Long Island Rail Road shooting spree, Colin Ferguson has "taken a wrecking ball to his own case," one of his legal advisers said today.
The adviser, Alton G. Rose, said that Mr.
Ferguson had alienated jurors by badgering the very people he is accused of shooting.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Mixing Original Works With Some of the Standards  Robert DeGaetano, pianist and composer Weill Recital Hall
Robert DeGaetano is playing both standard repertory and his own music in a five-concert series that ends on March 2.
The fourth installment, on Saturday evening, was to have been devoted entirely to original works, including a song cycle.
But because Mr.
DeGaetano's singer was ill, he played Chopin's Scherzo in B flat minor instead.


GP Financial Corp.(GNPT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prodigy Sees Quick Growth From Internet Web Service
The Prodigy Services Company, struggling to regain ground it has lost in the consumer on-line information industry, said yesterday that the addition of a new Internet feature had led to phenomenal growth in the last two weeks.
The company said that more than 100,000 Prodigy customers, many of them new subscribers, signed up for special software that lets them connect to the Internet's World Wide Web since the company began offering it on Jan. 17, and that the sign-up rate was continuing at 12,000 a day.
Prodigy has an estimated 1.2 million users.


Midseason Finds Knicks Right in Thick of Things
The Knicks have reached the halfway point of their 82-game regular season in far better shape than they were a month ago.
By winning 15 of their last 17 games, the Knicks (27-14) have gone from being a .500 team to being a rejuvenated title contender.
Not that the slow start wasn't costly.


An Anguished Audience In a Theater of the Absurd
FRANK BARKER, who had a bullet in his tongue and four holes in his body after the Long Island Rail Road shooting spree, was facing Colin Ferguson, the man he said shot him.
Mr.
Ferguson was angry.
"Judge, I would have asked that the witness be punished for perjury," Mr.
Ferguson told Judge Donald E. Belfi in Nassau County Court yesterday.
"Excepting that he's injured, so my sympathy goes out to him."


Police Official Claims Dismissal Was the Result Of His Agenda
Openly upset with his abrupt dismissal, the Deputy Police Commissioner, Walter S. Mack Jr., accused senior commanders of the Police Department yesterday of resisting his efforts to combat police perjury and other criminal misconduct.
Mr.
Mack and two of his confidants said that the Deputy Commissioner had proposed a number of aggressive tactics to weed out officers who lied in court, brutalized suspects or stole drugs or money from dealers.


Plunge by Mexican Peso Jars U.S. Stocks
The markets opened with a shudder yesterday.
Another headlong plunge by the Mexican peso sent American stock and bond prices tumbling, with the dollar falling to a three-month low against the German mark.
The peso dropped to its lowest value yet in the current crisis, closing at 6.35 to the dollar, down nearly 10 percent from Friday's close of 5.735.
It has lost 45 percent of its value since Dec. 19, when its malaise began.


Fixing What You Thought You Fixed
COMPUTERS and the people who program them can sometimes be too smart for their own good.
The latest example is a bizarre byproduct of the notorious Intel Pentium bug.
Fire up a spreadsheet that originated on a buggy Pentium machine, run it on one with a new chip, and you may discover that two identical math computations can produce two answers, one right and one wrong.
The original Pentium chips, you will recall, caused very occasional errors in division.
Just how occasional remains a matter of dispute, but the ensuing outcry was enough to prod the Intel Corporation into offering to replace the defective chips for anyone who complained.
The toll-free number for starting the replacement process is (800) 628-8686.
The next step depends on who sold you your computer: Intel may replace the chip or refer you to your vendor.


Neither Snow Nor Shovels


Hiroshima: A Controversy That Refuses to Die
Fifty years after the B-29 Superfortress Enola Gay was used to drop an atomic bomb on Hiroshima, the decision that ushered in the nuclear age is still the subject of fierce historical debate.
The issue stirs enormous passions: at one pole speculative estimates of how many Americans would have died invading Japan, and were presumably spared because of the bombing, and at the other pole whether the attack in August 1945 was necessary to end the war.


On My Mind; What Americans Want
Slash government, lean and mean it.
Certainly it may do some good and it will be a kind of crash diet that will make us feel glowy about ourselves before we start fattening up again on our own favorite cream pies.
Oh, the delicious variety of them -- all those subsidies, grants, tax breaks, lifetime entitlements and investor bailouts we each decide we cannot live without, depending on our desires, age, race, national origin, mortgages, regional location, what we do for a living and how much we make.
Politicians and voters have decided for the time being that government is the enemy, not what they themselves do to, with or for government.


CHRONICLE
CHEVY CHASE, the film actor and former star of "Saturday Night Live," was arrested for drunken driving and spent Thursday night in jail, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Police officers in Beverly Hills, Calif., saw him driving at 70 miles per hour, making unsafe lane changes and tailgating, Police Lieutenant Frank Salcido said, adding that Mr.
Chase had a blood-alcohol level more than twice the legal limit.
Heidi Schaeffer, the actor's publicity agent, said yesterday that she had no comment on the matter.
NADINE BROZAN


DNA Tests Clear Man of Rape Nearly 8 Years After Conviction
A man who has served eight years in prison for a 1986 rape will be released because DNA tests show he was wrongly convicted, the Westchester County District Attorney, Jeanine Pirro, said today.
The tests, one obtained by lawyers for the man, Terry Leon Chalmers, the other by the District Attorney's office, prove that he could not have committed the crime, Mrs.
Pirro said.


As Complex Trial Gets Under Way, a Picture of Jury Emerges
The details are so complex, and there will be so many of them, that Judge Michael B. Mukasey gave each of the jurors -- five men and seven women -- a bit of help: a spiral notebook to jot down the opening statements.
For this jury, there is a lot of work ahead.
After a search through hundreds of potential jurors, these 12 were chosen, in part because they said they could devote the next six to nine months of their lives to hearing the biggest terrorism case ever presented by the Government.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The Mexican peso plunged nearly 10 percent, dragged down by fears that Congress would not approve the proposed $40 billion in loan guarantees.
The peso's plunge unsettled markets in Mexico, elsewhere in Latin America and in the United States.  [ Page A1. ]


How a Gap in the Fermat Proof Was Bridged
FERMAT'S last theorem, which has tantalized mathematicians for more than 350 years, has at last been solved, say those who have read the revised but not yet published proof.
But the endgame of this furious chase has proved as full of last-minute surprises as a murder mystery.
For Dr.
Andrew Wiles of Princeton University, the chief author of the proof, triumph had to be snatched from the jaws of disaster.
His first proof, which aroused worldwide attention when announced two years ago, turned out to contain a gap, which Dr.
Wiles found he was unable to cross alone.


Biggest U.S. Terrorist Trial Begins as Arguments Clash
After months of preparation, the prosecution and defense lawyers made opening arguments yesterday in the biggest terrorist trial ever to come to an American courtroom.
They immediately clashed sharply over the charges, the evidence and, perhaps most important, the credibility of the key witness in the case, a man who even the Government admitted had once lied under oath in a New York State courtroom.
Beginning the Government case against Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 11 other men, accused of plotting to blow up the Hudson River tunnels and the United Nations Building and other crimes, a Government prosecutor, Robert S. Khuzami, told the jury in his very first sentence: "This is a case involving a war."


Dozens Die as Floods Wash Across Northwestern Europe
Scores of communities across northwestern Europe were under water today as floods continued to inundate the region after days of driving rain.
Dozens of people were reported to have been killed in drownings or other flood-related accidents, and tens of thousands fled their homes.
Factories and schools were closed, roads were swamped and utility services disrupted.
The Governments of Germany, France, Belgium and the Netherlands declared states of emergency in flooded regions and sent thousands of police officers and soldiers to reinforce local relief workers.


Martin Amis's Big Deal Leaves Literati Fuming
In London's tight-knit literary world, the exciting news in November that the novelist Martin Amis had demanded an incredible (for here) $794,500 for his forthcoming novel, "The Information," spread like wildfire in a parched forest.
But it didn't become apparent until recently, when a deal was finally consummated and the smoke began to clear, that almost everyone involved had been burned along the way.
There was Mr.
Amis's longtime publisher, a division of Random House U.K., and his longtime agent, Pat Kavanagh, both of whom were replaced during the negotiations.
There was the formidable novelist A. S. Byatt, who gave Mr.
Amis an unusual public tongue-lashing.
There was the sharp-shooting Andrew Wylie, Mr.
Amis's new agent, whom the British press nicknamed the Jackal.
And then there was Mr.
Amis himself, pilloried for unseemly and un-British greed by an unforgiving London press.


McCarver Signs On for Two More Seasons With the Mets
Despite the distinct possibility that baseball will open the season with replacement players, WWOR-TV/Channel 9's Tim McCarver is enthusiastic that his new two-year contract guarantees his presence when the Mets' season begins.
"Baseball's my passion," said McCarver, who re-enlisted last week after months of talks, mostly with Fred Wilpon, the Mets' co-owner.
"On Monday, I'm going to Puerto Rico for the Caribbean World Series for the first time."


Dozens Killed in Floods in Northwestern Europe


Wolf's Howl Heralds Change for Old Haunts
THE serene, snowy valley of the Lamar River in Yellowstone National Park would be a cafeteria for wolves at this time of year.
Thousands of elk, deer and bison, driven from higher elevations by winter, congregate in the valley.
But wolf packs have not prowled it for decades, so the animals that would be their natural prey live there in comparative peace.
Now, in an ambitious restoration project, two packs and the nucleus of another -- 14 wolves in all, the first of a group that could eventually grow to hundreds -- have been living since the middle of the month in three one-acre pens within the valley and are soon to be set free.
When they are released, the result is likely to be an ecological upheaval whose ripples will spread in time to the farthest, most obscure corners of a region the size of West Virginia.
It is the largest nearly intact ecosystem remaining in the temperate latitudes of North America, and with the wolf's reappearance it will become more or less complete again.


Croatian Serbs Won't Even Look At Plan for Limited Autonomy
A proposal described as the last best effort to avoid a much wider Balkan war was spurned late today by leaders of the Serbian nationalists who control a third of Croatia.
Diplomats who traveled to Knin, the Serbian rebels' capital, to present a plan for limited autonomy for the Serbs in Croatia said that after months of effort, the international community had developed a plan that was as fair as possible to both sides.


Capital One Financial (COF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
It was one of those moments an audience dreads: the announcement that a star will be unable to appear.
TRUDY MILLER, acting director of the Tisch Center for the Arts at the 92d Street Y, appeared on stage on Saturday evening and Sunday afternoon as the audiences were settling in for concerts by the New York Chamber Symphony and announced, "The noted Russian pianist VLADIMIR FELTSMAN will not be appearing."


USX-Delhi Group (DGP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


DQE (DQE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jeffrey P. Beck Is Dead at 48; Flamboyant Wall St. Star of 80's
Jeffrey P. Beck, a flamboyant merger-and-acquisition specialist on Wall Street who rose to prominence in the 1980's, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 48 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was a heart attack, his wife, Anna, said.


Kidd Hospitalized
JASON KIDD, weakened by flu symptons and dehydration, was hospitalized last night and likely will miss the Dallas Mavericks' next two games.
Kidd, the second pick in last year's draft, has started every games this year.
Tonight's game against Milwaukee, featuring No. 1 pick GLENN ROBINSON, was to have been a matchup between the top two selections of the past draft.
Kidd is also expected to miss a road game Wednesday against Minnesota.
"He's not feeling very good at all," Mavericks Coach DICK MOTTA said.
"He's not responding to the medication. He came to (practice) and looked like death warmed over." (AP)


Islanders Recall Taylor
Reeling from consecutive defeats, the Islanders (2-2-1) recalled 22-year-old center CHRIS TAYLOR from their International Hockey League affiliate in Denver.
The Islanders have been having trouble scoring.
Taylor, the team's second pick in the 1990 draft, has a team-leading 27 goals and 30 assists in 47 games at Denver.
With 57 points, Taylor is currently seventh in the I.H.L. in scoring..


Albank Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.81
5.67
3.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.73
2.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.10
6.10
3.16
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.62
7.61
5.64
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.75
7.73
6.23
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.62
8.58
7.15
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.70
6.73
5.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


INSIDE
Simpson Team Reprimanded
The judge in the O. J. Simpson murder trial reprimanded the defense for violating disclosure rules and let the prosecution supplement its opening statement.
Page.
A18 Sickle Cell Treatment
For the first time, a drug has effectively attacked the underlying cause of the disease rather than simply its painful symptoms.
Page C1.
Soccer Death Shakes Italy
With tensions high after the stabbing of a Genoese fan, Italian sports officials suspended all national events for this Sunday.
Page B7.


Bay View Capital Corp.(BVFS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Old Republic Intl.  Corp.(ORI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Medicaid Repayments
The Federal Health Department said that nine states, including New York, had improperly obtained $449 million in Medicaid matching funds and must repay Washington.
The department also said that the bill to those states and nine others could run as high as $2.5 billion.
Article, page A15.


