Vacco Plans To Halt Curb On Gay Bias
Attorney General Dennis C. Vacco plans to rescind explicit job protection for homosexuals at the New York State Law Department, reversing a 15-year-old anti-discrimination policy.
The plan has unnerved and enraged lesbian and gay political leaders and their supporters, who fear the proposal's symbolism as much as its substance.
They believe that Mr.
Vacco, a recently inauguarated Republican, is sending out a signal that his office, which enforces civil rights and other laws, does not believe that anti-gay bias is a concern.


Hanna (M.A.) Co. (MAH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc.(CCE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Helmerich &amp; Payne (HP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Promising Season Turns Painful
Just when Don Nelson thought there was nobody good enough left on his team to break his rules, a rookie center named Clifford Rozier blew off the morning shootaround for last night's game against the Knicks.
Nelson, suddenly the National Basketball Association's poster coach for being abused by players, could only shrug and order a one-game suspension.
His Golden State Warriors were down to nine bodies, few of them familiar, at Madison Square Garden.


A New Stage for Meola
TONY MEOLA, the goalie for the United States World Cup team last summer, said yesterday that he would leave the Buffalo Blizzard of the indoor National Professional Soccer League to take a lead role in the Off Broadway play "Tony 'n' Tina's Wedding." Meola, who will play five more games for the Blizzard before departing on Feb. 16, said he had signed for a five-week stint in the play.
He might be back for the playoffs after the season ends March 26. (AP)


Islanders Glow With a New-Look Lineup
Two one-sided losses did more than send the Islanders into some serious soul-searching.
They prompted Coach Lorne Henning to make a handful of lineup changes tonight.
And he came away with an ear-to-ear smile.


Polaroid Corp.(PRD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New England Electric System (NES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ex-Fugitive Pleads Guilty in a 1971 Killing
Ricardo S. Caputo, who had said that he suffered from multiple personalities that made him kill at least four women in the 1970's, pleaded guilty today to manslaughter in the death of his first victim 24 years ago on Long Island.
Mr.
Caputo, who surrendered last March after 20 years as a fugitive in North and South America, said that as part of a plea bargain, he was abandoning his original plea of not guilty by reason of insanity.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about the quarterly financial results of three health care companies misstated the reason for a payment by Merck &amp; Company to E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company.
The $499.6 million charge, which will be paid over several years, is Merck's obligation based on the favorable performance of pharmaceutical products that Du Pont contributed to a joint venture, the Du Pont Merck Pharmaceutical Company.
Merck said the payment was not caused by the withdrawal of the drug Cozaar from the venture.


Chubb Corp.(CB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lancaster Colony (LANC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fina Inc.(FI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BMC West Corp.(BMCW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Comedy and Minimalism, Performed With Ardor
Jerome Robbins's ballets, no matter how plotless, are about human relationships, and the New York City Ballet has performed them with a vibrant emotional resonance this season.
"The Concert" seen on Sunday night at the New York State Theater, is a rarity: a comic ballet that works.
"Glass Pieces," given last Wednesday night, uses its music by Philip Glass in a distinctive manner.


Dominion Textile reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Banta Corp.(BNTA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Premark Intl.(PMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pataki Budget Would Freeze Aid to Schools
Gov.
George E. Pataki said today that his proposed budget for the next fiscal year would freeze two of the largest forms of state aid to local communities.
But he said that over all, his budget, to be released today, would not shift costs to local governments, and would actually save them more than $1 billion in programs mandated by the state.
He said he would freeze school assistance, the largest block of money that localities receive from the state, at $9.7 billion, and revenue sharing at $529 million.
Given the huge cuts that the Governor has proposed in Medicaid and welfare spending, many local officials said they had expected Mr.
Pataki to cut local assistance.


KLLM Transport Services Inc.(KLLM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


GM Canada reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Carjacker Is Sentenced to 70 Years to Life


Cancer Cases Up, but Future Isn't Bleak
THE news about cancer is both good and bad, a new analysis shows: more of it is being diagnosed, but death rates are holding steady and in some cases are even declining, especially among younger Americans.
And despite a widespread belief to the contrary, there is no evidence of a cancer epidemic.
The analysis, published in today's issue of The Journal of the National Cancer Institute, is the most detailed and comprehensive look yet at recent trends in cancer incidence and mortality in the United States.
The trends for 28 cancers in men and 30 cancers in women suggest that even while more cancers are being diagnosed, people treated for cancer are living longer.
The latest data also reveal that in the first two years of this decade, death rates from cancer in the United States declined for the first time since records have been kept.


Avery Dennison Corp.(AVY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


KCS Energy Inc.(KCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Coleman No Longer All-Star


Curriculum or Not, Teachers Teach Values
As always, Nina Fue starts the day by checking parental signatures.
Anyone who forgot to show his homework to Mom or Dad risks a sweetly stern reminder and a little black mark in Mrs.
Fue's book.
"I bet you didn't forget to eat dinner last night," Mrs.
Fue tells a sheepish Korey Sickler.
"Well, this should be like that. Happens all the time."


Quebecor Printing Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Political Memo; Little Room for Democrats To Maneuver on Welfare
Eighty-four days ago, many of the radical changes in welfare proposed by Gov.
George E. Pataki would have been declared dead on arrival in the Democratic-controlled Assembly.
But in light of Mr.
Pataki's election on Nov. 8, and the resounding call for change voiced by voters in New York and elsewhere, the question for the Assembly Democrats has become where they will draw the line.
Many legislators and advocates for the poor believe the new political dynamic in Albany will leave the Assembly with little choice but to support many of Mr.
Pataki's proposals, particularly those that would make life tougher for welfare recipients who are able-bodied and childless.
The real legislative battle, they assume, will be pitched over efforts to stave off cuts in benefits for the elderly and mothers with children.


Guardsman Products Inc.(GPI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Schools Chief Is Expected To Step Down
Thomas Sobol, the state's embattled Education Commissioner, is to announce later this week that he will retire by the end of the year because of increasing tensions with the new Republican administration of Gov.
George E. Pataki, a state official said tonight.
The announcement, which Mr.
Sobol is expected to make on Friday at a meeting of the State Board of Regents, comes at a time when the Education Department has been increasingly criticized by Mr.
Pataki and lawmakers from both parties as a bloated, insulated and unresponsive bureaucracy.


Santa Fe Pacific Gold Corp.(GLD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stanley Works (SWK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sunbeam-Oster Co.(SOC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Indiana Energy (IEI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Imperial Holly (IHK,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Contel Cellular Inc.(CCXLA,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Raiders' Change in Offing?
A National Football League head coaching change appears to be in the works in Los Angeles, where the Raiders are considered likely to dismiss ART SHELL.
According to a person familiar with the Raiders' thinking, the owner AL DAVIS is ready to replace Shell with the assistant coach MIKE WHITE and may do so by the end of the week.
Davis recently hired former Arizona Coach JOE BUGEL as an assistant head coach.


Saks Scans Manhattan For a Discount-Outlet Site
Saks Fifth Avenue, which built its reputation as a shopping place for the fashion conscious, not necessarily the dollar conscious, will open a bargain store in Manhattan as the company adds to its network of discount outlets.
No location has been chosen for the bargain store, which would become the first Saks Clearinghouse in New York State, Jaqui Lividini, a Saks vice president in charge of public relations, said yesterday.
"We're in the exploratory stages," she said.


LG&amp;E Energy Corp.(LGE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


John H. Livingston, 89, Lawyer And Partner in Venerable Firm
John H. Livingston, a specialist in wills, trusts and estates who was one of the oldest lawyers still practicing in New York, died on Sunday at his home in Oyster Bay Cove, L.I.
He was 89.
The cause of death was heart failure, according to his wife and sole survivor, Elisabeth.


Aviall Inc.(AVL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Quality Food Centers Inc.(QFCI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Helen P. Hayter, 81, Sculptor, Is Dead
Helen Phillips Hayter, an American sculptor, died on Jan. 23 at her home in Greenwich Village.
She was 81 and also had a home in Paris.
Mrs.
Hayter was born in Fresno, Calif., in 1913.
After studies at the California School of Fine Arts in San Francisco, she went to Paris on a scholarship in 1936.
There she studied engraving at Atelier 17, the printmaking workshop of the painter and engraver Stanley William Hayter.
They were married in 1940.


Exide Corp.(EX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


AT WORK WITH: Peter Schickele; When P. D. Q. Meets P. D. Slow
It is one of those hoary musical anecdotes that, no matter how preposterous, survive and even find their way into college classrooms: With an operatic premiere looming, the notoriously laggard composer Giaocchino Rossini was spirited off to a tower by his noble patron to complete the overture, long overdue.
His guards were instructed to drop the pages from a window as completed, for copying; if production stalled, they were to pitch out the composer himself.
As the hours dragged on in the largely deserted studios of Minnesota Public Radio here one Sunday, the tale seemed oddly appropriate, the more so in relation to Peter Schickele, that master of preposterous anecdotes.
For there in the next room was the bearded, bearlike Mr.
Schickele, amiable composer and unrepentant perpetrator of the mercifully mythical P. D. Q. Bach, scribbling a radio script long past the appointed hour.


Power and Romance Among the Old Negro Elite
THE WEDDING
By Dorothy West
240 pages. Doubleday. $20.
The Negro elite of Boston had a servant problem in the years before World War I, for, as Dorothy West explained in her first novel, "The Living Is Easy," "experienced domestics from the South could not be induced to work for people of color." Why should they, when it meant they would have to "use the back doors of a social group who could not use the front doors of their former employers."


For Pinball Artist, It's World Series
GENTLEMAN Kai Bateman was one with the pinball machine.
Obviously he was entirely aware of the tao of it.
As the 32-year-old commercial artist from Colonia, N.J., rolled up mega numbers, a few of the adolescents at the Broadway Arcade at 51st Street turned away from their own games to watch him.
"He's a champion," one of the teen-agers, who probably should have been in school, shouted over the noise.
"He's going to be in the World Series," said another, referring to the World Pinball Championships, which are to begin on Friday and end on Sunday at the Park Central Hotel at Seventh Avenue and 55th Street.


Corrections
Seven news articles between Jan. 13 and Jan. 26 and an Op-Ed page article on Jan. 27, all dealing with Federal charges that Qubilah Shabazz tried to hire someone to kill Louis Farrakhan, misidentified the location of the former Audubon Ballroom, where Ms.
Shabazz's father, Malcolm X, was killed.
It was in the Washington Heights neighborhood of Manhattan, not in Harlem, to the south.


Eating Well
IT'S Dodge City in cyberspace.
Myth and rumor fly as fast as bullets, and the sheriff is nowhere in sight.
Much misinformation is not shot down.
Some of it is harmless, but a lot is dangerous to health and well-being.
There are very few restrictions on the kinds of information that appear on the bulletin boards or in the forums of the three commercial on-line services -- America Online, Compuserve and Prodigy -- or on the Internet.
Combined, they have more than 30 million subscribers.
The anonymity of communicating this way makes it possible for people to provide false information with little fear of the consequences that might occur if someone offered erroneous advice in a newspaper or magazine column, or on radio or television.


Playing Second Fiddle To the Spoken Word
For modern composers, who are trained to regard music as the focus of attention and never as a backdrop, melodrama is an awkward form.
As in opera and song, words are central.
But in those forms the composer dictates pitch, rhythm, tempo, phrasing and coloration, effectively controlling the text's expressive power.
In melodrama, the words and the reader's mastery of it are central.
The music can be supportive, illuminating or in the way, but it is inescapably secondary.
The trick, of course, is to make the music seem so integral that a plain reading would seem naked without it.
The Unterberg Poetry Center at the 92d Street Y posed this challenge to Lee Hoiby, Ned Rorem and Robin Holloway, three composers best known for their expertise at setting texts.
Each was commissioned to write a work for speaker and piano -- specifically, for Claire Bloom and Brian Zeger -- and their very different solutions were given premieres on Monday evening in a program called "Women in Mind."


Ewing Makes All-Star Team
Adding to his list of impressive accomplishments, Patrick Ewing was named to the All-Star team yesterday for the ninth time in his 10-year career.
Ewing has been an All-Star more often than anyone else in the Knicks' history, surpassing the seven appearances of both Walt Frazier and Willis Reed.
And this year's trip to the All-Star Game on Feb. 12 in Phoenix may be more special to Ewing than some of the others.
After undergoing arthroscopic surgery on his right knee in July, Ewing missed the entire preseason and started the regular season slowly.
But in January, he returned to being one of the National Basketball Association's most dominant players.


Kovalev Is Aching for Early Showdown With Penguins
The Rangers are heading to Pittsburgh for a rematch with the undefeated Penguins on Wednesday night.
But they might have to play without one of their top players.
Right wing Aleksei Kovalev missed practice today while recovering from a major bump on the head.
Kovalev suffered the accident Monday night at Madison Square Garden when he crashed into the Ottawa goal post after making a spectacular spin move.


Owens Honor for Mandela
President NELSON MANDELA of South Africa was named yesterday as winner of the second Jesse Owens Global Award, given every two years to an individual "who has made a significant and lasting contribution of enduring quality to society from a background of sports."


Bronx Ring Stole 100 Luxury Cars a Month, Officials Say
Edmanuel's Auto Collision looked like any other grimy body shop in the Bronx, a dark garage full of late-model sedans and mechanics with grease-blackened hands.
Federal authorities said yesterday that Edmanuel's, at 1300 Cromwell Avenue, was the headquarters for a sophisticated ring that stole more than $8 million worth of luxury cars from New York streets over two years.


Some 49ers' Joy Abbreviated
The off season lasted about 36 hours for the San Francisco 49ers' coach, GEORGE SEIFERT, who was faced yesterday with the prospect of losing players from his championship team.
Six players -- offensive tackle HARRY BOATSWAIN, safety DANA HALL, fullback MARC LOGAN, tight end TED POPSON, running back ADAM WALKER and defensive end MARK THOMAS -- were left unprotected yesterday for the Feb. 15 expansion draft and could be with Jacksonville or Carolina next season.
Also, DEION SANDERS and RICKY WATTERS are free agents, and Seifert said the process of trying to re-sign them will begin soon. (AP)


Cominco Ltd. (CLT,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Sold the contract of Troy Neel, first baseman, to the Orix Blue Wave of the Japanese League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Signed George McCloud, guard-forward, to a 10-day contract.
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Suspended Clifford Rozier, forward-center, for one game for missing practice.
LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Activated Sedale Threatt, guard, from the injured list.
Placed Sam Bowie, center, on the injured list.
Signed Kurt Rambis, forward, to a 10-day contract.
Football  National Football League
DENVER BRONCOS -- Named Mike Shanahan coach.
DETROIT LIONS -- Named Frank Novak special teams coach.
Reassigned Steve Kazor, special teams coach, to tight ends coach and offensive assistant.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Named Steve Sidwell linebackers coach.
Reassigned Bob Valesente, linebackers coach, to defensive backs coach.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Named Jim Haslett linebacker coach. Canadian Football League
BIRMINGHAM -- Named Jack Pardee coach and signed him to a five-year contract.
Named John Jenkins offensive coordinator.
Hockey  National Hockey League  ANAHEIM MIGHTY DUCKS -- Recalled Mark Ferner, defenseman, from San Diego of the International Hockey League.
DALLAS STARS -- Acquired lain Fraser, left wing, from the Quebec Nordiques for an undisclosed 1996 draft choice.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Assigned Justin Duberman, right wing, to Johnstown of the East Coast Hockey League.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Recalled Ian Laperriere, center, from Peoria of the International Hockey League.
Assigned Craig Johnson, center, and Jeff Batters, defenseman, to Peoria.
SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Recalled Andrei Nazarov, left wing, from Kansas City of the International Hockey League.
College
CALIFORNIA, PA. -- Named Michael Kolakowski defensive coordinator.
DAYTON -- Named Tim O'Connell business manager for intercollegiate athletics.
FDU-MADISON -- Named Sharon Feeney interim softball coach.


Chargers List Carrington
DARREN CARRINGTON, San Diego's starting strong safety in the Super Bowl, was among six players the Chargers left unprotected yesterday for the N.F.L. expansion draft.
Carrington, who was acquired by San Diego as a free agent before the 1991 season, has started for the last two years.
"In essence, what I told him is that I just didn't feel that we had been physical enough at that position," said the Chargers' coach, BOBBY ROSS.


Crawford &amp; Co. (CRDA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


IES Industries Inc.(IES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wine Talk
FROM 1967 until just a few years ago, one of the most important wine reference books in any library was Alexis Lichine's "Encyclopedia of Wines and Spirits" (Knopf).
Lichine died in 1988 and there has been no attempt since then to update the book.
Now, there may be no need to.
A new star has appeared: "The Oxford Companion to Wine" (Oxford University Press, $49.95).
Edited by the English wine writer Jancis Robinson and written by her and a battery of 70 international wine experts, it is, for the general reader, easily the most complete compendium of wine knowledge assembled in modern times.
And despite the British preference for the more modest word "companion," the book is -- there's no other way to express it -- truly an encyclopedia.
There are more than 3,000 entries and 1,088 pages.


Stolt-Nielsen S.A. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Mets to Offer Ticket Rebates
Buy one now.
Get a rebate later.
That was the contingent inducement offered by the Mets yesterday to get fans to buy tickets at regular prices now, even though they might seem greatly overpriced if the strike continues and the season starts with replacement players in the place of familiar stars.
Should that happen, the Mets said, anyone who has purchased a full-price ticket can get a rebate worth two-thirds of the regular price, a $10 rebate on a $15 box seat ticket, for example, and an $8 refund on a $12 loge or mezzanine reserved seat.
Rebates would be obtained either at the Shea Stadium or by mail.


Stokely USA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Port Authority May Scale Back Airport Rail Line
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is considering scaling back its plan to build a 22-mile railway between Manhattan and its two airports in Queens by 2003 because of rising costs and criticism of the project's effects on traffic congestion, authority officials said yesterday.
Such a move would be a blow to an ambitious proposal that was intended to address longstanding complaints that one of the world's biggest cities relied on a patchwork of inconvenient or expensive options to transport travelers to and from its airports.


A Hollywood Role for a Capitol Star?
Speaker Newt Gingrich likes to talk about renewing civilization, but did he mean Hollywood, too?
Some in Hollywood think so.
The movie moguls want to bring him out.
Not to star in a picture, at least not yet.
But to star at a gala dinner to give a lift to conservatives in Tinsel Town.


Pataki to Freeze Aid
On the eve of releasing his first budget, Gov.
George E. Pataki said he would freeze two of the largest areas of state aid, schools and local governments, but that his overall budget would save them money.
Article, page B1.


Reebok Intl.(RBK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Suspect in Rail Killings Says Police Plotted to Frame Him
Colin Ferguson accused the Nassau County police today of plotting to frame him for killing six people on a Long Island Rail Road train a year ago, and he threatened to subpoena the prosecutor in his murder trial, saying he knew of the scheme.
Mr.
Ferguson, who a defense psychiatrist has said is paranoid and delusional, also accused a detective who testified against him of threatening to kill him.


Scott Helps Red Storm Find Its Missing Confidence
Forget about the six-game losing streak that ended with the 82-77 victory at Michigan on Sunday.
St.
John's considers itself 1-0 after deciding to wipe its slate clean mentally if not physically after an 88-71 loss at Georgetown eight days ago.
"We decided we had hit rock bottom and we were going to start over," Coach Brian Mahoney said yesterday.
"We said we were going back to Oct. 15 and start from there. We didn't have five weeks to prepare for the next game, just three days. But maybe it was helpful."


To Fight Mob, Giuliani Proposes Takeover of Fulton Fish Market
Acknowledging that Federal intervention had failed to eradicate Mafia influence and business abuses at the Fulton Fish Market, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is proposing new laws to permit New York City to take control of the market.
Under the proposals, the city for the first time would investigate, license and regulate all businesses and employees at the market, in lower Manhattan.
And in an attempt to sever suspected Mafia ties to merchants and companies, the city would also have the power to conduct background investigations of companies and their employees and bar those involved in wrongdoing.


KinderCare Learning Centers Inc.(KCLC,NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 16


29th Super Bowl Rates Only 22d
The San Francisco 49ers' 49-26 rout of the San Diego Chargers in Sunday's Super Bowl generated a 41.3 Nielsen rating with a 62 share for ABC, ranking it 22d out of the 29 games.
ABC's last Super Bowl, the Giants' 20-19 thriller over Buffalo in 1991, produced a 41.9 rating.
"We're happy, considering how viewers stayed the whole telecast," said Mark Mandel, an ABC Sports spokesman.
From a peak of 43.7 from 7-7:30 P.M., the rating fell to its lowest point of 39.3 in the final half-hour.


Airborne Freight Corp.(ABF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Everett Adds Stability to His Many Feats
Mark Everett's credentials as a runner are superb.
He has five national outdoor titles in the last seven years at 800 meters and two national titles indoors in the last three years at 500 meters.
He is the third-fastest American ever at 800 meters (1 minute 43.40 seconds) behind Johnny Gray (1:42.60) and David Mack (1:43.25).
And he is ranked third in the world in the 800 behind only Wilson Kipketer and Patrick Konchellah, both of Kenya.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the awards ceremony at the Sundance Film Festival in Park City, Utah, misstated the surname of the film maker who was honored posthumously for the documentary "Black Is . . . Black Ain't." He was Marlon T. Riggs, not Briggs.


Sunny, With an Isolated Shower


Cancer Cases Up, but Future Isn't Bleak
THE news about cancer is both good and bad, a new analysis shows: more of it is being diagnosed, but death rates are holding steady and in some cases are even declining, especially among younger Americans.
And despite a widespread belief to the contrary, there is no evidence of a cancer epidemic.
The analysis, published in today's issue of The Journal of the National Cancer Institute, is the most detailed and comprehensive look yet at recent trends in cancer incidence and mortality in the United States.
The trends for 28 cancers in men and 30 cancers in women suggest that even while more cancers are being diagnosed, people treated for cancer are living longer.
The latest data also reveal that in the first two years of this decade, death rates from cancer in the United States declined for the first time since records have been kept.


Tracor Inc.(TTRR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Italy Death Is Warning For America
THE MURDER happened on Super Bowl Sunday.
It happened before a game I was watching at home on television.
It's my Sunday-morning ritual: my cocker spaniel, a pot of coffee and Italian soccer.
When I saw the sunny stadium in Genoa, the banners waving, the fans chanting, great athletes performing, I wished I could be there.
But I'm not naive.
When I daydream about being at a game, I mean in the press box, behind barricades.
I've been to a few games in Italy, drawn to soccer the way some of my colleagues are drawn to covering war.
And sometimes in Italy, soccer becomes war, the old city-states reviving, Lombards fighting Ligurians, in sneakers and jeans.


Homer Kripke, 83, an Authority On Commercial Rules and Law
Homer Kripke, a professor emeritus of law at both New York University and the University of San Diego who was an authority on commercial law, accounting and securities regulation, died last Thursday at the Kearney Mesa Convalescent Hospital in San Diego.
He was 83 and lived in San Diego.
The cause of death was complications of diverticulitis and kidney failure, said his wife, the former Ann Ehrenfeld.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Nordiques Still Perfect  Center Joe Sakic had a shorthanded goal and added three assists as the Quebec Nordiques beat the visiting Philadelphia Flyers, 5-2, for their fifth straight victory last night to kept pace with the Pittsburgh Penguins, also 5-0, as the National Hockey League's only unbeaten teams.
It is Quebec's fastest start since 1985-86, when the club won its first seven games. (AP)


Women and Children First?; For More Than Half a Century, Two Brothers Have Begged to Differ
First things first: Michael Katen remembers how cold it was when he bivouacked outside the Lincoln Tunnel for four days and four numbing winter nights.
The macaroni and coffee he had brought along froze.
Someone shook his hand and said it felt like an icicle.
It was 1945, and Mr.
Katen's goal was to be the first motorist to pay a toll when the new north tube of the tunnel opened.
After all, he and his brother say that separately or together, they were first at hundreds of things: Mr.
First and Mr.
Second.


Defense Charges Entrapment in Terrorist Conspiracy Trial
Judging from defense lawyers' opening statements, the defendants in the terrorist conspiracy trial will argue that the "war of urban terrorism against the United States" that they are charged with planning was actually an entrapment scheme engineered by the F.B.I., using a shadowy Egyptian double agent who will be the Government's main witness.
"This case is about one of the biggest and most embarrassing moments in the F.B.I.'s history," said John H. Jacobs, the lawyer for Mohammed Saleh, who is accused of providing fuel oil for the manufacture of bombs in the alleged terror plot.


Sears Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sunrise Medical Inc.(SMD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


George Abbott, Broadway Giant With Hit After Hit, Dead at 107
George F. Abbott, who opened on Broadway in 1913 and didn't close for more than 70 years, died yesterday at his home in Miami Beach, Fla.
He was 107 years old.
He died of a stroke in his sleep, said his wife, Joy, who was at his side.
"He died a beautiful death," she said in a telephone interview.


Officer Convicted of Hitting Brooklyn Man
A New York City police officer was convicted yesterday of second-degree assault in striking and seriously injuring a Brooklyn man with his nightstick and police radio.
Officer Gerard Pitti, 31, an eight-year veteran of the force, was found guilty by a jury in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn after six hours of deliberations in a two-week trial.
Prosecutors told the jury that in February 1992, the officer struck the victim, Victor Medina, in the head, face and body, causing injuries that led to a month in the hospital.


Rouge Steel Co.(ROU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lon Chaney, 68, A Tap-Dancer
Lon Chaney, a leading tap-dancer who performed in the musical revue "Black and Blue" and with the Original Hoofers, died yesterday at Bronx Municipal Hospital Center.
He was 68 and lived in the Bronx.
The cause was injuries from an automobile accident in December, said his sister, Evelyn Peterson.


METRO DIGEST
MAYOR SEEKS TAKEOVER OF FISH MARKET
Acknowledging that Federal intervention had failed to eradicate Mafia influence and business abuses at the Fulton Fish Market, Mayor Giuliani is proposing new laws to permit New York City to take control of the market.
A1.
TEACHERS GIVE LESSONS IN VALUES
Teachers of the year across the nation say the heated national debates over values curriculums and school prayer overlook the obvious: that quietly, in their own classrooms, good teachers teach values every day.
A1.


A Hollywood Role for a Capitol Star?
Speaker Newt Gingrich likes to talk about renewing civilization, but did he mean Hollywood, too?
Some in Hollywood think so.
The movie moguls want to bring him out.
Not to star in a picture, at least not yet.
But to star at a gala dinner to give a lift to conservatives in Tinsel Town.


Sweeping Changes Proposed on Meat Safety
THE United States Department of Agriculture yesterday proposed sweeping changes in the archaic way meat and poultry are inspected.
If the changes are approved, Federal inspectors at processing plants will no longer be expected to pick out bacteria-contaminated carcasses as they whiz by; instead, plant officials will be required to take steps to prevent the contamination and then to sample the product through microbiological testing to prove that the measures are working.
The new system will exchange the 90-year-old look-touch-and-feel method of inspection for one based on science, and the responsibility will shift from the Federal inspectors to the processors, although Federal inspectors will still be used to verify the adequacy of the plans.


Geneva Steel Co. (GNV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kroger Co. (KR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


You Can Ride City Hall, However


Augat Inc.(AUG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Genicom Corp.(GECM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Smoothly Covering the Course for PGA Tour
The commissioner of the PGA Tour was striding through the organization's offices in Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla., recently, checking his watch, talking about membership requirements and looking to make certain that workers were correctly taping the seams on a new wallboard.
His pace was brisk and purposeful.
Then he spotted something on the carpet, to the left of his polished black wing tip.
It was a tiny piece of Styrofoam packing popcorn.
Without breaking stride, he bent over and scooped it up, veering just slightly off course so he could toss it into a wastebasket as he continued down the hallway.


Eastman Chemcial Co.  (EMN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Margaret and Walter Frese, Publishers, Die
Margaret and Walter Wenzel Frese, founders of the Hastings House Publishing Company, died on Jan. 24 from injuries sustained in an automobile accident, their son Alan said.
Mrs.
Frese was 83 and Mr.
Frese, 85.
They lived in Stamford, Conn.
Mr.
Frese was president of the Architectural Book Publishing Company, founded by his grandfather Paul Wenzel around 1900.
With his wife, who was known as Polly, he founded the Hastings House Publishing Company in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., in 1936.
Among the works they published were the state guides in the American Guide Series, and photographic and other books by Samuel Chamberlain.
The company also produced a pictorial diary-calendar.


CHRONICLE
ERIC LEWIS, KEN FREED, JOHN DEXTER and CHRIS FINCKEL have been training off and on for six months and seriously for another month, stretching, exercising and getting in shape -- to play Shostakovich.
They are members of the Manhattan String Quartet, and tomorrow at 10 A.M. they will begin a 12-hour marathon at Eastern Connecticut State University in Willimantic.


Stanley Barrows, 80, New York Educator In Interior Design
Stanley Barrows, an educator and mentor to generations of New York City's top designers, died yesterday at Naples Community Hospital in Naples, Fla.
He was 80.
The cause was respiratory failure from complications of pulmonary disease, said Susanna Barrows, Mr.
Barrows's niece.


Tracing the Line of the Second Viennese School
It was boom time in New York last week for composers of the Second Viennese School.
While Christoph von Dohnanyi, one of atonality's most persuasive proponents, offered Alban Berg's "Wozzeck" and music of Arnold Schoenberg with the Cleveland Orchestra at Carnegie Hall, the Juilliard School carried on with its weeklong Focus Festival devoted to the legacy of Anton Webern.
The comprehensive treatment accorded Webern, on the 50th anniversary of his death, was especially welcome.
Despite the inherent and often immediate appeal of his music, it tends to be overshadowed by the grander creations of his colleagues.
He is too easily dismissed as the quaint miniaturist of the bunch.


BIC Corp.(BIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


At the Atlanta Games, Culture Will Be a Serious Competitor
To some skeptics, using the five Olympic rings as the symbol for an exhibition of 130 of the world's greatest works of art is a trifle unseemly.
But don't tell that to J. Carter Brown, the former director of the National Gallery of Art in Washington.
"Because there is so much fame attached to the Olympics, it would be very easy to take the knee-jerk reaction that everything is just part of a big sideshow," said Mr.
Brown, the man behind "Rings: Five Passions in World Art," which will be the centerpiece of the Cultural Olympiad that is being held here in conjunction with the 1996 Summer Olympics.
"It has nothing to do with a logo. It's about interconnectedness, and if there is anything more important to the future of this planet, I'd like to know what it is."


Peco Energy Co.(PE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


When the Dinner Conversation After the Theater Gets Crazy
Anne Meara's "After-Play" may be the perfect New York comedy to attend before going out to dine with dear old friends from Los Angeles you haven't seen in ages.
This is also pretty much the situation in "After-Play," which opened last night in Stage II at the Manhattan Theater Club.
Though not entirely fat-free, it's an easy-to-take, weightless star vehicle for two marvelous actresses, Rue McClanahan and Barbara Barrie.
Marty and Terry Guteman (Merwin Goldsmith and Ms. McClanahan) and Phil and Renee Shredman (Larry Keith and Ms. Barrie) arrive at Manhattan's newest "in" restaurant, having just come from the latest must-see play.
As revealed by their comments, "Jamie, We Hardly Knew You" deals with the immigration experience, a ghost, a dying grandmother, menstruation (and other rites of passage), changing time frames and transcendent metaphors.
The discussion it prompts is intense, sincere and soon nasty.


Rutgers Leader Disavows Linking Race and Ability
The president of Rutgers University today blamed "three words jumbled together" in a talk with faculty members for creating the false impression that he believed a "genetic hereditary background" made it hard for black students to do well on college entrance examinations.
"Let me unequivocally make it clear that I believe that the view that genetic and hereditary factors determine ability and achievement is dead wrong," said the president, Francis L. Lawrence, who has headed the 48,000-student state university since 1990.
"That idea is precisely opposed to my beliefs."


UConn Charges Back To Its Winning Ways
Maybe it was the reality-check 29-point loss to Kansas three days ago.
Or perhaps it was the inferior opposition tonight.
Or maybe Connecticut just reverted to the form that enabled it to win its first 15 games before the 88-59 trouncing by Kansas last Saturday.
Whatever the reason, the Huskies got back on the winning track with ease tonight, crushing Miami, 82-57, before a capacity crowd of 16,294 at the Hartford Civic Center.


Lamb Dish With Orzo, Enlivened by Apples
THERE is something quite comforting and soothing about orzo, the little rice-shaped pasta, and it provides a neutral background for the traditional combination of lamb, apples and onions.
Red wine and red-wine vinegar add punch.
Be sure to choose baby lima beans for the side dish, which has thyme.


Goals by Guerin Do the Trick for Devils
Two blistering shots by Billy Guerin.
That's what it took for the Devils to break into the victory column and into smiles of relief.
That's what provided the margin for a 2-1 victory over the Buffalo Sabres tonight in the home opener at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Devils, who opened the season with a tie at Hartford and had lost their three other games, as well as their scoring touch, responded in the third period tonight, before a crowd of 16,311, about 3,000 short of capacity.


Kleenex, Juice (Sniff), Aspirin, Fax
NANCY SMITH has a two-line telephone, right by her bed, that can handle conference calls.
She has a laptop computer.
She has a boss who leaves anxious-sounding voice-mail messages.
She also has the flu.
So she compromised: she stayed home one day last week, but took part in a meeting on the phone.
The problem was, the conference-call connection had the fidelity of a subway public-address announcement.


Hayes-Dana reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
Europe's Rivers Rage
The Netherlands faced its greatest natural catastrophe in more than 40 years as flood waters continued to rise.
Page A10.
Giuliani to Monitor Police
Defying the City Council's creation of an independent agency to monitor police corruption, the Mayor said he would create his own panel.
Page B3.
Airport Rail Plan in Jeopardy
Plans to build a 22-mile railway between Manhattan and Queens airports may be abandoned because of rising costs and criticism.
Page B1.
Coming: the Absolut Bunny?
Chiat/Day, the creator of the Energizer bunny, will merge with TBWA, the ad agency that made Absolut a household name for vodka.
Page D1.


Henry Kraus, Labor Historian And Writer on European Art, 89
Henry Kraus, the first editor of the United Automobile Workers' national newspaper, a labor historian, an authority on European art and a recipient of a MacArthur Foundation Fellowship, died on Friday in Paris, where he had lived since 1956.
He was 89.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Dorothy.


For AC Milan, Game Goes On Despite Killing
Although Italian authorities have postponed all games in their country for a week to protest the stabbing death of a fan outside the stadium before the AC Milan-Genoa game in Genoa on Sunday, AC Milan will be playing outside the country tonight.
AC Milan, the defending champion, which is owned by Silvio Berlusconi, will be in London for a game against Arsenal at Highbury for the European Cup.
It will be the only game involving an Italian soccer team until Sunday, Feb. 12.


Acme Metals Inc.(ACME,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


American General Corp.(AGC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Grow Group Inc.(GRO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Infinity Broadcasting (INFTA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Allegheny Ludlum Corp.(ALS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


CHRONICLE
Does the world need another radio talk show host?
Two more are jumping on the bandwagon.
JAY SEVERIN, a political consultant to Republicans, made his debut on WOR-AM Monday in a nationally syndicated three-hour show to be broadcast every weekday.
Asked what he would add to the mix, Mr.
Severin, 41, said yesterday, "The talk-show format is well enough established for permutations, and I believe that what I can add is a younger, hipper, more irreverent and broader spectrum of issues."


Knight-Ridder Inc.(KRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Book Notes
Off to a Running Start
Hesiod, a poet writing in 700 B.C., may have needed to remind his fellow Greeks that "right timing is in all things the most important factor." But no one needs to tell that to publishers these days.
Just look at O. J. Simpson's new book, "I Want to Tell You."
The 224-page book arrived in bookstores on Friday, just days after the murder trial began and in the midst of the defense's opening statement.
Since then, the book, in which Mr.
Simpson proclaims his innocence, has been a runaway success for its publisher, Little, Brown.


Gerald Durrell, 70, Who Prized Animals, Dies
Gerald M. Durrell, a British conservationist and author who is credited with creating a role for zoos in the preservation of endangered species, died on Monday in a hospital in St.
Helier on the island of Jersey in the Channel Islands.
He was 70 and lived in the town of Trinity, Jersey.
He died of complications related to a liver transplant he received last year, said Dr.
Mary Pearl, executive director of the Wildlife Preservation Trust International, a conservation group that Mr.
Durrell founded in 1971.


Moyers Joins NBC As News Analyst
Bill Moyers, whose 25-year television career has swung back and forth between the public and commercial networks, will join NBC News this month to deliver commentaries three nights a week on the "NBC Nightly News."
Mr.
Moyers said he would continue to produce and be the host of documentaries for the Public Broadcasting Service.
"My agreement with NBC expressly stipulates that I can do for PBS what I've done before," he said.
"I just won't do as much."


No Headline
"I don't see how I can be value-neutral. If you don't stand up for what you believe in, who's going to stand up for it? NINA FUE, a fourth-grade teacher in New Jersey.  [ B7:1. ]


Giuliani Considers Creating Own Police-Monitor Panel
Two weeks after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said he would ignore the City Council's vote to create an independent agency to monitor the police, his administration is drawing up a plan to create one of its own.
Mr.
Giuliani has long opposed the Council's plan for an agency to watch over the police and guard against corruption, saying it would give the Council too much power and would duplicate the work of the city's five district attorneys.


Moyers Joins NBC As News Analyst
Bill Moyers, whose 25-year television career has swung back and forth between the public and commercial networks, will join NBC News this month to deliver commentaries three nights a week on the "NBC Nightly News."
Mr.
Moyers said he would continue to produce and be the host of documentaries for the Public Broadcasting Service.
"My agreement with NBC expressly stipulates that I can do for PBS what I've done before," he said.
"I just won't do as much."


Sun Distributors L.P.(SDP.B,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dentsply International (XRAY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Southern Union Co.(SUG,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Horace Mann Educators Corp.(HMN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
A New York native, I was here for a visit with my girlfriend, a Midwesterner.
We were going to see "Pulp Fiction" at a Manhattan movie theater.
We were a few minutes early and my friend found an usher reading a newspaper and asked him where the restrooms could be found.
Without lifting his eyes from the paper, he replied, "Girls around the corner to your left."


Tommy Hilfiger (TOM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Union Decides to Keep Contract-Signing Freeze
On the eve of the resumption of negotiations with the owners, the executive board of the baseball players' union decided today to continue the freeze on contract-signings, potentially preventing some players from signing multimillion-dollar contracts but also disrupting the plans of some teams to improve themselves by signing those players.
The board also voted to advise players on major league 40-man rosters not to report to spring training when camps open in a couple of weeks and to ask players not on 40-man rosters to refrain from playing in exhibition games in Florida and Arizona with strikebreaking, or replacement, players.


Food Notes
Specialty Chains Merge
Hay Day Markets, the Connecticut-based group of five fancy food stores, merged last week with Sutton Place Gourmet, the country's largest chain of specialty food shops.
The merger gives Sutton Place Gourmet, based in Washington, a foothold in the New York region.
"We're hoping that basically our customers will not know the difference," said Alex Van Rensselaer, who started Hay Day Markets with his wife, Sallie, in Westport 17 years ago.
"Our aim is to preserve the specialness and noncommercial, cottage-industry aspect of what we do."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  CHINA FAULTED ON HUMAN RIGHTS  A State Department report on international human rights has concluded that China failed to make progress in all major areas of human rights in the past year.
A1  EUROPE'S RIVERS RAGE  The Netherlands faced its greatest natural catastrophe in more than 40 years as floodwaters continued to rise, forcing more than 100,000 people from their homes.
A10


Cipsco Inc.(CIP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Health Care &amp; Retirement Corp.(HCR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cupid Has Wings, So Why Can't a Brownie?
BROWNIES have tempted Americans for nearly 100 years.
And for Valentine's Day, when gifts of chocolate are customary, brownie companies can expect to be very busy.
Scores of companies send brownies gift-wrapped with messages on cards.
Only a credit card and a telephone or fax machine are needed.


Coleman, Anderson No Longer All-Stars
Derrick Coleman did everything but ask for a recount with his fallaway swishes, determined drives to the goal and his 27 points and 10 rebounds.
Kenny Anderson sat on the team bench in a black turtleneck, his left forearm bruised, a resigned look on his face saying nothing and everything.
It was the night before they were voted out of office, All-Stars no more, thanks to the Eastern Conference coaches, who did not believe that they deserved a second straight selection.
New Jersey had pulled out a wild 99-98 victory over the Trail Blazers in Portland's Memorial Coliseum on Monday night, but Coleman and Anderson knew they were about to lose status among their peers.


Bernard N. Fields, 56, Viral Researcher, Dies
Dr.
Bernard N. Fields, a leading microbiologist and virologist who strongly influenced the direction of viral research, died yesterday at his home in West Newton, Mass.
He was 56.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said officials of Harvard Medical School in Boston, where he was chairman of the department of microbiology and molecular genetics.


Washington Post Co.(WPO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Harper's Late Long-Range Shots Save the Knicks
Derek Harper will miss another All-Star Game, but he enjoyed another stellar performance last night at Madison Square Garden.
Helping the Knicks avoid what would have been a shocking loss, Harper made two crucial 3-point jumpers during the final two and a half minutes to lift New York to a shaky 90-87 victory over the injury-riddled Golden State Warriors.


Of Women And Men, And La Difference
John Stossel is at it again.
Last year, in "Are We Scaring Ourselves to Death?," he pummeled television programs that specialize in unnerving predictions of improbable catastrophes; and in "The Blame Game: Are We a Country of Victims?" he kicked around the national fashion for suing somebody else for one's bad luck or bad judgment.
Now, in "Boys and Girls Are Different: Men, Women and the Sex Difference," he goes after ideologues who insist that the main distinction between men and women is the way they are treated by society.
In Mr.
Stossel's view, that's a variation on the blame game.


'Pocahontas' Premiere Free in Central Park
"Pocahontas," a new animated film by Walt Disney Pictures, is to have its premiere on June 10 on the Great Lawn in Central Park, shown free on four 92-foot screens.
The announcement was made yesterday in Central Park by Michael D. Eisner, the studio's chief executive officer, and by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.


Megadeth Emphasizes Power to the Players
On Friday night, in the first of two sold-out shows at Roseland, Dave Mustaine of Megadeth sang from the point of view of deity and devil, judge and murderer, Government agent and street anarchist.
Though they are all opposites, these characters have at least one thing in common: they all possess power.
While the popular hard-rock bands of the 1990's (like Pearl Jam and Nine Inch Nails) play music in which victims release their rage, Megadeth has stuck to its roots in the 80's and continued to make music in which oppressors show their might.
"I make you wanna scream in pain, and feel your life is just a losing game," Mr.
Mustaine, who was kicked out of Metallica in the early 80's, growled in "Reckoning Day," from Megadeth's sixth and latest album, "Youthanasia" (Capitol).
The force of his lyrics was backed by the band's heavy artillery.
Nick Menza's drum set, propped on silver risers, was outfitted not with one bass drum (the norm) but three, and Mr.
Mustaine and Marty Friedman wielded their guitars like firearms or phalluses, depending on what the situation called for.


Aylin Radomisli-Cates; Psychiatrist, 57
Aylin Radomisli-Cates, a psychiatrist who was the wife of the producer Joseph Cates, died on Jan. 17 in a car accident outside her home in Bedford Hills, N.Y.
She was 57.
After graduating from the University of Lausanne in Switzerland, she became an assistant clinical professor at Cornell University Medical College.
She entered the Army in 1992 as a lieutenant colonel to head the psychiatric service at Fort Sill, Okla.
After two years in the Army, she returned to private practice, opening offices in Bedford Hills and Manhattan.


Lilly Industries Inc.(LICIA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Beneficial Corp.(BNL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Joseph Holzka, 92, Staten Island Banker
Joseph Holzka, a banker on Staten Island for more than 50 years and a former head of the United States Savings and Loan League, died on Jan. 17 in the King James Care Center in Navesink, N.J.
He was 92 and had lived in Todt Hill, S.I.
The cause was heart failure, said his daughter, Barbara Judge of Little Silver, N.J.


Kulicke &amp; Soffa Industries Inc.(KLIC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cooking Up a Storm in Atlanta
UNTIL fairly recently, Atlanta's major contribution to American gastronomy was Coca-Cola.
Today, however, there is a vibrant and growing restaurant scene on all fronts, offering everything from haute French to homey Southern fried chicken.
The steady growth in restaurants -- the number has increased 40 to 50 percent in the last five years, according to industry estimates -- is often attributed to the 1996 summer Olympic Games, which will attract hundreds of thousands of visitors to Atlanta.
But restaurateurs point out that the Olympics haven't arrived and that their places will have to stay in business when the games are just a memory.


Jury Hears of Sheik's 'Jihad' Against U.S.
The first witnesses were called to the stand yesterday in the terrorist conspiracy trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 11 others and -- apparently without the prosecution's intending it -- the trial lurched immediately into whether Mr.
Abdel Rahman was the "ideological leader" of a "jihad organization" whose aim was to conduct criminal operations in the United States.
The first witness in the case was Harlen Bell, an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation who described himself as a specialist on Arabic and international terrorism.
Mr.
Bell was present during a search of Mr.
Abdel Rahman's apartment in Jersey City in June 1993, and he seemed to have been called first for largely technical purposes -- to list things that had been taken from Mr.
Abdel Rahman's home.


Gothi Wins at Windsor Castle
Although it gutted sections of one of Britain's more spectacular landmarks, the fire at Windsor Castle two years ago wasn't, in the end, a total disaster.
For one thing, it encouraged Queen Elizabeth II to open another of her many homes, Buckingham Palace, to admissions-paying tourists as a way to raise money for repairs.
The fire also presented architects with the chance to redesign a relatively small but functionally crucial part of the castle, which was built after the Norman Conquest and sprawls, in heavy stone majesty, over 13 acres in the town of Windsor. (More than 100 rooms were damaged in the fire, but most are being repaired exactly as they were.)


Stocks End Day Mixed as Fed Raises Rates
In another hectic session, the stock market closed mixed but essentially unchanged yesterday, as the Federal Reserve raised interest rates again.
Bonds and the dollar gave back some of their gains from Tuesday.
Banks like Citicorp moved immediately to lift the prime interest rate to 9 percent from 8 1/2 percent.


Nick Lowe's Down-Home Simplicity
Nick Lowe has left irony behind.
Back at the end of the 1970's, Mr.
Lowe emerged as a producer (for Elvis Costello and others) and songwriter who toyed with pop genres and tucked unexpected words into cheerful, catchy tunes.
But on his new album, "The Impossible Bird" (Upstart), he is no longer an arch pop craftsman; the skill remains, but his tone is now sincere.
Leading his new band for a packed house at Wetlands Preserve on Monday night, Mr.
Lowe played a set that explored heartbreak and loneliness before winding up, in encores, with a glimpse of new love.
He hasn't grown sappy or lost his sense of humor.
From country and soul songwriters, Mr.
Lowe has learned restraint; his lyrics don't gush, and he doesn't over-indulge his old taste for wordplay.
Instead, he aims for a telling simplicity; the hymnlike "Lover Don't Go" begins, "There's a hollow in the bed where your body used to be/Like the hollow in your heart where the love once was for me." He sings without pushing too hard, and while his understatement is partly a result of a limited range, he can lend his voice a country quaver or a hint of a yodel.
He makes his words resonate by singing them with quiet longing.


Snap-On Inc. (SNA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Executive Changes
SANTANDER INVESTMENT SECURITIES INC., New York, appointed Aldo Roldan senior vice president and head of fixed-income sales.


Lawyer Puts Medical Training on Trial in Death
In closing arguments, a lawyer for the family of a young woman who died in New York Hospital in 1984 accused the hospital yesterday of defending its training at all costs by trying to conceal a litany of errors by doctors.
"The Libby Zion case is much larger than Libby Zion," said the lawyer, Thomas A. Moore.
"The cause of the medical establishment is at issue."


Washington Slept Here When He Was Very Old
UNDER a light dusting of January snow, this wooded Westchester County town, located some 50 miles north of Manhattan, looks like a sentimental etching by Currier &amp; Ives.
Smoke drifts from the chimneys of white clapboard houses.
Inky shutters flank small-paned sash windows.
And it wouldn't be too difficult to imagine the sound of sleigh bells echoing through the hamlet's rocky hills and wooded gorges.
Purists, take note.
As residents of this quiet moneyed community will admit -- some only after a stiff cocktail and an oath of confidentiality -- Pound Ridge's founding-fathers' allure is fake.
Well, not fake, strictly speaking.
After all, the town was settled in 1718 and several pre-Revolutionary buildings remain intact.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $100 million of medium-term notes due in 2005 though Lehman Brothers.
Callable in five years, the issue is priced at par to yield 8.33 percent.
*
Nationsbank Corp., Charlotte, N.C., filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell $3 billion of securities.


The Neediest Cases; Children Are Moved by Others' Plight
Charity might begin at home, but this winter, some New York children have developed philanthropic leanings in the classroom.
Through bake sales, book collections and chores, they have raised money for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Several dozen children wrote letters in impeccable script explaining their efforts and trumpeting the results.
A fourth-grade class at Kent Elementary School in Carmel, N.Y., made $25 selling books.
Their reasoning was simple:


Circle Rep Names Two New Directors
Austin Pendleton will take over as the artistic director of Circle Repertory Company and Lynn Thigpen will be associate director, the theater announced yesterday.
Tanya Berezin, who ran the company for eight years, has decided to return to acting.
Mr.
Pendleton, 54, is a veteran theater and film actor who has directed and written for the stage as well.
His newest work, "Uncle Bob," opened just last night at the Mint Theater.
Ms.
Thigpen, 46, appeared on Broadway in "Fences" and "Tintypes."


At Pebble Beach, Weather Means No Practice Rounds
Almost every year since 1947, when Bing Crosby first moved his tournament to the Monterey Peninsula, there has been some kind of weather obstacle to overcome.
Rain.
Snow.
Sleet.
Howling winds that blew golf balls off tees and jiggled them on greens.
But even here, where the weather vagaries are such that the locals make preparations for four seasons in one day, there has never been anything like this.
The AT&amp;T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am that gets under way on Thursday will be unique.
Never in the history of this tournament -- or any other tournament on the PGA Tour -- have the players gone into the competition without having played a practice round on the tournament courses.


Barry Reports Washington Is at the Financial Bottom
Bracing residents for severe reductions in services and layoffs, Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. said today that the nation's capital was in worse financial shape than it had ever been.
At a news conference, he said the city's budget deficit could reach $722 million by the end of the fiscal year without the vast spending cuts he said he intends to propose on Thursday.
That amount reflects an additional $230 million in deficit spending that independent auditors discovered in the last six weeks, he said.


Carroll P. Reed; Founder of Ski Shops, 89
Carroll P. Reed, who helped define the style of American skiing through a chain of stores that carried his name and sold skis and ski clothing, died on Sunday at a nursing home near his home in North Conway, N.H.
He was 89.
While recovering from a ski accident in Jackson, N.H., in 1934, Mr.
Reed, a native of West Roxbury, Mass., became captivated by the Mount Washington Valley in New Hampshire, and saw its potential as a ski resort.


The Pop Life
The Jackson Watch
Michael Jackson is the kind of musician who likes to keep everybody -- from his fans to his collaborators to his record label -- in the dark.
His newest album, with the working title "HIStory," was supposed to be in stores in November, just in time for Christmas.
Then it was pushed back to Valentine's Day, and yesterday a spokeswoman for his record label, Epic, said the recording was now rescheduled for some time in the spring.


Selective Insurance Group Inc.(SIGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Interco (ISS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Southdown Inc.(SDW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cilcorp Inc.(CER,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cut, but Be Fair to the City
Gov.
George Pataki has crafted a budget that follows his campaign promises, but also threatens to deal punishing blows to New York City.
Indeed, the Governor's cuts in state aid to the city's schools, subways and hospital and welfare programs are so sweeping that political opponents in Albany seemed stunned.
Mr.
Pataki needed to limit spending, of course, to close the deficit and at the same time make good on his promised tax cuts.
Given the reality that he has the political strength to redistribute revenues in this way, questions of fairness -- in sharing the pain of budget reductions and the rewards of the tax breaks -- become foremost.
Sheldon Silver, the Assembly Speaker, said the $5 billion in spending reductions was "significantly, purposefully targeted at New York City." He foresaw a $100 million loss to schools, a 25- or 30-cent subway fare increase and several hundred million in losses for the Health and Hospitals Corporation.
In other words, he portrays the Governor as contemplating an unfairly brutal blow to the social-services infrastructure of a city with over half of New York State's welfare population.


Bump on Mogul Run Cousin to Ocean Wave
The most skied-out terrain of a downhill area is apt to be a mogul run.
But there is a certain call of the wild to its knobby topography.
What other inbound slope draws skiers to its edge looking like parachutists about to drop out of an airplane?
"Even if you're a good skier, when you come to a mogul run and take that first look down, it's always, oh-oh," said Patti Sherman-Kauf, a mogul skier with two world pro titles.


Carlisle Cos. (CSL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Luxottica Group (LUX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kollmorgen (KOL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Burlington Industries Inc.(BUR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Surgery for Olazabal
The Masters champion, JOSE MARIA OLAZABAL will miss at least a month of play after surgery on his right foot, but is expected to defend his Masters title in April.
The Spanish golfer said the foot had bothered him for the last 18 months, a problem caused by a malformed big toe. (AP)


CAE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Truman Told Stalin Not to Invade Japan
To the Editor:
Re "Hiroshima: A Controversy That Refuses to Die" (news article, Jan. 31): I must point out an omission.
After discussing the influence of Secretary of State James Byrnes on Truman's decision to drop the atomic bomb and the perceived need to send a warning to the Soviet leadership, you quote me about the geopolitical stakes of such a warning.


Computer Task Group Inc.(TSK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sincerity Cannot Tell The Future
THE Governor of New York is earnest and friendly as he sits in his office minutes after proposing his budget.
Speaking in that reedy voice of his about reviving the work ethic and encouraging the entrepreneurial spirit and cutting taxes no matter what, he seems to suggest that that if the state would just listen to him, its problems would go away and New York could become North Carolina.
Or even New Jersey.
In the new world of George E. Pataki, people on welfare will work.


In Russia, Another Time, Another Boris
To the Editor:
"Strains of Chechnya War Setting Russians on Edge" (front page, Jan. 29) states that the 17th-century Time of Troubles in Russia was caused by a religious schism.


14 Million Pupils in Unsuitable or Unsafe Schools, Report Says
One third of the nation's 80,000 public schools are in such poor repair that the 14 million children who attend them are being housed in unsuitable or unsafe conditions, a report to Congress estimated today.
The conditions, the report said, will cost $112 billion to correct -- roughly four times the United States Education Department's total annual budget.


Foreign Aid, in Moderation
Foreign aid, never very popular with Americans, is on the chopping block.
It is not easy to argue the merits of Federal spending to diminish poverty, hunger and disease abroad when budget cuts mean inadequate funding for those problems at home.
But some substantial benefits for the U.S. can be secured by relatively inexpensive foreign aid programs that are carefully selected and managed.
Aid that directly attacks the causes of global insecurity like poverty, disease, overpopulation and environmental degradation can prevent the sort of political instability and humanitarian disasters that ultimately require more costly American involvement.
If the budget-cutters are not careful, they may shortchange aid to those who need it most and where it may do the most good.


No Headline
A dike is like a child's sand castle on the beach.
The danger of collapse rises the longer the water pressure is maintained." -- JAN ROELOFF, a Dutch relief official.  [ A1:1. ]


A Deficit Reins In Sweden's Welfare State
In the last six decades, Sweden has built one of the world's most generous and successful social welfare systems, providing its citizens with a lifelong array of benefits that help them maintain a high standard of living through good times and bad.
But now, unable to afford the bill, the country is being forced to pare social welfare spending.
Although the cuts have so far hardly been Draconian, there is widespread anxiety that the system, long seen as the model for combining socialist welfare policies with vibrant capitalism, could collapse under its own economic weight.


Panel Seeks To Streamline Nuclear Labs
The longstanding rivalry between the nation's two nuclear weapons design laboratories, Livermore and Los Alamos, should be ended, said a Federal advisory report released today.
The study said several other large national physics laboratories should be made more efficient and taken out of the Government's hands.
The Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, Calif., established to compete with the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico in designing nuclear weapons, should turn over all the design work to its rival, the advisory panel said.
The panel included both scientists and industry executives and was headed by Robert W. Galvin, chairman of the executive committee of Motorola Inc.


Kotite Holds Court
RICH KOTITE had his first meeting with several Jets coaches yesterday, but still has not had a chance to look at the tapes of last season.
JOHNNY ROLAND, who recently accepted Kotite's offer to return as the running backs' coach, then left the next day for Houston, has apparently changed his mind -- again.
He will join the Rams in their expected move to St.
Louis, where he was rookie of the year in 1966.


Delmarva Power &amp; Light Co.  (DEW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
BANK OF BOSTON CORP., Boston, will sell two retail banking branches in Puerto Rico to Roig Commercial Bank and Oriental Bank and Trust for an undisclosed amount.


Dignity and Art Join on a Sarajevo Stage
This city is full of struggle: for survival, of course, but also for the salvation of dignity in the face of horror.
Dignity, under siege, becomes synonymous with civilization.
Its absence constitutes the abyss.
Nowhere is this struggle more violent than in the person of Nermin Tulic, one of Sarajevo's best-known actors.
Mr.
Tulic has no legs.
They were blown off on June 10, 1992.
A Serbian shell severed them as he walked near his home in the center of the city.
He was hospitalized, refused to eat and says he spent several weeks intending to die.


Suspect Is Arraigned
A Milan teen-ager, SIMONE BARBAGLIA, was arraigned yesterday on charges of murdering a fan of a rival soccer team in a fight before the AC Milan-Genoa match.
The AC Milan backer said he was acting in self-defense during the brawl Sunday.
A 25-year-old Genoa fan, Vincenzo Spagnolo, died of knife wounds during surgery.
A 17-year-old friend of the accused was charged with giving Barbaglia the murder weapon, a knife with a four-inch blade, from a collection of knifes before Barbaglia left by train for Genoa. (AP)


Fieldcrest Cannon Inc.(FLD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Madness in a Long Island Court
The adage that anyone representing himself in court has a fool for a lawyer and a fool for a client was never more pertinent than now.
Colin Ferguson is representing himself against six murder charges in a county court in Mineola, L.I.
Mr.
Ferguson is on trial for a shooting rampage aboard the Long Island Rail Road in December 1993, and is exercising his constitutional right to proceed without lawyers.
He has that right if a court finds him mentally competent to stand trial.
The presiding judge, Donald Belfi, has twice found he meets that standard after hearing medical evidence and questioning the defendant.
Nevertheless, Mr.
Ferguson's conduct in his own defense has been so bizarre that Judge Belfi should review his pretrial findings.


Timken Co.(TKR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


AirTouch Communications Inc.(ATI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


UMass Survives Injuries to Two Stars
UMass 74, St. Joseph's 62
Top-ranked Massachusetts overcame injuries to its two best players, Lou Roe and Marcus Camby, and beat St.
Joseph's, 74-62, last night behind Roe's 19 points at Amherst, Mass.
Roe, the leading scorer and rebounder for UMass, left the game after he fell to the floor, clutching his left knee, with 5 minutes 9 seconds left and Massachusetts ahead by 64-51.
His condition was not immediately known, but he remained on the bench.


2 Robbery Suspects Held in Death of Witness After Body Is Found
A Long Island woman abducted from her home on Saturday night was found early yesterday in a shallow grave off the Cross Island Parkway in Queens -- killed, the police said, because she was about to testify against two men who had robbed her home last year, expecting to find money and drugs.
The nude body of Bonnie Mejia, 21, was found about 2 A.M. yesterday just south of the Grand Central Parkway.
The police said her killers had strangled her with a nylon rope, then poured acid on her face, pulled her teeth with pliers and cut off her fingertips to hinder identification.


Ben &amp; Jerry's Talent Hunt Ends
Now it's Ben &amp; Jerry &amp; Bob.
After seven months of highly public searching, Ben &amp; Jerry's Homemade Inc. named a corporate turnaround consultant, Robert Holland Jr., as its new president and chief executive.


Oklahoma Gas &amp; Electric Co.(OGE,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


At Rally, Students Seek Resignation of Rutgers President
Two Rutgers University student government organizations and the campus newspaper today called on the president of the university to resign over remarks he made two months ago that black students do not have the "genetic hereditary background" to do well on standardized tests like college entrance exams.
But the university's Board of Governors on Tuesday stood firmly behind the president, Dr.
Francis L. Lawrence, and tonight he issued a public apology for what he described as "the damage and the pain that I know that my widely published remarks have caused Rutgers' students." He also said he would not resign.


Death and Dire Doings? Time to Call Dalgliesh
ORIGINAL SIN  By P. D. James  416 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
The touch of symbolism is not gentle in "Original Sin," P. D. James's latest mystery featuring Comdr.
Adam Dalgliesh of New Scotland Yard.
At the story's opening, Mandy Price, a young temporary typist, rides her motorbike to work at The Peverell Press, a venerable London publishing firm situated in a mock-Venetian palace on the Thames called Innocent House.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  TOUGH TIMES AHEAD FOR MEXICO  Mexico turned to the task of rebuilding its economy as officials warned of a long year ahead of austerity, disappointment and anger.
A1


Associates Corp. of North America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


PATAKI PROPOSES BROAD REDUCTIONS IN STATE SPENDING
Taking the first step toward fulfilling his vision for a smaller state government, Gov.
George E. Pataki proposed a $32.4 billion state budget today that would reduce taxes for almost all New Yorkers and cut spending across the board.
In presenting his budget, Mr.
Pataki became the first New York governor since 1943 to call for less spending than in the previous year, proposing a $1.1 billion, or 3 percent, reduction.
He also proposed income-tax cuts that would total $1 billion, the first step in a four-year plan to reduce the top tax rate by one-quarter and save taxpayers $6.8 billion a year.
The top tax rate this year would fall to 7.59 percent, from 7.87 percent last year.


National Fuel Gas Co.(NFG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In G.O.P. Presidential Field, A Race to Raise Money Is On
Shortly before Dick Cheney, the former Defense Secretary, formally dropped out of the race for the Republican Presidential nomination in 1996, he called Mel Sembler, a millionaire developer from St.
Petersburg, Fla., who would have been among his top fund-raisers, to give him the news.
Soon Mr.
Sembler's telephone was ringing again.
"Within hours," he said, "I had calls from Lamar Alexander, from Phil Gramm and from Arlen Specter." Former Vice President Dan Quayle had an excuse for not calling immediately: He was recuperating from surgery.
But within three days, Mr.
Sembler also received calls from advisers to Mr.
Quayle and Senator Bob Dole of Kansas.


Where to Find It
SOME call it crackle.
Others say it sounds like bacon cooking.
Whatever it's called, the background static heard on old phonograph records, from LP's and 78's to World War I-vintage diamond disks, is annoying.
But it need not always be permanent.
For years, professional sound restorers have de-crackled and enhanced historic sounds for the recording industry.
Without restoration, few reissues of old recordings, from Caruso to Cole Porter, would be marketable as CD's or tapes. (Never mind that the hippest contemporary rock artists now consciously leave in background gibberish.)


New York Agrees To a Homeless Plan
After 11 years of litigation, New York City agreed to allow a court-appointed monitor to oversee a reorganization of its system for sheltering homeless families, a system that has routinely forced families to sleep in city offices and has led to $5 million in fines against the city.


Cuts in Pataki's Plan Draw Municipal Opposition
City University officials today called Gov.
George E. Pataki's budget "harsh and potentially damaging."
Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, predicted the cuts could force a 50-cent fare increase on New York City subways.


On the Duke Campus, Fans Form Bivouac
The front of the line looked as if nothing had changed, even if everything else is different.
Tents were pitched a short distance from the Cameron Indoor Stadium on the Duke University campus.
Residents of college basketball's most unique unincorporated village were in place yesterday afternoon, the day before their Blue Devils will face North Carolina in a game that could soon take its place in Duke's painful season as the end of the beginning or the beginning of the end.


Confusion Reigns in Auto Sales
One might think it a pretty straightforward act, toting up car and light-truck sales.
But many of the world's auto makers tried to tally their January sales today, and the result was chaos that made it impossible to determine for sure if the market is headed up, down or sideways.


Celex Group
Shares of Celex Group, a specialty retailer and catalogue company, dropped sharply in Nasdaq trading yesterday.
The company, based in Lombard, Ill., announced that November and December sales were below Wall Street projections.


Let's Look at Biases in the History Standards; Skewed Economics
To the Editor:
Frank Rich's claim (column, Jan. 26) that the National History Standards are "middle of the road" is not sustained by a reading of their economic history.
A telling example is the standard on the causes of the Great Depression, which is quite outside the contours of the debate among economic historians.


Shunned Outside Prison, Paroled Sex Offender Stays in a Cell
For the last five months, Carl DeFlumer, a convicted murderer and sex offender who has spent 42 of his 62 years in prison, has been a free man.
But he has no place to go and has been spending his freedom in prison at a cost of $2,100 a month to the state.
When Mr.
DeFlumer was paroled in early September, the state wanted him to live with his sister in Glenmont, an Albany suburb.
But neighbors learned of his plan through school and parole officials and protested so fiercely that the sister withdrew her offer.


Let's Look at Biases in the History Standards
To the Editor:
Re Frank Rich's "Eating Her Offspring" (column, Jan. 26): Mr.
Rich attempts to whitewash a seriously flawed document and to portray the proposed National History Standards as a "middle-of-the-road committee product."


CompUSA Inc.(CPU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 24


Pleased With Metrocard
To the Editor:
I was surprised at Lindsey Hanahan's Jan. 26 letter criticizing the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's Metrocard.
I have used the card since its introduction and have found it to be far more convenient than a pocketful of heavy, loose tokens.
I have continually reused the same card and have never had a problem with a scratched or broken card, although I keep it in my pocket without any protective covering.


Request to Move Slaying Trial Is Denied
A state appeals court yesterday denied a request by Colin Ferguson to have his murder trial moved from Nassau County to Brooklyn.
Mr.
Ferguson is accused of killing 6 people and wounding 19 others aboard a Long Island Rail Road train.


Idaho Power (IDA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Spacelabs Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


A Leak in Ulster Peace Plan Stirs a Storm
Prospects for peace negotiations in Northern Ireland hit a snag today when details of a British-Irish plan to guide the talks were leaked to the press and published, provoking a storm of protest from unionist politicians of Ulster.
The Protestant unionists, who want Northern Ireland to remain part of Britain, said the plan went too far in giving the Irish republic a role in running the affairs of the six counties of the north.
In particular, they objected to a proposed joint north-south Irish authority that would have strong executive powers in certain areas and would deal directly with the European Union.


Long Island Lighting Co.  (LIL,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Journal; Closet Clout
"I rule out that it was an innocent mispronunciation," said Barney Frank from his office this week, reflecting on the slur that shook the 104th Congress.
"I turned to my own expert, my mother, who reports that in 59 years of marriage, no one ever introduced her as Elsie Fag."
Now that the shouting has died down -- and the tape of the deed has been widely heard -- this much is clear.
Dick Armey, the House majority leader, did not, as he hastened to put it, merely have "trouble with alliteration" and stumble innocently over his colleague's last name.


Sports of The Times; Twenty, Independent And Proud
THE newspaper in Jim Pierce's condominium told him everything he needed, or wanted, to know.
It told him his daughter realized that he'd given her something forever, and good.
"Mary said it right here in the paper, that her strokes were made by Papa," Jim Pierce said the other day from Delray Beach, Fla.


Burial of Tainted Sludge Wins Broad Endorsement
A new proposal for disposing of contaminated sludge dredged from shipping channels in the Newark and Elizabeth ports was unveiled today.
But instead of inspiring another one of those fights between shippers and environmentalists that have hampered the local maritime industry for years, the new plan was endorsed by both sides.
The proposal by a 15-member task force appointed last June by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman calls for burying contaminated dredge material in two underwater clay pits in Newark Bay, near the dredging sites, instead of barging it to the mud dump, a federally approved site five and a half miles off Sandy Hook.


General Instrument Corp.(GIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Valhi Inc.(VHI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rayonier Inc.(RYN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Market Place; The clock is ticking on a tax loophole for equity swaps.
ONE of Wall Street's better tax dodges seems likely to end soon.
But it looks as if you can still get in on it.
It now appears the Internal Revenue Service will issue final rules in the near future ending the tax benefits of the tactic, which uses equity swaps.
But those rules are not expected to apply to equity swaps entered into before they are issued, creating a window of opportunity.


Masahiro Tomonaga; Restaurateur, 63
Masahiro Tomonaga, who owned and operated restaurants in New York and Tokyo, died on Sunday at his Manhattan apartment.
He was 63 and also had homes in Roxbury, Conn., and Tokyo.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said his companion, Clint Wade.


United Illuminating Co.(UIL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pulte Corp.(PHM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ametek Inc.(AME,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ford's Profits Conclude Banner Year for Big Three
By announcing today that it had posted a record profit of $ 5.3 billion for last year, the Ford Motor Company made it official.
The Big Three auto makers made more money in 1994 -- almost $ 14 billion -- than ever before.
And Ford's earnings report illustrated how they did it, even though the market for vehicles constituted about a million fewer sales than at its peak in 1986: emphasizing sales of more profitable mini-vans and sport utility vehicles like the Explorer, loading record amounts of overtime on their workers to increase productivity, and cutting other costs throughout the company.


Agency Starts Checking Sale Of a Key Debt
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation is reviewing how it sold a debt owed by Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown, an agency spokesman said today.
The review follows news reports that Nolanda Hill, Mr.
Brown's former business partner, ended up holding the $87,000 debt, so that Mr.
Brown owed her the money.
She would not have been eligible to buy the loan from the F.D.I.C, because she had previously defaulted on a $26.3 million loan the agency held.


Media General Inc.(MEG.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Alltrista Corp.(JARS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For Troubled Students, Group Help
ONCE a week in the middle of the school day, instead of heading to algebra or gym class, a wispy 15-year-old girl, looking lost in her oversize Levis, makes her way to a light pastel classroom where, with the gentle prodding of a counselor, she talks about life at home with her alcoholic father.
After an hour of hashing out her shame, confusion and misery with a dozen or so other teen-agers at Centreville High School, after her tears have dried, she goes back to her books.


Arm and Hammer Names a New President
The Church &amp; Dwight Company rehired a former executive yesterday to put "back on track" its well-known Arm and Hammer division.
Robert A. Davies 3d was elected vice president of Church &amp; Dwight, based in Princeton, N.J., and president of Arm and Hammer.
That division's eight products generated 80 percent of the company's $491 million in revenue last year.


Free Concert at Emanu-El
"The Sounds of Sanctity," a free concert of Jewish liturgical music, is to be presented on Feb. 10 at 8 P.M. at Temple Emanu-El, Fifth Avenue at 65th Street.
The concert features music commissioned by the synagogue since it was established 150 years ago.
Soloists include Howard Nevison, cantor; Hunter Tillman and David Graf, organists; Richard Locker, cellist, and Susan Altabet, flutist.
Information: (212) 744-1400.


Simpson Industries(SMPS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New York State Electric &amp; Gas Corp.(NGE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jailed Algerian Issues Warning About Election
A jailed opposition leader in the Algerian Islamic movement has warned against holding a presidential election this year, saying in a letter published today that such a move would lead to an even more violent confrontation between Muslim militants and the Algerian Army.
The letter, written by Ali Belhadj, the second-highest-ranking official of Algeria's dominant Islamic opposition party, the Islamic Salvation Front, was dated Jan. 27, three days before a suicide car bomb attack on a security police headquarters in downtown Algiers killed 42 people and wounded 256.


Two Views of the Peso Bailout: Wall Street vs. Main Street
If Washington won't bail out Orange County, why should the taxpayers risk billions on Mexico?
If American communities, not to mention corporations with thousands of employees, must look to their own devices in a financial crunch, why are foreigners being held to a lesser standard?
President Clinton didn't have the answers, forcing the Administration to abandon a program of loan guarantees needing Congressional approval for a hastily pulled together package for Mexico totaling nearly $50 billion from international lenders and an obscure United States Treasury account.
Indeed, the sense that the original rescue package was a bailout for Wall Street -- an unavoidable side-effect of restoring the health of the Mexican economy -- is what turned Main Street against it.


Public Service Co. of New Mexico (PNM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


VeriFone Inc.(VFIC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Orange County Faces Bond Payment Shortfall
Two months after Orange County, Calif., declared bankruptcy, the county has done little to reassure its bondholders that they will get their money back, and bondholders are becoming increasingly restless.
Some $1.2 billion in Orange County bonds, held primarily by individuals and mutual funds, come due from June to August and must be paid back.
The county says it has no money to repay those bondholders and, in their eyes, is doing little to change that.


Kovalev Returns and He's a Culprit With Campbell
There can be no debate about one simple statistic: Aleksei Kovalev of the Rangers was on the ice for all four Pittsburgh goals tonight when the undefeated Penguins edged New York by 4-3 at Civic Arena.
Some of those goals were aided by Kovalev's poor passes, although they were hardly the only reasons for this revealing defeat in this most interesting game between recent Stanley Cup winners.


Calendar: Exhibitions And Shows
One Woman's Works  Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6862.
"Elaine Lustig Cohen: Modern Graphic Designer," a show including 75 books, catalogues and stationery, starts Tuesday and continues through May 23.
The designer, whose style was characterized by clean geometric designs and simple typography, worked for institutions like General Motors, the Jewish Museum and the Whitney Museum of Art and with architects including Philip Johnson and Eero Saarinen.


'Gay Bashing' Death Convictions Voided
A New York State appeals court has thrown out the murder convictions of two men in the 1990 killing of a homosexual from Queens who prosecutors said had been beaten and stabbed in a "gay bashing" spree.
The appellate court held that the judge at the highly publicized 1991 Queens trial, Justice Ralph Sherman of State Supreme Court, had made fundamental errors that deprived the defendants of their rights.
Though the convictions were overturned and a new trial was ordered, the panel said the evidence presented was "legally sufficient to establish" the defendants' guilt in helping to kill the man, Julio Rivera, 29, in a Jackson Heights schoolyard that was known as a gay cruising area.


Nets Share Some Light Moments In Victory
Derrick Coleman slapped Benoit Benjamin on his sweaty, bald head.
Benjamin laughed.
Coleman then jabbed Benjamin in his ample belly.
Benjamin laughed again.
The Nets were battering the Bucks by 19 points so they could afford to frolic on the bench.
They hardly resembled a team in disarray.
The Bucks were another story.
There was no head-slapping or stomach-jabbing on Milwaukee's side of the court because dismal shooting and weary legs helped to transform the Bucks into the perfect opponent for New Jersey.


Florida Rock Industries INc.(FRK,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Quiet Woman's Story With a Loud Message
In all the publicity for "Serving in Silence," a made-for-television movie to be shown on Monday night on NBC, one name is mentioned most prominently: Barbra Streisand.
Ms.
Streisand is not in the movie.
She did not direct it.
She is but one of five executive producers for the film.
And yet when the announcer intones during promotional spots that the movie is "from Barbra Streisand," there is more than name-dropping involved.


Congress Limits Federal Orders Costly to States
The House of Representatives brought a prolonged debate to its foregone conclusion today and overwhelmingly passed legislation making it harder for Congress to impose new requirements on the states and cities without providing Federal money to pay for them.
The legislation, which passed the Senate in similar form last week and has President Clinton's endorsement, is the first major step in what the new Republican majority in Congress is promising will be a steady shift of power from Washington back to the local governments.


Washington Talk; I'll Sleep on the Idea, But Must I Vote on It?
The best thing about President Clinton's new plan to rescue the Mexican economy, Senator Bob Dole said on Tuesday, is that Congress will not have to vote on the matter.
Mr.
Dole, the Senate Republican leader, was only half joking.
Senators and representatives are always looking for ways to avoid casting votes that can be used against them in their next election.


Rescue: Durable Or Brief?
President Clinton's move to sidestep Congress and order emergency credits to Mexico halted a monthlong run on the peso, but it left Congressional critics and reluctant American supporters worrying that the bailout's success would prove temporary.
A debate over the solidity of the plan arose today as the International Monetary Fund met into the night in Washington and finally approved an emergency $17.8 billion in medium-term loans.


Petro-Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


FlightSafety International Inc.(FSI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Finlay Stock Offering
Finlay Enterprises Inc., the holding company for the Finlay Fine Jewelry Corporation, is making its second attempt in less than four years at a public stock offering.
Finlay, based in New York, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Tuesday for an initial public offering of 2.5 million shares.
No price for the shares or date for the offering has been set.


Dr. George Stibitz, 90, Inventor Of First Digital Computer in '40
Dr.
George Robert Stibitz, whose mathematical calculations and tinkering at the kitchen table led him to invent the first digital computer in 1940, died on Tuesday at his home in Hanover, N.H.
He was 90.
He had been in declining health for about a year and died of natural causes, said a spokeswoman for Dartmouth College, where Dr.
Stibitz was a professor emeritus of physiology at the medical school.


CHRONICLE
Here comes the bride . . . down a very glamorous aisle.
JENNIFER RAPAPORT, a special education teacher at Public School 224 in Bayside, Queens, spotted a newspaper advertisement on Jan. 20 for an essay contest in which the first prize was a wedding at the Rainbow Room at Rockefeller Center on Valentine's Day.


Tesoro Petroleum Corp.(TSO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Connecticut Energy Corp.(CNE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Owners For Three Shops
Three agencies have announced changes in ownership.
Poppe Tyson Advertising and Public Relations, a unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt, has acquired Schurdell Communications Inc. in Cleveland.
The terms were not disclosed.


Ferrucio Tagliavini, Met Tenor And Puccini Specialist, 81, Dies
Ferrucio Tagliavini, an Italian lyric tenor who was a favorite of Metropolitan Opera audiences in the late 1940's, died on Saturday at his home in Reggio Emilia, Italy.
He was 81.
Aldo Mancusi, the curator of the Enrico Caruso Museum in Brooklyn, who was a friend of Mr.
Tagliavini's, said the cause was a heart attack.


Bubka's Training Sights
How does SERGEI BUBKA, who has broken 35 world records indoors and outdoors in the last 10 years, train for the pole vault?
Not the way you might expect.
The 31-year-old Ukrainian arrived Tuesday night to compete in Friday night's Chemical Bank Millrose Games in Madison Square Garden.
After a short night's sleep, he jogged in his hotel corridor to get the aches out.
Then he made a visit to the New York Stock Exchange and autographed a pole to be auctioned off for the benefit of the United States Olympic Committee.


FEDERAL RESERVE RAISES ITS RATES 7TH TIME IN A YEAR
The Federal Reserve pushed up short-term interest rates today for the seventh time since last February, when it set out to tighten credit and smother any resurgence of inflation.
The Federal Reserve increased by a half-point two important short-term lending rates it controls, placing its key lever over the economy at 6 percent, double the level of a year ago.


Board Creates Task Force On Brutality
Concerned over the growing number of complaints of police brutality in four Bronx precincts, the Civilian Complaint Review Board voted yesterday to create an emergency task force to investigate the cases.
The task force is seen as a test of whether the board, which is largely considered passive, can make any real changes.


Eagles Eye Candidate
GARY STEVENS, the offensive and quarterbacks coach for the Dolphins, has emerged as the Eagles' leading candidate to replace RICH KOTITE as head coach.
Stevens, 51, met with the Eagles' owner, JEFFREY LURIE, in Miami this week and could be named as early as Friday. (AP)


Banner Aerospace Inc.(BAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


States Like New York Know Balanced Budget Rule Won't Work
To the Editor:
Re "Proposal Beyond Politics" (news analysis, Jan. 26): One argument used in support of a constitutional balanced budget amendment is that the Federal Government must learn to live within its means as the states do.


Democrats Begin a Campaign for the Hearts and Minds of the Middle Class
Caught between a November mandate for change and a tradition of support for social welfare, New York Democrats began an aggressive campaign today to depict Gov.
George E. Pataki's budget in the emotion-laden terms of class warfare.
Their strategic positioning marked the start of a race with the Republican Governor for the political center, the place where the votes are.


Mister Abbott
Simply to say his name, George Abbott, is to think of Jimmy Durante, Ethel Merman, Carol Haney, Gene Kelly, Ray Bolger, Gwen Verdon, Zero Mostel.
It is to think of "Call Me Madam," "Pal Joey, "Pajama Game," "Where's Charley," "Damn Yankees" and "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum." It is also to remember that "Broadway" was once a synonym for "magic," and that actor/producer/director/play-doctor George Abbott was a very big reason why.
Mr.
Abbott, who died on Tuesday, lived for 107 years.
His entrance was as an actor, in 1913, in a play called "The Misleading Lady"; his exit was an incredible 76 years later, when he wrote and co-directed "Frankie." By then this monument to sobriety and three square meals a day ("burning the candle at both ends . . . is a dandy way to get a nervous breakdown," he wrote in 1963) was 102.


Police Investigating Corruption Charges At a Bronx Precinct
The New York City Police Department is investigating 20 officers of the 48th Precinct in the central Bronx who are suspected of beating up suspects, dealing narcotics and stealing money from drug dealers during the last three years, law enforcement officials said yesterday.
The pattern of corruption that investigators have found in the precinct -- small groups of officers who worked together to shake down and beat up drug suspects and enter apartments without search warrants -- closely resembles the case in the 30th Precinct in Harlem, where 29 officers have been arrested on similar charges since last March, the officials said.


A Thrift Shop Is Going Out of Business


Owners' Proposal Isn't New, Players Say
In a hotel room about a mile from the White House, where its primary occupant is watching them closely, negotiators for baseball's striking players and owners returned to the bargaining table today after a 40-day absence.
But they maintained their distance.
The owners made a new payroll-tax proposal that John Harrington, chairman of the negotiating committee, termed a "significant step," only to have the players privately shake their heads and, in the words of one, say, "It doesn't look a whole heck of a lot different."


Nalco Chemical Co.(NLC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Armco Inc.(AS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Niagara Mohawk Power Corp.(NMK,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Overproduction of a Protein Is Linked to Adults' Diabetes
Millions of Americans develop a form of diabetes in adulthood because they make too much of a protein that interferes with their cellular machinery, scientists reported today.
The finding, described in the current issue of Nature magazine, opens a new avenue of research into what causes Type II diabetes, researchers said.
The condition, in which the body becomes resistant to insulin, used to be referred to as adult-onset diabetes and is a less severe form of the disease than Type I diabetes.


Economic Scene; Does raising the minimum wage inevitably mean a loss of jobs?
BILL CLINTON is maybe, sort of, leaning in favor of an unspecified increase in the minimum wage.
Details to be announced, provided the House majority leader, Dick Armey, promises not to sneer . . .
That's not just a cheap shot at a President already lampooned as a waffle.
It is also a joke on economists in and outside the Administration who no longer know what to think about the impact of a higher minimum wage on joblessness.


Noble Affiliates (NBL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Whitman's Allies Join Debate On Her Penalties for Schools
The administration of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman got a foretaste of the political dangers of budget cutting today when her fellow Republicans joined Democrats and irate school superintendents in questioning her program to penalize school districts that spend too much on administrative costs.
Republican leaders in the Senate and Assembly today talked about postponing the effective date of the penalty system, which is scheduled to start next fall, questioned the measurements used by the state and proposed hearings on the plan.


Peoples Energy (PGL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prices Drop After Fed's Rate Move
Prices of Treasury securities dropped yesterday, following the awaited move by the Federal Reserve to raise short-term interest rates by half of a percentage point.
The bond market for weeks had been expecting the central bank's seventh rate increase in the last year, traders said.
But yesterday's selloff was not necessarily a sign of displeasure, but rather the act of investors who had bought securities on the bet that the Fed would raise rates, and now were selling to take profits.


Sister Ann Gillen, Rights Leader, 76
Sister Ann Gillen, executive director of the Interreligious Task Force on Soviet Jewry from 1972 to 1987, died on Jan. 14 at the Sisters of the Holy Child Jesus convent in Rosemont, Pa.
She was 76.
The cause was cancer, said Sister Gloria Coleman, a member of the order.


Owens &amp; Minor Inc.(OMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Universal Forest Products Inc.(UFPI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ford Canada (FC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article in The Home Section last Thursday about the living quarters of some members of Congress referred incorrectly to Representative John Linder, Republican of Georgia.
He has a town house in Washington; he does not sleep in his office.


G.O.P. Is Tutored on Strategy for Budget Debate
Programs have friends, but bureaucrats do not, so focus your fire on the bureaucrats.
Hold on to the moral high ground.
When Democrats attack your budget cuts as unfair, "we must match our opponents story-for-story -- the personal and national immorality of passing along increasing debt to our children and future generations, versus their budget cutting horror stories."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy As expected, the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates by half a percentage point.
The increase, the Fed's seventh in 12 months, prompted large banks to follow suit immediately, causing borrowing costs to rise for millions of Americans.  [ Page A1. ] Orange County bondholders are worried as a shortfall looms for bond payments.
Warnings by officials of the California county that they will not raise taxes to solve the problem undermine a basic tenet of municipal bonds: borrowers are obligated to repay their debts, even if it means cutting services and raising taxes.  [ D1. ]


Silicon Graphics Account in Review
Silicon Graphics Inc., the computer work station marketer, has placed its account in review after almost nine years at Poppe Tyson in Mountain View, Calif.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $12 million to $20 million.


A Rose or a Thorn for East Harlem?; Sentiment Is Divided Over a Proposal for a Huge Supermarket
To the residents of East Harlem, the announcement last September that a nonprofit development corporation had raised millions of dollars to help build a giant Pathmark supermarket on 125th Street was the answer to years of prayers.
Like people in countless communities with large minority populations in the city and across the country, they had watched as the chain stores shunned their neighborhood and consigned them to shopping in smaller stores, often with higher prices and inferior merchandise.


EMC Corp.(EMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


George Abbott, Broadway Giant With Hit After Hit, Is Dead at 107
George F. Abbott, who opened on Broadway in 1913 and didn't close for more than 80 years, died on Tuesday at his home in Miami Beach.
He was 107.
The cause was a stroke, said his wife, Joy.


CHRONICLE
Dramatizing an illness through theater is not a new idea, but SUSAN MILLER, an Obie Award-winning playwright, and Dr.
PETER I. PRESSMAN, her surgeon, are marrying drama and medicine at a performance of her one-woman show, "My Left Breast," next week.
The work, a monologue about her struggle with breast cancer, opens tonight at the Ohio Theater Space on Wooster Street in SoHo.
On Wednesday after the show, Dr.
Pressman will lead a panel discussion on the medical and psychological ramifications of losing a breast.
"We will also ask whether it would be useful to do the play around the country for women's groups," said Dr.
Pressman, who is an associate clinical professor of surgery at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.


Study Finds Sperm Counts Are Declining
A new study has found a marked decline in sperm counts among fertile men over the past 20 years, reopening a heated argument over whether sperm counts serve as an environmental bellwether, showing effects of toxic substances accumulating in the environment.
The paper, published today in The New England Journal of Medicine, was based on data collected over 20 years at a Paris sperm bank.
Some experts in the United States took strong exception to the findings, saying the question of whether sperm quality was deteriorating was still open.


International Flavors &amp; Fragrances Inc.(IFF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tyler Corp.(TYL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Aid for Mexico Gives Economy Shot in the Arm
One day after President Clinton's rescue plan brought a respite from its financial crisis, Mexico turned today to the task of rebuilding its shattered economy as officials and economists warned of a long year ahead of austerity, disappointment and anger.
The $50 billion international package of loans and loan guarantees announced in Washington on Tuesday brought a temporary euphoria to the markets and the business community, which the newspapers were terming the "Clinton effect."


Avondale Industries Inc.(AVDL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Humphries Hurts Arm And May Need Surgery
One day after redislocating his left elbow while swinging a golf club, San Diego Chargers quarterback STAN HUMPHRIES is facing probable surgery, Coach BOBBY ROSS said yesterday.
Humphries had an magnetic resonance imaging test taken yesterday on the injured elbow, according to Ross.
The result of the test was not yet known.
"The likelihood is that we're looking at some potential surgery," Ross said.


Stepan Co.(SCL,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ipalco Enterprises Inc.(IPL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Shuttle's Launching Is Delayed By Failure in a Guidance Unit
The blastoff of the space shuttle Discovery on a mission to rendezvous with a Russian space station was delayed today for a least a day, from early Thursday to early Friday, after routine testing had revealed a failure in one of the shuttle's three critical guidance units.
Ground crews are working to replace the suspect part, hoping to finish soon enough that the liftoff will be postponed no more than 24 hours.


Let's Look at Biases in the History Standards; Benefiting the People
To the Editor:
Frank Rich's "Eating Her Offspring" (column, Jan. 26) was the perfect complement to my coffee this morning after the infamous hearings in Washington where Lynne Cheney and William Bennett, former chairmen of the National Endowment for the Humanities, sought to derail their onetime benefactor.


Scrutinizing Pages From History


U.S. Says Russian Army Violated Human Rights in Chechnya
The Administration accused Russia today of human rights abuses, saying Moscow had violated international agreements when it sent troops into Chechnya, the secessionist republic, to attack civilians.
It also accused Russia of making arbitrary arrests, beating prisoners and allowing military recruits to be abused in systematic hazing.


Sonoco Products Co.(SONO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Essay; Singapoverty
Never in history has there been widespread famine in a democratic country with a political opposition and a free press.
Starvation by the millions takes place only under tyranny or in anarchy.
Communist Russia was decimated by famine in the 1930's; in Communist China, starvation took 30 million lives after the "great leap forward" three decades ago; in this generation, we see famine sweeping anarchic and despotic states in Africa.
Contrariwise, in India -- where famine seemed inescapable under sultans, nizams and colonial rule -- no famine has struck since democracy began in 1947.


Charter Medical (CMD,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Spreckels Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Inter-Regional Financial Group Inc.(IFG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Central Louisiana Electric Co.  (CNL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Petronio's New Series Includes a New Image
In recent years Stephen Petronio has dressed up his cerebral dances, which are explorations of complex movement, with trendy costumes and decor.
The onstage fashions have been punk and beyond, with a predilection for stuffing bare-legged men into the corsets women have battled for centuries to throw off.
But for all the fancy clothes, or lack of them, the choreographer is still the same Stephen Petronio who initially attracted attention with his highly formal work.
How fast, how furiously and how physically dancers could reach their limits were issues that preoccupied him and that made his pieces so exciting.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about new diet cola advertising for the Coca-Cola Company referred incorrectly to the soft drink ranked No. 10 in United States sales, according to Beverage Digest, an industry newsletter.
It is Caffeine-Free Diet Pepsi, not Caffeine-Free Pepsi.


Pressure Beyond the Track for Algerian Woman
She has carried the Olympic torch for progressive Algerian women -- running in shorts, displaying her legs when Islam demands that only the face and hands be visible -- so it was inevitable that Hassiba Boulmerka would become as much a symbol as an athlete.
Victories by Boulmerka in the 1,500-meter race at the 1991 world track and field championships in Tokyo and the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona have come to illustrate the struggle of female athletes caught in Algeria's increasingly violent tug of war between politics and religion.


Houseware Trends: Spelling And Speed
Each January, retailers flock here to the houseware industry's biggest trade show dreaming of finding astoundingly innovative products to entice consumers to buy more goods, more often.
What they see is almost always less thrilling: a growing number of versions of things that are already selling well, like bread-making machines, new colors for staples like kitchen glassware, and extensions of successful designs, like ergonomic handles for kitchen accessories.
Some 50,000 buyers and sellers converge from all over the world on the McCormick Place Convention Center.
In the end, some of the most creative talk ends up revolving around prices and better ways to distribute, display, advertise and promote familiar products.
Out of it all emerges a curious, evolving picture of what the housewares industry thinks the American consumer wants and, by extension, its view of how we live.


USF&amp;G Corp.(FG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Harrison R. Wesson, Chief of Surgery, 89
Harrison R. Wesson, a retired surgeon and former president of the Mayo Clinic Alumni Association, died on Sunday at the Cherry Nursing Home in Montclair, N.J.
Dr.
Wesson, who lived in Montclair for 56 years, was 89.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, said his daughter Sally W. Cogan.


Quorum Health Group Inc.(QHGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Simpson Dream Testimony Stirs Uproar
A self-described longtime friend of O. J. Simpson testified today that Mr.
Simpson confided to him shortly after Nicole Brown Simpson was found slain that he had dreamed of killing his former wife.
But a defense lawyer tore into the witness on cross-examination, attacking him as a liar and a drunk.
In an arduous day of oral fencing between defense lawyers and the friend, Ronald G. Shipp, a former police officer and part-time actor, Mr.
Shipp was questioned about his friendship with Mr.
Simpson, about the couple's stormy relationship and about a conversation he had with Mr.
Simpson in the bedroom of Mr.
Simpson's Brentwood mansion on June 13, the day after Mrs.
Simpson and her friend Ronald L. Goldman were killed.


HALLE DETAILS: INSTANT AGE


A Collapsible Bottle From Evian


Broad Deregulation Sought In Cable and Phone Services
In a sweeping bid to deregulate the telecommunications industry, Senate Republicans proposed legislation yesterday that would end all price controls for cable television after one year and let the regional Bell companies enter the $ 60 billion long-distance market after three years.
The proposal, which would also eliminate longstanding restrictions on the number of television and radio stations a company can own, drew criticism from consumer advocates and complaints from telephone companies, which say the proposal would hinder their efforts to compete in the cable business.


Harvard Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Commander Meets the Chiefs


McClatchy Newspapers Inc.(MNI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Umbrella Credit Union Seized by Regulators
The Capital Corporate Federal Credit Union, the latest victim of a bad bet in derivatives, has been seized by Federal credit union regulators.
The move by the National Credit Union Administration late Monday to take over the day-to-day operations of Cap Corp, as it is known, came after Cap Corp, based in Latham, Md., incurred $100 million in losses on its huge portfolio of collateralized mortgage obligations.
Cap Corp is one of the nation's largest umbrella credit organizations, covering more than one million individual members.
The takeover is the first since the N.C.U.A. was established in 1970.


As Dike Cracks in Holland, Fear Rises With the Flood
Flood waters reached a new peak in the Netherlands today, and specialists said they were not sure whether the dikes and dams that protect this low-lying country from its rivers would hold or crumble under the pressure.
"The situation is very hard to predict," Interior Minister Hans Dijkstal said.
"It is extremely difficult to make a reasonable estimate of the danger."


Battling the Contract, Gephardt Offers a Code
Searching for a political counterweight to the Republicans' Contract With America, the House minority leader today unveiled a new economic strategy for his party: what he called a Best Practices Code of Conduct for American business, an approach that focuses on promoting the well-being of middle-income workers.
"For Democrats, the single, simple, fundamental task of our party -- in this Congress, in this decade, in this generation -- is to fight for the standard of living of working families and the middle class," the Democratic leader, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, said in a speech to the Economic Policy Institute, a liberal group of economic policy experts.
"Everything else is secondary to that goal."


Calling on Carroll?
MIKE SHANAHAN, who received a seven-year contract to return to the Denver Broncos as head coach Tuesday night, strongly suggested yesterday that he would be bringing PETE CARROLL with him.
Carroll, who was dismissed as the Jets' coach after his rookie season, would bring his aggressive coaching style as defensive coordinator to complement Shanahan's constant-motion offense.


Combination of Drugs Appears To Slow AIDS Virus, Studies Say
A new combination of AIDS drugs seems to suppress the AIDS virus more effectively and for longer than existing combinations of drugs, preliminary results of four American and European studies show.
Although experts expressed guarded optimism, they cautioned about making too much of the findings, which were reported at a meeting of the American Society for Microbiology here today.
The experts said that additional studies of the drug combination were needed to determine whether those who took it actually lived longer.


Stockton Becomes Career Assists Leader
Jazz 129, Nuggets 88
John Stockton, wasting little time in setting the record and ending what was fast becoming an ordeal for him, became the National Basketball Association's career assist leader last night in Salt Lake City.
With a pass to Karl Malone, who scored from the left corner, the Utah Jazz guard set the record with 6 minutes 23 seconds to go before halftime in a game against the Denver Nuggets.
The basket gave Stockton his 9,922d assist, putting him ahead of Magic Johnson.
Stockton entered the game 11 assists shy of the mark, and he produced in less than one half the number of assists he usually gets in an entire game.


INSIDE
Phone Numbers Revealed
Because of a phone company error, some 30,000 New Yorkers who were promised protection from caller ID did not get it.
Page B1.
Egypt Criticizes Israel
Egypt's Foreign Minister set the stage for a conference of Middle Eastern leaders by attacking Israel on several issues.
Page A7.
Blood Shortage in New York
The city is experiencing its most critical blood shortage in a decade, forcing at least one hospital to postpone elective surgery.
Page B3.
U.S.
Criticizes Russia
Russia's recent actions in Chechnya were one reason it was among nations chastened in a State Department human rights report.
Page A8.
Mr.
Broadway Dies
George Abbott, the playwright, producer, director and actor who worked on more than 120 theatrical productions, was 107.
Page B10.


Barrick Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Falconbridge Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tandycrafts Inc.(TAC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Avon Account Is Awarded to Ayer
Avon Products Inc. said yesterday that it had selected N. W. Ayer &amp; Partners in New York to handle the creative portion of its account, which had been handled by FCB/Leber Katz Partners in New York since 1990.
Billings were estimated at $15 million to $20 million.
Delia deLisser, advertising director at Avon in New York, said Ayer was awarded the account after a four-month review that began with 33 agencies, was narrowed to 7 and then to 3 New York-based shops: Ayer, Altschiller &amp; Company and Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond.


U.S. Starts Evacuating Cuban Refugees From Camps in Panama
With a phalanx of American soldiers on hand to overcome any last-minute resistance, the United States began evacuating nearly 7,500 Cubans today from temporary camps set up here last September at the height of a refugee exodus from Cuba.
The refugees, 500 of whom left today, are to be sent to the American naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where they will rejoin more than 20,000 other Cubans who also took to the seas last summer in rafts and inner tubes hoping to reach the United States.
The Clinton Administration has repeatedly said it will not admit Cubans to the United States from the base, but it also does not plan to force them to return to their homes in Cuba.


Tribune Co.(TRB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Heritage Media Corp.(HTG,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Late Comebacks Leave Pirates Just Short
Two points.
That was as close as Seton Hall could come to Providence tonight during two late-game comeback thrusts.
Three points.
That was the margin the Pirates fell short by when the game ended, 80-77, in favor of Providence.


In Tribute to Purcell, Modernism Reveals Roots in the Baroque
In what he called an "ambulatory program note," the composer Charles Wuorinen offered some commentary in Merkin Concert Hall on Tuesday night, recalling a skit from the early days of "Saturday Night Live." A couple were arguing over whether a product was a dessert topping or a floor cleaner.
"Wait," interrupted a narrator, "it's both."
Mr.
Wuorinen argued that a dual, conflicting character was also evident in Dylan Thomas's poem "A Winter's Tale," which he set to music in 1992.
The work was then performed as the centerpiece of a remarkable concert that had a dual character as well: it was a tribute to the tercentenary of Purcell (its title was "In Pursuit of Purcell: Purcell's Line"), but Mr.
Wuorinen and his music were the center of attention.


Caller ID Reaches Out A Bit Too Far
When Nynex first proposed caller ID -- a service that tells a customer who is calling by displaying the caller's number on a screen -- it assured New York officials that it had the technology to protect the privacy of anyone who did not want his number revealed.
More than 550,000 customers requested such protection.
But because of a phone company error, as many as 30,000 customers did not receive the privacy protection they had been promised, the Public Service Commission said yesterday.
For months, each time those customers called someone with caller ID, their numbers were revealed.


NVR Inc.(NVR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


City to Revise Its Housing Of Homeless
After 11 years of litigation, New York City agreed yesterday to allow a court-appointed monitor to oversee a reorganization of its system for sheltering homeless families, a system that has routinely forced families to sleep in city offices and has led to $5 million in fines against the city.
The agreement between the city and advocates for the homeless, signed by Justice Helen E. Freedman of State Supreme Court, requires the city to begin immediately to fashion a system for housing the homeless that does not rely on families' sleeping on chairs and tables in offices or staying in substandard welfare hotels.
In exchange, the advocates who had sued the city on behalf of homeless families agreed to suspend the litigation, freeing the city from court-imposed fines for at least six months.


Knicks Will Live or Die on 3-Pointer
Watching Derek Harper shadow box after practice today showed the kind of fight the Knicks have demonstrated in winning 16 of their last 18 games.
As Harper quietly answered questions about New York's ugly 90-87 victory over Golden State Tuesday night and Friday night's game at Philadelphia, someone asked him about the highly anticipated battle against the Magic on Sunday in Orlando, Fla.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.86
3.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.88
5.82
3.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.17
6.11
3.20
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.65
7.58
5.70
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.74
7.69
6.28
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.60
8.57
7.19
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.64
6.66
5.63
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Before Summit, Egypt Says Israel Erodes Peace
Foreign Minister Amre Mahmoud Moussa said today that Israel had failed to abide by the peace agreement, leading to an increase in Palestinian violence.
He also said Israel's decision not to sign the nuclear nonproliferation treaty was fueling regional instability, and called on the Israeli Prime Minister to stop questioning Egypt's long-term stability.
The criticisms of Israel were made in an interview in the Foreign Minister's office on the eve of a meeting in Cairo between President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, King Hussein of Jordan, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
The comments reflect a deterioration of relations between the two neighbors who signed a peace treaty in 1979.


Gore and Gingrich Look for Common Ground


New Delhi Journal; Crown Jewels of the Nizam: All Are India's Now
For the Nizams of Hyderabad, Muslim rulers of fabled wealth whose authority once extended across much of southern India, the armored car that carried four steel trunks away from a Bombay bank vault last month was a punctuation mark to decades of declining fortune.
The trunks, bound for a Government strongroom in New Delhi, held a collection of jewels considered by experts to be one of the greatest ever assembled.
Among them was the fabled Jacob diamond, a duck's-egg-size 162-carat stone bought by Hyderabad's ruling family in 1891.
It was used for much of this century as a paperweight by Osman Ali Khan, the seventh and last Nizam to rule the royal state.


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI PROPOSES 3% TRIM IN STATE BUDGET Taking the first step toward fulfilling his vision for a smaller state government, Gov.
George E. Pataki proposed a $32.4 billion state budget that would reduce taxes for almost all New Yorkers and cut spending across the board.
A1.
New York Democrats began an aggressive campaign to depict Mr.
Pataki's budget in the terms of class warfare.
News analysis, B6.


Cyber-critics flock on line for a spirited post-mortem on the lineup of Super Bowl commercials.
THE commercials that ran during Super Bowl XXIX have been critiqued by everyone from advertising experts to agency executives to David Letterman, who spoofed them with a mock "Late Show" spot in which he stuffed his mouth with Doritos and proclaimed: "Chips! It's what's for dinner!"
Now the evaluation of Super Bowl ads has even entered cyberspace.


Mentor Graphics Corp.(MENT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Apache Tribe Rejects Move to Store Nuclear Waste on Reservation
Wendell Chino, the president of the Mescalero Apache tribe in southern New Mexico, had hoped to convince his people that their role as stewards of the earth included tending to the tons of highly radioactive nuclear waste that accumulates daily at the nation's electrical generating plants.
He spoke solemnly of "ghost bullets" -- invisible shards that were deadly if mishandled, but something that could earn millions of dollars a year if treated with respect.


Armey Didn't Condemn Anti-Gay Bigotry
To the Editor:
Although some may feel that enough has been said about House Majority Leader Dick Armey's use of the slur "fag" against Representative Barney Frank, the most troubling issue is what has not been said.
Mr.
Armey constructs an adamant defense in a righteously indignant letter (Jan. 30).
However, in explaining the detailed intricacies of a "slip," he fails to condemn anti-gay sentiments without exception.
On the day the world commemorated the 50th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, an atrocity painfully remembered as the consequence of hatred and intolerance, it is particularly ironic and offensive that Dick Armey would publicly use the slur "fag."
Although these two events have been separated by 50 years, they are inextricably connected by their essential cores: politically and publicly espoused hatred and bigotry.
There is an insidious link between anti-gay slurs and violence against gay men and lesbians.
Since April 1993, there have been eight brutal murders of gay men in Dick Armey's home state of Texas, yet he fails to address the serious implications of hate toward gay people.
Gay men and lesbians face an increased threat to our lives and well-being for fear of hostility and violence everywhere we turn -- from the streets of our neighborhoods to our jobs.
Mr.
Armey owes an unqualified apology not only to Mr.
Frank but also to all gay men and lesbians, who must now endure the consequence of his deliberate refusal to declare publicly that bigotry and hatred is a path the world cannot afford to take again.
RICHARD BURNS  Executive Director, Lesbian &amp; Gay Community Services Center New York, Jan. 30, 1995


Gateway 2000 (GATE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Slumping Red Storm Goes Right to the Videotape
It is rare if not unprecedented for someone to witness his own burial.
But that's what the St.
John's basketball team did last night.
After choking off its dwindling hopes for a respectable season by losing, 78-62, to the 19th-ranked Villanova Wildcats last night at Madison Square Garden, the Red Storm immediately bused back to campus for a team meeting where it watched its defeat on film.
Perhaps it was fitting punishment.
Why not force the Red Storm players to watch what a crowd of 13,374 paid good money to see: a second-half collapse that saw a 5-point halftime lead turn into a 16-point rout that was worse than the score indicated.


American Savings of Florida (ASFL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Adviser in Radio Ads Draws S.E.C. Sanctions
An investment adviser who advertises heavily on financial talk radio programs has been sanctioned by the Securities and Exchange Commission for fraudulent advertising.
Peter Bruno and his company, the Wall Street Money Management Group Inc., reached a settlement with the S.E.C. on Monday.
Without admitting or denying the allegations, Mr.
Bruno agreed to pay a penalty of $25,000 and hire a consultant to review his advertising.
He also agreed to inform his more than 4,000 clients of the sanctions.


Halliburton Co. (HAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Agee Leaving Morrison Knudsen
When William Agee came home to Idaho to run the Morrison Knudsen Corporation in 1988, both he and the construction and engineering company needed a turnaround in their fortunes.
Mr.
Agee's reputation as a young, fast-rising business strategist at the Bendix Corporation was upended by his ill-fated attempt to acquire the Martin Marietta Corporation in 1982.
Morrison Knudsen, which had prospered for decades by building landmarks like the Hoover Dam, the San Francisco Bay Bridge and the trans-Alaska pipeline, was losing money.


Bridge
Even when the battle seems lost, fight fiercely to the end and a miracle may happen.
There are historical precedents for that, and now a bridge example.
At the NEC World Championships in Albuquerque, N.M., in September, a favored team was in a deep hole in the qualifying stage -- so deep that its captain, Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., gloomily flew home in his private plane.


Francois Boutin, Horse Trainer, Dies at 58
Francois Boutin, one of the most renowned horse trainers in Europe, died yesterday at a hospital in Paris, not far from the training center where he developed Arazi and other leading race horses.
He was 58.
He had been suffering from liver cancer.


RESULTS PLUS
FIGURE SKATING  Germans Win European Pairs  Mandy Woetzel and Ingo Steuer of Germany took advantage of the home ice in Dortmund to win the pairs event at the European figure skating championships yesterday.
Radka Kovarikova and Rene Novotny of the Czech Republic were second and Yevgeniya Shishkova and Vadim Naumov of Russia, the world champions, finished third.
Ilya Kulik, a 17-year-old from Russia, took a surprising lead in the men's event after the short program yesterday.
Kulik was followed in the standings by Vyacheslav Zagorodniuk of Ukraine and Philippe Candeloro of France.
The Olympic champion, Aleksei Urmanov of Russia, was sixth after scaling down a triple lutz to a double with eight basic jumps and spins. (AP)
N.H.L.
Whalers Edge Senators  Robert Kron and Frantisek Kucera scored in the first period as the visiting Hartford Whalers beat the Ottawa Senators, 2-1, last night.
Both of the victories for Hartford (2-2-2) have come at the expense of the Senators (0-4-2).
Aleksei Yashin scored for Ottawa midway through the third period. (AP) STARS 9, DUCKS 2: Mike Modano established career highs with 6 points and 4 assists to lead Dallas to its first home victory of the season.
In addition to Modano's two goals, Trent Klatt and Brent Gilchrist also scored twice and defenseman Grant Ledyard matched his career high with three assists as Dallas (3-2-1) extended its winning streak against Anaheim to four games. (AP) BLACKHAWKS 7, OILERS 0: Patrick Poulin's two goals highlighted a four-goal first period to lead visiting Chicago over Edmonton.
Attendance was announced at 10,497, but the 16,600-seat Coliseum was half-empty for the Blackhawks' humiliation of the struggling Oilers.
Edmonton has now lost five in a row after opening the season with consecutive victories.
Chicago put the game away during a four-minute stretch in the first period when it scored four times, including back-to-back goals from Poulin. (AP)
FLAMES 2, RED WINGS 1: German Titov's shorthanded goal midway in the third period gave host Calgary the victory over Detroit.
Titov's third goal of the season came at 9:05 of the third when the puck deflected past goalie Chris Osgood off the skate of Red Wings defenseman Mark Howe for a 2-0 Calgary lead.
Sergei Fedorov cut the lead to one with 11 seconds left in regulation with his fourth of the season. (AP)
SWIMMING  American Sets Butterfly Mark  Amy Van Dyken of the United States set a short-course world record of 26.73 seconds in the 50 meters butterfly at a World Cup event yesterday in Espoo, Finland.
The 21-year old Van Dyken, who is from Denver, clipped 0.20 seconds from the mark set by Angela Kennedy of Australia in July 1993. (AP)
YACHT RACING  No Wind, So No Racing  America's Cup sailors waited for more than two hours yesterday for the wind to come up on the ocean waters off San Diego, but the breeze never showed.
Racing was postponed as a result, with the challengers expecting to race the same matchups today as were scheduled for yesterday.
The defenders' lineup will be different, with the intended match between Young America and America
rescheduled for next Tuesday.
Today, Young America and Stars &amp; Stripes are set to race.
SOCCER  AC Milan Ties Arsenal  AC Milan, the defending champion, and Arsenal played to a 0-0 tie at Highbury in London yesterday in a first-leg game of the European Cup.
The replay is scheduled for March 8 in Milan, Italy.
Yesterday's game was the first for an Italian soccer team since Italian authorities postponed all games in that country for one week in the aftermath of Sunday's fatal stabbing outside the stadium in Genoa before a league game between AC Milan and Genoa.
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  Tennessee Snaps Florida Streak  Michelle Marciniak scored 20 points and Nikki McCray added 19 as second-ranked Tennessee beat No. 14 Florida, 76-69, last night and snapped the Lady Gators' 20-game home winning streak.
The last time Florida had lost at home was also to Tennessee, 88-75 on Feb. 23, 1993.
Tennessee improved to 20-1 over all and 7-0 in the Southeastern Conference while Florida fell to 16-5 and 3-3. (AP)


W.J. Strawbridge, Sailor, Is Dead at 83
William Justice Strawbridge, a yachtsman and America's Cup financier who helped organize the Intrepid racing syndicate in 1967, died in his sleep yesterday at his home in Hobe Sound, Fla.
He was 83 years old.
His wife, Marjorie Flagg Strawbridge, said the apparent cause was heart failure.


Family Relationships, Both Real and Spectral
The title characters of Craig Lucas's "Missing Persons" are actually very much in evidence in the extensively revised version of the 1981 play at the Atlantic Theater Company.
Specters of failed relationships in the lives of an English teacher and her grown son, they show up with the harping persistence of Mrs.
Muir's resident ghost: popping out of refrigerators, closets, even garbage pails to keep mother and son in a feverish purgatory of guilt and self-examination.


Opening Up the Rolls of the Avant-Garde
The Crosstown Ensemble issued no manifestoes for its inaugural concert at the New York Academy of Art in TriBeCa, but one can guess what its founder, the conductor Eric Grunin, had in mind.
Rooted in the downtown musical avant-garde, Crosstown seeks to broaden its scope by reaching across town, in a global village sense, to like-minded European composers of the younger generation and to established figures of 20th-century musical history.
This is the sort of lively, wide-ranging prospectus offered by European groups like the Ensemble Modern.
American new-music ensembles tend to have a narrower outlook, institutionally or ideologically circumscribed.
The mere sight of Crosstown's program on Saturday night was refreshing: works of established European masters (Lutoslawksi, Ligeti), a cult figure of the avant-garde (Giacinto Scelsi), a noted younger Finn (Magnus Lindberg) and a young American (Norman Yamada).
The ensemble did not always meet the music's extreme demands, but it showed great promise.


Dreams Live Another Day for Players Making Mets' Cut
Jeff Edwards was selling cars in Nashville, a job he considered little more than a way station after more than eight years in professional baseball, both as a pitcher and a coach.
Today, he quit his job.
He packed all his earthly possessions -- what few there are -- into the back of his 1988 Toyota Land Cruiser and drove 13 hours south to Port St.
Lucie, spring training home to the New York Mets.


Inco Ltd. (N,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Alert Inc.(ALRT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


AT WORK WITH: Evelyn Lauder; From Pink Lipstick To Pink Ribbons
THERE aren't too many people around who really care about Evelyn Lauder's favorite lipstick color.
Which is just as well.
The woman who has been called the Crown Princess of the Estee Lauder Companies is too savvy, and far too guarded, to name one.
But there's no doubt that high on the list is a comparatively new shade called Pink Ribbon.
It's more than a color to her; it's another element in her crusade to raise awareness of, and to fight, breast cancer.
Mrs.
Lauder, the senior corporate vice president of the privately held $2 billion-plus company, is an immaculately turned-out, awesomely organized woman.
She has become increasingly visible as her mother-in-law, Estee Lauder (whose exact age is buried somewhere but who is thought to be in her late 80's), has curtailed many public activities.


Midwest Resources Inc.(MWR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


With Blood Shortage Near Crisis, Hospitals Prepare to Delay Operations
New York City is in the midst of its most critical blood shortage in about a decade, a situation that has forced at least one hospital to postpone elective surgery and others to prepare for the increasing possibility that they, too, will have to put off all but the most pressing operations.
"It's the most critical situation I've seen in the last 10 years, really touch and go," said Dr.
Carl F. Wolf, director of the blood bank and transfusion services at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, where doctors are evaluating whether they will need to cancel some elective operations scheduled for today.


Calton Inc.(CN,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


It's One Strike and You're Out in Florida
After its grand opening this week, the Shooters restaurant here was counting on baseball's exhibition season for a marketing blitz.
Among the plans: ticket giveaways, visits from big-name players, advertisements flown over two gleaming stadiums.
Now, with the baseball strike threatening spring training, which is supposed to start in the third week of this month, the restaurant has started looking into a fishing motif.


Nine West Group Inc.(NIN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Currents; What's Hot: A Gingerly Guide
THE New York International Gift Fair, held twice a year at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan, has become both a barometer of conditions in the design world and a divining rod for trends to come.
Last week, 2,350 exhibitors at the five-day bazaar put on a staggering display of lamps, linens and curiosities that will soon appear in stores.
The fun at a trade show like this is to distinguish hot stuff from old hat.
A spirit of multiculturalism, a sort of fermenting World Style, was present, as designers freely borrowed materials, forms and crafts from global sources.
There were lamps inspired by Moorish architecture, batik and hand-dyed fabrics in the warm colors of Indian spices, and plastic lamps folded and snipped like origami.


Quno Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column of Business Day on Jan. 17 about a planned sale of assets by Martin Marietta Materials Inc. overstated the plan.
The company wants to sell concrete and gravel operations in the Pittsburgh area, not all its concrete and gravel operations.


Recognizable Wins Again
Recognizable, a 4-year-old daughter of Seattle Slew, won her fourth straight race and the sixth in 10 starts today in the Sabin Handicap at Gulfstream Park.
The filly, who is owned by Ogden Mills Phipps, has run in the money nine times and never finished worse than fourth.
She is one of four top fillies owned by Phipps and trained by Shug McGaughey, joining Heavenly Prize, Educated Risk and Inside Information.


In Poland, Not Polish
To the Editor:
The 50th anniversary of the liberation of the Auschwitz death camp is a fitting time for you to publish "Slaughter of the Innocents" by Serge Klarsfeld (Op-Ed, Jan. 25).
While the article reminds the world of the horrors that should never again be repeated, it contains the phrase "Polish concentration camp," which deserves correction.


Quarterback Ware Signs With Jaguars
The Jacksonville Jaguars yesterday signed the 1989 Heisman Trophy winner, ANDRE WARE, as their first quarterback.
"This as a starting-over point for myself," said Ware, 26, who worked out for the Jaguars in December.
He was released by Minnesota last summer after signing as a free agent in May.
He spent four seasons with Detroit after being selected No. 7 in the 1990 draft following his junior season at the University of Houston. (AP)


Art in Review
Brian Clarke
Tony Shafrazi Gallery
119 Wooster Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 11
Big, ambitious and characterized by dazzling color, Brian Clarke's stained glass projects can be found in England, Japan and Germany and, soon, in Austria and France.
So this exhibition, which includes color photographs, architectural models, designs and a few examples of the real thing, provides a valuable opportunity to become acquainted with the efforts of this 41-year-old British artist without leaving the country.


Caller ID Line Expanded
Nynex said yesterday that it was expanding a special phone line to handle inquiries about problems with its caller ID service to 24 hours a day.
It said it had instructed the operators to assure that, if asked, they would check the privacy status of the caller's line.


Botanical Garden Wins Latest Round in Fordham Tower Dispute
The New York Botanical Garden claimed a small victory yesterday in its long-running battle to block its across-the-road neighbor, Fordham University, from building a radio-broadcasting antenna half as tall as the Eiffel Tower.
Garden officials hailed a Federal Communications Commission action ordering Fordham to submit an environmental assessment for the partly completed tower, which rises almost directly across Southern Boulevard from the Botanical Garden's Enid A. Haupt Conservatory.
Officials of the garden have said, among other things, that the tower would interfere with the flight paths of migratory birds.


Queries on Public Radio Staff Start Furor
A 16-page questionnaire from a Republican member of the Senate leadership seeking information about the ethnic backgrounds, sexes and previous employment of National Public Radio employees touched off a furor today over its propriety and legality and forced him to withdraw several questions.
A spokesman for the Senator, Larry Pressler of South Dakota, had said the personnel information was needed to gain "insights into whether its programming is balanced."


CHRONICLE
Why would someone described by ART BUCHWALD as "astronaut, sportsman, gourmet, personal friend of Hillary Clinton, lifetime subscriber to People magazine and president of the Frequent Flyer Club of Roxbury, Conn." be honored by the National Arts Club on Gramercy Park?
Try the name WILLIAM STYRON.
Mr.
Buchwald's remarks were made at the club's 27th annual literary award dinner on Wednesday night as Mr.
Styron, a Pulitzer Prize winner whose books include "The Confessions of Nat Turner" and "Sophie's Choice," received its Medal of Honor for Literature.


The Spoken Word
"CONTINUITY AND CHANGE IN AFRICAN-AMERICAN ART," Graduate School and University Center of the City University of New York, 33 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
A daylong conference featuring writers, professors and museum representatives.
Today, 3 to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 642-2641.
SIXTH AFRICAN-AMERICAN READ-IN, St.
James Presbyterian Church, St.
Nicholas Avenue at 141st Street, Harlem.
A silent reading of works by black authors, followed by a reading of works by authors in attendance.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free.
Sponsored by the Literary Society.
Information: (212) 862-4646.


CHRONICLE
Irreverent, impertinent, witty, slightly diabolical in the most pleasing way -- could these be tributes to graphic designers?
They could be, and were, at a gathering on Wednesday evening of 100 friends and admirers of MILTON GLASER, EDWARD SOREL and SEYMOUR CHWAST at the Cooper Union, their alma mater.
The occasion was the 40th anniversary of Push Pin Studios, which was founded by the three designers.
"These three changed visual communication, they brought the phenomenon of joie de vivre, pizazz and a great sense of panache to design -- and they are still setting design on its head," said JOHN JAY ISELIN, the president of Cooper Union.
The three men now work independently, but Mr.
Chwast is still associated with Push Pin.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MANDARIN ORIENTAL INTERNATIONAL, Hong Kong, paid $40 million for a 40 percent stake in the Kahala Hotel in Honolulu.
PATRICK INDUSTRIES, Elkhart, Ind., a producer of moldings, cabinets and paneling, is expanding its size and product line through the acquisitions of U.S.
Door and Harlan Machinery Co.


Washington Mayor Seeks Fiscal Help From the U.S.
Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. outlined an ambitious plan today to save Washington from fiscal disaster, but he wants Congress to pay for a big part of it.
His proposal to eliminate the city's $631 million deficit would cut an unspecified number of jobs, require wage reductions and scale back city services like garbage collection and health care without raising taxes.
But it also asks Congress to assume responsibility for the city's growing Medicaid costs -- an estimated $267 million this year, or 42.3 percent of the deficit.


A Misfit Emerging From Oblivion
William Baziotes wasn't a man for his time, but he may be one for ours.
Though he started at the forefront of American painting during the 1940's, at his death in 1963 his career was in eclipse.
Since then, compared with the other pioneers of postwar abstraction, he has had little written about him and only a handful of shows.
The one now at the Blum Helman Gallery is a handsome, though scattershot, tribute.
There are only 18 paintings and drawings in it (and no catalogue), but the works span his career, from the rambunctious ones of the 1930's through his mature paintings of the 50's and 60's: shimmering, iridescent images of strange shapes swimming in a plasmic pond, as suave and introspective as the earlier pictures are the reverse.


Giants' Beamon Pleads Not Guilty
Giants defensive back WILLIE BEAMON pleaded not guilty yesterday to charges of trying to run over a Clifton, N.J., police officer.
Beamon, 24, was arrested Wednesday night on charges of aggravated assault on a police officer, obstruction of the administration of law and reckless driving.
He was freed on $5,000 bail following the municipal court hearing in Clifton.


Art in Review
Tatsuo Miyajima
Luhring Augustine Gallery  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through Feb. 11
This Japanese artist has adapted digital technology to philosophical ends with mixed results.
Tatsuo Miyajima's themes, which embrace both Buddhist thought and Western theory, are time and causality, and he explores them in installations composed of hundreds of luminous digital numbers ceaselessly and sequentially flashing.


Budget-Cut Target Has 9 Lives Plus
President Clinton's budget includes one item that is a hardy perennial on the list of programs to cut: "impact aid" to school districts having sizable numbers of military personnel or other Federal employees.
The program is intended to compensate school districts for revenue lost because of their inability to tax Federal property.
President Ronald Reagan tried to reduce these payments in 1981, when they totaled $706 million, and he had some success.
But they have since climbed back, reaching $728 million this year.


Corrections
A headline on the Evening Hours pages in Styles on Sunday misstated the amount raised by the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center cabaret at the New York State Theater on Jan 23.
The evening raised $2 million.


Devils' Coach Provides No Rest for the Productive
Stephane Richer was heading toward the bench after playing a full shift with his regular linemates with about four minutes left.
Devils Coach Jacques Lemaire, who like most hockey coaches prefers his best players on the ice with a tight game winding down, stopped Richer as he tried to enter the bench.
Lemaire sent him out for two consecutive shifts, and Richer rewarded his coach's decision in grand fashion.
The flamboyant Richer, arguably the most talented forward on the Devils, scored his second goal of the night on that shift, with 3 minutes 46 seconds, left to break a deadlock and give the Devils over the Quebec Nordiques a 5-4 victory tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


METRO DIGEST
PLEASANT LAYOVER FOR AIRPORT HOMELESS
About a dozen people live permanently at Kennedy International Airport, settling down at night in the cavernous international terminals that never close, sacking out like weary travelers.
They are different from the homeless people who sleep on the streets or in the subways.
They are, in effect, invisible, working each day to blend in with the human traffic.
A1.


Tackling the Fish Market Mess
Ending half a century of abdication by New York City -- and delivering on a promise he made a year ago -- Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has announced plans to impose municipal control on the mob-dominated Fulton Fish Market.
This is welcome news for wholesalers who have suffered decades of bribery and extortion; for consumers forced to pay prices inflated by shakedowns and other transactional costs of crime, and for the city's economy as a whole.
Over the years, the market's volume has shrunk dramatically as racketeers have driven suppliers and their refrigerated trucks to satellite markets elsewhere on the East Coast.
With $800 million in annual revenues, Fulton remains the country's largest fish and seafood market and the third-largest in the world.
To visitors who take the early-morning tours, it still conveys the romance and energy captured in Joseph Mitchell's New Yorker essays years ago.
To insiders, however, it is a place where fraud and payoffs are routine costs of daily business.
And to the city and Federal prosecutors, it has been a source of constant frustration.


Jazz Falls Short in Bid For Share of Road Record
Rockets 121, Jazz 101
John Stockton already had his record.
But Stockton and his Utah Jazz teammates could not get theirs.


Fighting Intensifies Along Peru-Ecuador Border
While United States and South American diplomats struggled here today to negotiate a cease-fire, the heaviest fighting in a week of skirmishes enveloped a disputed stretch of jungle border between Peru and Ecuador.
Using helicopters, mortars, planes and infantry units, Peru repeatedly attacked two border posts, Ecuadorean officials said today.


Children in Kobe Remember Their Classmates


U.S. to Withdraw Funds From Journalism Center in Budapest
The United States Information Agency has moved to stop financing a journalism training program in Budapest that has been run by an American university for four years.
The decision has led to complaints by American journalists and the program's administrators that the agency is infringing on academic freedom and journalistic independence.


Treasuries Close Mixed On Slow Day
Government securities traded mixed yesterday in thin volume as investors remained worried about inflation despite the Federal Reserve's increase of short-term interest rates by half a percentage point on Wednesday.
Traders fretted about whether the rate increase, the seventh in a year, would be enough to subdue future inflation.
And there was caution ahead of the scheduled release today of the latest national employment data, along with a heavy supply of $40 billion in new Government debt coming up at next week's auction.


Man in the News: Henry Wendell Foster Jr.; A Matter Of Balance
President Clinton's choice to replace Dr.
Joycelyn Elders, the Surgeon General he forced to resign in December, is Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr., 61, acting director of Meharry Medical College in Nashville.
He is an obstetrician who has specialized in the prevention of teen-age pregnancy and infant mortality.
When President Clinton introduced his new nominee in the Oval Office today, one of the first things he was asked was:


Western Allies Rebuff Clinton In Mexico Vote
In an extraordinary sign of the European uneasiness over President Clinton's plan to rescue Mexico's economy, financial officials disclosed today that six European countries withheld their support from an American-backed loan package approved by the International Monetary Fund.
Although the $17.8 billion package was accepted late Wednesday, the fact that six key Western nations -- Britain, Germany, Denmark, the Netherlands, Belgium and Switzerland -- abstained from approving the Clinton plan was taken as a rare rebuff of American leadership in the handling of an emergency.


Wellcome Cites Profit Gain In Move Against Glaxo Bid
Wellcome P.L.C. today reported higher earnings for 1994 and sought to use the results as evidence that the $14 billion hostile takeover bid made last month by Glaxo P.L.C. undervalued the company.
Scrambling to escape from Glaxo's clutches, Wellcome rushed out its unaudited financial results a month ahead of schedule.
Wellcome, which is based in London, said its pretax profits rose 19 percent, to $:738 million, or $1.17 billion, while sales increased 13 percent, to $:2.28 billion, or $3.6 billion.


In a Wealthy District, Opposition To Whitman's Cuts in School Aid
Clutching hastily scrawled petitions and letters to their legislators, parents in this wealthy suburb began crowding into the auditorium of the local high school shortly before 7 P.M.
An hour later, there was hardly an empty seat.
Nor were there many smiles.
Only a few years ago, many of these people had helped defeat Democrats in New Jersey for raising taxes, foreshadowing similar revolts around the country.
But on Wednesday night the parents were plotting another citizens' mutiny, against a Republican leader many of them had once supported: Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman.
This time, the fight was not over taxes but proposed cuts in school aid for affluent districts.


Accounts
*
Winkler McManus Advertising, San Francisco, was awarded two accounts with combined billings estimated at $7.5 million: Wall Data Corp., Kirkland, Wash., to handle its corporate software products account, previously handled on a project basis by various agencies, and Quantum Corp., Milpitas, Calif., to handle the account of the maker of hard drives for desktop computers, previously handled by Shafer &amp; Shafer, Newport Beach, Calif. *
Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, Williamsburg, Va., to Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weiss, New York, to handle its advertising and marketing account, which had been at Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York for the last 12 years.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.


Art in Review
'Triple Feature'
Art in General  79 Walker Street (one block east of Broadway)  Through March 4
Of the three artists here, Paolo Pelosini is the most dramatic, taking mundane objects and literally ripping them apart to make his "Destructivist Sculptures." The more solid the object, the more impressive the result.
A ripped-up umbrella looks like something you might have plucked from a trash can after a thunderstorm, but torn-open file cabinets are a genuine novelty.


Simpson Defense Grills 'Dreams' Witness
A defense lawyer for O. J. Simpson today scornfully attacked the credibility of a former policeman, Ronald G. Shipp, challenging his testimony that Mr.
Simpson once confided to him that he had dreamed about killing his former wife.
In the second day of tenacious cross-examination, Carl Douglas, one of Mr.
Simpson's lawyers, extracted testimony from Mr.
Shipp that he was once suspended from the police force for showing up at work with alcohol on his breath.
In again focusing on Mr.
Shipp's drinking habits, he suggested that drinking may have clouded his judgment on the night that Mr.
Simpson was said to have mentioned his dreams.


'The Piano Lesson': A Family Elegy
The jeweled crown of this year's Black History Month on television turns out to be a 1990 Pulitzer Prize-winning play set in 1936 Pittsburgh.
The play, August Wilson's "Piano Lesson," was created at the Yale Repertory Theater and then went to Broadway.
Now, adapted by Mr.
Wilson, it is a "Hallmark Hall of Fame" production being broadcast on Sunday at 9 P.M. on CBS.
Lloyd Richards, Mr.
Wilson's longtime collaborator, is once again the director, and Charles Dutton returns to the role of Boy Willie in a mesmerizingly powerful performance.
On the face of it, "The Piano Lesson" is an uncomplicated story.
Boisterous Boy Willie and his gentle pal Lymon (Courtney B. Vance) roll into Pittsburgh with a truckload of watermelons that, together with the sale of an old family piano, should raise enough money to let Boy Willie realize his dream of buying some Mississippi land his family worked as slaves.
But the piano is half-owned by his sister Berniece (Alfre Woodard) who, although she hasn't played it since their mother died seven years earlier, cherishes the instrument for its haunting connections to the family's history.
She won't hear of its being sold.


Retired Shouldn't Bear The Budget Burden
To the Editor:
In "An Unaffordable Pension Boost" (editorial, Jan. 27), there is the suggestion that members of the New York State Senate and Assembly voted for a pension supplementation to "placate their union supporters." To impugn the integrity of members of the Legislature in such fashion is offensive.


Art in Review
Andreas Gursky
303 Gallery  89 Greene Street (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 11
The melancholy of modern life weighs more heavily than ever on Andreas Gursky's romantic photographs.
The pastoral landscape is gone; in one large color print, a view of cattle in a field is obliterated by lines etched into a glass panel at a rest stop on the autobahn.
The Dutch landscape of Rembrandt and Ruysdael has been reduced to a backdrop for the smooth curves of a runway, in a photograph taken from inside an empty terminal at Schiphol Airport near Amsterdam.
Replacing landscapes are the seamless grids of corporate architecture.
One oversize print shows nothing but the glowing grid of the cover of a light fixture, receding into the image.


Snags Predicted for G.O.P. Agenda
While central elements of the Republicans' Contract With America are sailing through the House of Representatives, Speaker Newt Gingrich is cautioning that other items may face a stiffer headwind.
"I'll be quite frank with you," Mr.
Gingrich said in a speech to a business association on Wednesday night.
"I think term limits is going to be very hard to pass, and I think litigation reform is just going to be a brawl."


Keep in Mind
"LIGHT NIGHTS SATURDAYS AND MIDNIGHT BASKETBALL," a new program for young people 10 to 21, who can learn swimming, basketball, hip-hop dancing, weight training and game-room activities.
Saturdays, 7:30 to midnight.
At the Vanderbilt Y.M.C.A., 224 East 47th Street, Manhattan.
Free.
Information: (212) 756-9600, ext. 640.
"WINTER BIRDING," a trail walk concentrating on birds that stick around for the winter (like downy woodpeckers and cardinals), led by a birder.
Bring binoculars and field guides, if you can.
Tomorrow, 8:30 A.M., at the Alley Pond Environmental Center, 228-06 Northern Boulevard, Douglaston, Queens.
Free.
Registration: (718) 229-4000.


A Network Searches For Salable Identity
Despite showing more than 900 hours of programming on TNT, TBS and SportSouth -- including the National Basketball Association, the Atlanta Braves and the National Football League -- the new leaders of Turner Sports insist they are suffering from an identity crisis.
Plenty of games but no personality.
"When you say ABC, you say Michaels, Dierdorf, Gifford, McKay," said Mike Pearl, who is in his third week as Turner Sports' senior vice president of production, replacing Don McGuire.
Previously, Pearl was CBS's coordinating producer of the Winter Olympics.
"When you say CBS now, it's Jim Nantz. At NBC, it's Costas. At ESPN, it's Chris Berman."


Many Are Aboard for Buttonholing Trip
This year, New Jersey's premier business excursion was surprisingly businesslike.
The Republicans are in power in Trenton, taxes are going down, deregulation rules the roost.
With no political issues on the horizon any larger than this fall's race for the State Assembly, the annual New Jersey Chamber of Commerce train to Washington managed to be as crowded as usual, almost as noisy as usual, but not as zesty as usual.
If it had been a pudding, Winston Churchill would have said it had no theme.


Soprano Makes Met Debut in 'Pagliacci'
Daniela Dessi, an Italian soprano who has established a major career in Europe during the last decade, made her Metropolitan Opera debut on Wednesday night as Nedda in Leoncavallo's "Pagliacci." Although she has sung the role in concert and recorded it with Riccardo Muti, she had never performed it onstage, which perhaps explains some of her dramatic uncertainties on Wednesday.
She possesses an essentially fine lyric voice: secure, well-projected high notes, lustrous tone quality at lower volumes, a subtle expressive sense.
In certain passages, however, she showed an uncomfortably wide vibrato and a hollowness of tone in the middle register.
This is not the most subtle role in the soprano repertory: Nedda is an unfortunate young woman caught in front of an onrushing truckload of verismo disaster.
Ms.
Dessi nicely sketched the innocent fantasy of "Stridono lassu," but her adulterous duet with Dwayne Croft's Silvio lacked raw passion, and her acting in the play scene failed to get across the character's slow realization of her fate.
She hasn't yet found the big, obvious gestures needed to make an impact on the Met stage.


W. R. Timken, 84, Ex-Chairman Of Ohio Manufacturing Business
W.
R.
Timken, former chairman of the Timken Company of Canton, Ohio, died on Jan. 26 at Aultman Hospital in Canton, where he lived.
He was 84.
The cause was heart failure, a company spokeswoman said.


In Small, Smoky Bars, Music With Grit
TAKE a look inside a few of Manhattan's finest dives any night.
This is called paying your dues.
There are no refunds, and, for most Manhattan bands, few returns on the investment.
In other cities, bar bands are staples, playing an all-American mix of blues, country and rock to late-night revelers at local spots.
But in New York, a city known for its cultural diversity, cutting-edge arts offerings and abundance of famous touring music groups, bar bands tend to be either overlooked or taken for granted.


Cup Skipper Falls Overboard
It wasn't supposed to happen on calm days, nor to an America's Cup yacht skipper.
But John Bertrand of Australia fell overboard in the challengers' trial race off San Diego yesterday against his most formidable rival, New Zealand's Black Magic 2.
"He was pushing the boom out, and somebody pushed it out ahead of him," said Andrew Cape, an alternate navigator on Bertrand's yacht, One Australia.


California Looks To Era of Growth
To the Editor:
"Leaders in States Pledge to Reduce Taxes This Year" (front page, Jan. 30) contains a flagrant error, which strongly prejudices the argument for Gov.
Pete Wilson's 15 percent cut in California's personal and corporate income tax rates.
You state that "many are based on optimistic economic assumptions," and "Gov. Pete Wilson's proposed 15 percent cut in personal and income tax assumes 5.9 percent annual economic growth in the state and a victory in California's lawsuit against the Federal Government to recover costs related to illegal immigration."


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Sabres Top Capitals  Dominik Hasek stopped 33 shots and Dale Hawerchuk got a power-play goal in the second period last night as visiting Buffalo beat punchless Washington, 1-0.
Hasek, whose seven shutouts tied for the National Hockey League lead last season, preserved his first this year with a sprawling save on a close-in backhand shot by Pat Peake with 5 minutes 30 seconds left. (AP)


Helms Seeks Law to Restrict Gay Groups in Government
Senator Jesse Helms has introduced legislation that could limit the ability of homosexuals who work for the Federal Government to form employee associations.
The measure, introduced last month by Senator Helms, a North Carolina Republican, would ban the spending of Federal money to promote or carry out any program for Government employees that "would compel, instruct, encourage, urge or persuade employees or officials to embrace, accept, condone or celebrate homosexuality as a legitimate or normal life style."


For Arts, State Budget Less Than Reassuring
The state budget released by Gov.
George E. Pataki this week answered a question that had been worrying arts organizations around New York City: would it include the second slice of $5 million in matching funds to arts groups promised under the Cuomo Administration?
The answer, buried in the two volumes of budget figures and notes released on Wednesday, was yes, but the news did not bring much relief to those who work in the arts.
That is because overall financial support for museums, theaters, dance companies and other arts groups had been cut to $25.8 million from $32.6 million, a 21 percent reduction.


Mayor Presses Vacco Over Gay Bias Curb
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has urged Attorney General Dennis C. Vacco to preserve explicit job protection for homosexual workers at the State Law Department, a move that would reverse an executive order signed by Mr.
Vacco.
"I hope that upon further reflection, you will reconsider this action, which represents a step backward and a reversal of an important 15-year-old anti-discrimination policy," Mr.
Giuliani wrote to Mr.
Vacco.


Crime and (Extra) Punishment; Appeals Court Voids Sentence for an Accused Drug Dealer
For almost two years, Pedro Fernando Chunza-Plazas has sat in a Federal prison cell in Lewisburg, Pa., accused by the United States Government of being a major drug trafficker and serving two concurrent five-year sentences.
But Mr.
Chunza-Plazas was convicted only of carrying forged immigration cards, an offense that usually carries a sentence of no more than six months.


Mexican Report Details Brush With Insolvency
Haunted by lingering investor uncertainty, Mexican financial markets lost ground today as a central bank report showed how close the nation had come to insolvency before a new international assistance package was announced in Washington earlier this week.
The peso, after gaining strength for the last two days, weakened slightly to 5.455 to the dollar, down from 5.375 on Wednesday.
The Mexican stock market, unable to sustain a rally, slumped a further 2.7 percent today to close just under 1,944 -- 56 points below the 2,000 level many investors consider an important indicator of market health.


Separate but 'Comparable' for Women?
How far may a state go in denying women valuable educational benefits it provides for men?
Virginia poses an extremely discriminatory answer to that question in defending its subsidized all-male Virginia Military Institute.
The U.S.
Court of Appeals in Richmond has fallen for the bogus argument that V.M.I. can stay closed to women if the state provides "separate but substantively comparable" military education -- 35 miles away at the all-female Mary Baldwin College.
Such evasions are unlikely to wash in the Supreme Court, which applies strict scrutiny to discriminatory treatment of the sexes.
Indeed the V.M.I. case, with its evidence of determined bias and lame excuses, provides the justices an opportunity to treat gender discrimination as severely as racial discrimination.
Moreover, Virginia's invocation of outdated language and doctrines should convince the justices of the need to do so.


Ferraro Deflects Islanders Over the Flyers in Overtime
In the case of the Islanders, it may be too early to say what a difference a year makes.
Not so, if you are talking about Ray Ferraro.
Like the Islanders, Ferraro is trying to come back from a season he would like to forget.
Tonight, Josef Beranek scored a hat trick for Philadelphia, the first of his National Hockey League career.
But the goals that counted most belonged to Ferraro.


Retailers Sacrifice Profits To Enliven January Sales
Christmas arrived in January for many retail chains, as sales exceeded merchants' expectations.
Shoppers turned out in force last month to snap up the bargains offered in the aftermath of the disappointing 1994 holiday sales season, when most retailers failed to post the sales gains they had anticipated.


Rangers Will Take the Tie, and Some Rest
With the truncated season now one-sixth complete, the Stanley Cup champion Rangers find that a 3-3 tie with the Tampa Bay Lightning brings more sighs of relief than grumbles of frustration -- at least in the locker room, if not in the pricey seats at Madison Square Garden.
Rather than merely looking forward to the next game, their rookie head coach is also anticipating the off days that go around it.
His team needs the rest.
The Rangers have a 2-5-1 record, an injury to their best defenseman and a flu virus sweeping the roster.


Voyaging Back in Time to Try to Change History
FROM TIME TO TIME  By Jack Finney
303 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.
When we last saw Simon Morley, Jack Finney's peripatetic time traveler, he had made a decision to stay put in the past, in the 1880's, where he had fallen in love with a woman named Julia.
In Mr.
Finney's classic 1970 novel, "Time and Again," Si had become part of a secret government project (the Project) dedicated to the investigation of the past, and he had used his powers of self-hypnosis to make the leap backward into history.
And there he determined to stay: he married Julia, had a son named Willy, and adapted -- or tried to adapt -- to the ways of 19th-century New York.


Simpson Awards End Up in Court, Too
O.
J.
SIMPSON may have a new court skirmish -- this one over two trophies he was awarded during his playing days with the Buffalo Bills.
The trophies were seized by the police, who found them two weeks ago at a Buffalo pawnshop which bought them for a total of $300.
The police said they planned to return the trophies to Simpson, but lawyers for the pawnshop said they will go to court to get them back.


Art in Review
Cindy Sherman
Metro Pictures  150 Greene Street (near Houston Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 11
In her new color photographs, Cindy Sherman continues her forays into the grotesque.
Mixing and matching body fragments from anatomical dummies, she creates figures that are both scary and poignant.


Scientists Find Place on Left Side of the Brain Where Perfect Pitch Is Heard
A rare form of musical talent -- perfect pitch -- seems to reside in a mound of tissue on the brain's left side, scientists reported today.
Musicians with perfect pitch are able to identify any musical note without comparison to a reference note.
Researchers have long suspected that highly specialized mental functions occur primarily in either the left or the right brain hemisphere, said Dr.
Gottfried Schlaug, a neurologist at Heinrich Heine University in Dusseldorf, Germany, and a research fellow in the Department of Neurology at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
Recent studies show that the process of listening to music is carried out primarily on the brain's right side, he said.


Saturated With Expertise, Yet Seeming to Abandon It
The best ballets are often those in which the choreographer and the performers are steeped in the technique and conventions of the dance form but then seemingly abandon them.
That held true in "To the Pointe," a program of six new and recent ballets presented on Saturday night at the Church of the Holy Trinity (316 East 88th Street, Yorkville).
Jean Churchill took an often hilarious look at "The Nutcracker" and feel-good self-hypnosis in "Snow," set to the Tchaikovsky snowflakes music and excerpts from a relaxation tape.
Peggy Florin was a delight as an earnest, slightly be draggled ballet sprite trying mightily to follow the tape's directions as Andrew Hill set up the stage around her for a performance.


Bubka Leads a Millrose Field So Rich It Dazzles the Eyes
The Millrose Games are more than America's best track meet, indoors or outdoors.
They are a celebration of a sport, and tonight's 88th annual Millrose meet before a full or almost full house at Madison Square Garden should show why.
Title sponsorship from Chemical Bank and money from a new NBC-televised track series have added more elite athletes to already-loaded fields.
There will be 10 Olympic gold medalists, 18 world champions and eight athletes ranked first in the world outdoors.
All seven events for women and eight of the 10 major events for men will include at least one athlete from those groups.


A Quick Glance at Calendar And Riley Is a Bit Concerned
The Knicks, who finished 13-2 in January and have won 16 of their last 18 games, appear to be in high gear for tonight's contest against Philadelphia at the Spectrum.
But Coach Pat Riley is wary.
It's not the 76ers who scare him, it's February.
A year ago at this time, the Knicks were cruising along atop the Atlantic Division with a 30-11 record, 5 games in front of second-place Orlando.
But they suddenly began to struggle with their shooting and proceeded to lose 8 of 14 games in February, which narrowed their lead over the Magic to 2 games.
In March, the Knicks snapped out of their funk by starting a 15-game winning streak and regaining control of their division.
Although New York went on a memorable playoff ride, Riley won't forget that horrid late-winter slump.


Desarmes Journal; Rooting Up Fears, Haiti's Farmers Fill the Silos
The sorghum harvest is drawing to a close now, and the fields are filled with children and goats playing in the stubble.
The crop may be smaller than anticipated, peasants here in this dirt-poor village in the Artibonite Valley say, but there is reason to celebrate, and the distant sound of music wafts through the hot and dusty afternoon air.
With the grain speculators who once controlled prices no longer able to call on armed bands of enforcers, it is finally safe to begin storing crops until the price rises.
To the farmers, the silos they built with their own labor and money but which have stood empty for years are a symbol of their freedom.


School District Seeks a Partner, in Vain
High on Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's hit list of school districts that needed comeuppance for spending too much on non-instructional personnel is Red Bank.
On paper, the district, covering kindergarten through 8th grade, looks like a disobedient holdout that balked at Trenton's directions to cut administrative positions through merger with a nearby district.


Home Video
The CD-ROM Riddle
Analysts of the video-game scene report turbulent conditions.
Over the holidays, people bought millions of computers and CD-ROM games, but some studies indicate that they aren't using their new multimedia systems as ardently as anticipated.
And in video stores where traditional cartridge games are sold, onrushing technology may be cutting off old formats before their time.


Queries on Public Radio Staff Start Furor
A 16-page questionnaire from a Republican member of the Senate leadership seeking information about the ethnic backgrounds, sexes and previous employment of National Public Radio employees touched off a furor today over its propriety and legality and forced him to withdraw several questions.
A spokesman for the Senator, Larry Pressler of South Dakota, had said the personnel information was needed to gain "insights into whether its programming is balanced."


Executive Changes
ASHA CORP., Santa Barbara, Calif., named John C. McCormack president and chief operating officer, succeeding Alain J-M Clenet, who continues as chairman and chief executive.
BAUSCH &amp; LOMB, Rochester, said Peter Stephenson, senior vice president for finance, was retiring.
Stephen C. McCluski, controller, was named to succeed him.


Enrollment Is Up For Black Athletes
Enrollment of black athletes at the nation's leading athletic colleges dropped by one-fifth when stringent freshman standards took effect in 1986, but has since rebounded to previous levels, a new statistical study indicates.
According to projections based on a series of surveys conducted for the National Collegiate Athletic Association, the percentage of black freshman athletes at Division I schools was 24.4 percent in 1984 and 23.6 percent in 1985, the year before the new standards, known as Proposition 48, were implemented.
Since then, the percentage has risen to as high as 27.5, and has not been below 24 since 1990.


Back to School On the Hallway Patrol
HERE it is, two weeks since they started at Elizabeth High School, and the two new guys are already popular.
Students introduce themselves, welcome them to campus and very politely ignore their guns.
"It's amazing," Detective Michael Brown said.
"They walk in our office, sit down and make themselves comfortable."


Concerns Are Voiced On Effects of Title IX
Some of the most celebrated and successful athletes in the nation came here today to celebrate their accomplishments.
That the celebration on Capitol Hill and at the White House was for women on National Girls and Women in Sports Day spoke to the broad acceptance of women's athletics in the nation's capital, something that one Senator, Joseph Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, said didn't exist 20 years ago.
Still, as athletes like the former swimmer Nancy Hogshead, the tennis player Venus Williams and the former gymnast Mary Lou Retton -- the 1995 winner of the Women's Sports Foundation's Flo Hyman Award for "dignity, spirit and commitment to excellence" -- were being feted, their supporters in government and industry were voicing concerns.


When Insurers Say 'Tort Reform'
To the Editor:
Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky (letter, Jan. 25) advocates quick action by Congress on "tort reform." That title is a misnomer.
Every item on the Senator's agenda would deprive injured people of their rights to proper compensation.


Boeing Will Slow Output and Cut 7,000 Jobs
Buffeted by continued weakness in the airline industry, the Boeing Company said yesterday that it would reduce production of two models of jetliners and eliminate 7,000 more jobs, or about 6 percent of its work force.
Both the production cuts and the job cuts had been widely anticipated.
In the last two weeks, USAir Group, Continental Airlines, Air France and All Nippon Airways all said they would either cancel or delay orders.
But the number of job cuts exceeded most estimates, even though analysts said the production cutbacks were smaller than expected and appeared to mark a bottom for Boeing.


For Children
Artime
Various SoHo galleries  (718) 797-1573 or (201) 224-8002  Recommended ages: 5 to 10  Saturdays
"Have any of you every done a self-portrait?" Dorothea Basile asked a group of adults and children.
Two of the four children nodded warily.
They were meeting with Ms.
Basile and her partner, Amanda Lauricella, former educators at the Brooklyn Museum and art historians.
Last fall, the two women formed Artime, a theme-based program of family tours through SoHo art galleries.


Salomon Registers Big Loss
Battered by rising interest rates, a steep drop in client activity and charges for accounting mistakes, Salomon Inc. said yesterday that it lost $122 million in the fourth quarter, a performance that capped its first unprofitable year since 1981, when the firm went public.
For the latest quarter, the securities and commodities firm, the parent of Salomon Brothers Inc., reported a loss of $1.32 a share, in contrast to its record earnings of $476 million, or $4.33 a share, a year earlier.


Beckmann's Grim, Forceful Detailing of the Human Condition
The great German artist Max Beckmann was both a modernist and humanist, an artist who believed unequivocally in the ability of form to communicate the real: that is, the best and the worst of life.
This is the timely message to be extracted from the exceptional show of Beckmann's prints at the Museum of Modern Art.
The 84 works on view, which include drypoints, lithographs and woodcuts spanning most of Beckmann's career, represent nearly a quarter of his print production.
There are portraits, four wonderfully sweet cityscapes from the artist's Frankfurt years, an impressive selection of self-portraits (including the hypnotic "Self-Portrait in a Bowler Hat") and, most prevalent, the often crowded tableaux of faces and figures, sometimes calm, sometimes violent, always disturbing, with which Beckmann conveyed his memorable view of the human condition.


Council Passes a Deficit-Cutting Package
Signaling the end of its three-month budget feud with the Mayor, the City Council overwhelmingly approved a $647 million deficit-reduction package yesterday that also restores money to services like youth programs, day care and garbage pickup at schools.
The smooth passage of the amendments to the city's $31.6 billion budget came in sharp contrast to the acrimony just months ago, when the Democratic-controlled Council took the Republican Mayor to court in a dispute over a $1.1 billion in cuts.
Ultimately, Mr.
Giuliani unilaterally trimmed the budget by nearly $800 million by impounding the money.


Horace Pippin Captured History With Joy and Acid
THE quickest route to "I Tell My Heart: The Art of Horace Pippin" at the Metropolitan Museum of Art is through the Michael C. Rockefeller wing, where you'll pass a West African sculpture of two musicians leaning together and smiling as they play.
About halfway through the Pippin show itself, you'll find "Harmonizing" (1944), a painting of four young black men singing, shoulder to shoulder, on a street corner in the artist's hometown, West Chester, Pa.
The connections between African art and American primitive art (to use a term routinely applied to Pippin's work) are complex, but one thing is certain.
Both are relatively recent arrivals to the world of fine-art museums, and their status still feels uneasy.
Tribal art contends with exoticism, primitive art with unthinking affection.
We come to it to be tickled and charmed, not to be challenged.


Art in Review
Phoebe Adams
Curt Marcus Gallery  578 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 11
The sculptor Phoebe Adams operates deep in Louise Bourgeois territory, that uncanny realm where a breast is a testicle, where a head is a phallus and vice versa, and where every orifice equals every other orifice.
Fortunately, Ms.
Adams has a strong feeling for materials.


House to 'Correct' San Diego Sewage Plan
In what they say will be the first of many bills undoing the work of overzealous regulators, House members led by Speaker Newt Gingrich plan to exempt San Diego from the Clean Water Act's requirement to thoroughly purify sewage before piping it out to deep ocean waters.
The proposal has strong support from the predominantly Republican Congressional delegation from the San Diego area, and Mr.
Gingrich has repeatedly praised it this week.


The Changeless Poor: Images a Century Apart
It is hard to imagine a more timely exhibition than "A Century Apart: Images of Struggle and Spirit," the provocative show now at the Museum of the City of New York.
With poverty programs once again at the center of political debate, the museum's idea of pairing the work of Jacob Riis, the turn-of-the-century reformer, with that of five contemporary documentary photographers seems especially astute.
Along with Riis, the photographers include Martine Barrat, Fred R. Conrad, Mary Ellen Mark, Margaret Morton and Jeffrey Henson Scales.
The show also gives the museum a chance to show off some of the incomparable Riis prints, negatives and other material in its collection.
Most of the more than 60 works by Riis in the show are new contact prints of the original 4-by-5-inch glass negatives, made on a special kind of paper that was standard when the images were taken.


Make Software as Cheap as a Paperback
To the Editor:
Re "China Trade Rift With U.S. Deepens" (front page, Jan. 29): Something has gone cockeyed with our drive to profit when a bundle of mass-produced software, priced at $10,000 (consideration given for origination and royalty costs) can be cloned and sold at a profit for as little as $100.
Has anyone stopped to consider that American software producers have unrealistically overvalued a product that can easily and effortlessly be copied?


Art in Review
Katherine Kuh  'Interpreting the New'
Archives of American Art  1285 Avenue of the Americas (at 51st Street)  Through March 13
Katherine Kuh (1904-1994) was a figure of exceptional accomplishments.
As a gallery owner in Chicago in the 1930's, she showed advanced European work.
She was the first curator of modern painting and sculpture at the Art Institute of Chicago, and then a critic for The Saturday Review for close to 20 years.
Her writing style was clear, her eye sharp and -- admirably -- her art-historical knowledge extended well beyond modernism.


Now, Rwanda's Neighbor Hovers Near the Brink
An opposition political party threatened to overthrow the Government of Burundi this week, by force if necessary.
Rival ethnic groups clashed in gunbattles in the suburbs of the capital, Bujumbura.
A grenade exploded inside a packed bus on Wednesday, killing at least one person and wounding several others.
A two-day general strike has shut down the city.
Crisis and uncertainty have been the common currency in Burundi for more than two years, and diplomats continue to worry whether the Central African nation can avoid the unspeakable violence that befell Rwanda, its northern neighbor.
So far it has, but Burundi always seems to be on the brink of disaster.


Brain Bedford in Two Grand Farces
THE funniest, wisest, most engaging new show in town is more than 300 years old and in verse.
Not blank verse but rhymed couplets, which, if spoken by amateurs, can numb the mind faster than Valium.
It's the Roundabout Theater Company's rollicking production titled "The Moliere Comedies," which pairs "The School for Husbands" (1661) with "The Imaginary Cuckold" (1660), and it opened last night at the Criterion Center.
Though Moliere is generally acknowledged to be France's greatest dramatist, he isn't easily translated.
That means he travels reluctantly or, when crossing the Atlantic, less well than goat cheese.
Now, using Richard Wilbur's American translations, Brian Bedford, the star, and Michael Langham, the director, have pooled their resources to give us two grand farces that are much more than academic approximations of the originals.
They have lives of their own.


No Justice Dept. Role in Quayle Accuser Case
To the Editor:
Dan Quayle begs for sympathy from the "elite media and the Clinton Administration," who, he asserts in his Jan. 29 letter, support and glorify me.
He portrays himself as a victim because I have "falsely claimed" that he regularly used marijuana when he was a law student at Indiana University.


INSIDE
Boeing to Cut 7,000 Jobs
Boeing, buffeted by airline weakness, said it would cut 7,000 jobs, or about 6 percent of its staff, and reduce output of two aircraft.
Page D1.
Pataki Outlines Cuts in Aid
Governor Pataki wants to cut a rent allowance and eliminate emergency fuel aid for the poor.
Page B1.
Psalms Aiding President
President Clinton says that he has been receiving help in a time of political troubles by reading all 150 Psalms in the Bible.
Page B9.
Dutch Flooding Recedes
Dutch officials said that river flooding had slowly begun to recede, but that dikes could crumble.
Page A12.


More Open Fed On Rate Moves
The Federal Reserve is opening the window a little wider into its inner sanctum.
Breaking eight decades of resistance to greater public disclosure, the Fed made it official this evening that it would continue to announce changes in interest rates.
The central bank's resistance to announcing policy changes had already been crumbling, and the Fed began a provisional practice of announcing rate increases last year.
But until today, Fed officials had maintained that each statement could be the last and that further rate increases might not be announced.


Market Place; Has the stock of Roadmaster stopped going downhill?
FOR more than a year the stock price of Roadmaster Industries has disappointed investors, falling by almost 19 percent.
But with recent corporate initiatives, is the stock now ready to respond?
Last month Roadmaster, a bicycle maker based in Englewood, Colo., completed the purchase of four business lines from the Actava Group Inc. of Atlanta in an all-stock transaction valued at $80 million.
The deal with Actava puts Roadmaster in several sporting goods niches.
In exchange, Actava acquired a stake of 39 percent in Roadmaster.


In Cairo, Israel and Arabs Back Peace Talks
The leaders of Egypt, Jordan, the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel, in their first regional summit meeting, agreed tonight to conduct talks in the coming days aimed at overcoming the obstacles to peace in the region.
In the past, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has met individually with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, King Hussein of Jordan and Yasir Arafat, chairman of the P.L.O., but until Mr.
Mubarak invited the group to Egypt, Mr.
Rabin had never sat down with all three of the Arab leaders who have formally made peace with Israel.


Moe Ginsburg Account in Review
Moe Ginsburg, Men's Better Clothing Inc. in New York has dismissed Lipman, Richmond, Greene in New York, its agency of seven years, and placed the creative portion of its account in review.
Billings were estimated at $1 million.
The media portion has been assigned to the Media and Marketing Group in Boca Raton, Fla.; Martin Weissberg, president at Media and Marketing, will assist Paul Ginsburg, president at Moe Ginsburg, in conducting the creative review.
A decision is expected by the end of the month, Mr.
Weissberg said yesterday.


French Court Fines Benetton
A French court has ordered Benetton Group S.p.A. to pay $32,000 in damages to French people infected with the H.I.V. virus for an ad campaign showing body parts tattooed with the expression "H.I.V. positive." The company said it would appeal.
Aides, a group supporting French AIDS patients, and three people with the virus sued the French unit of the Italian company in 1993, arguing that the campaign offended people with AIDS, which is caused by the virus.


Report Backs U.S. Program For Computer Development
A Federal program begun three years ago to support the development of advanced computers and computer networks is essential to the nation's half-trillion-dollar information technology industry, a report to be issued today by the National Academy of Sciences contends.
The Government is spending $1.1 billion annually on the program, known as the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative, which has been cited by Congressional Republicans as a program that could be eliminated to offset proposed tax cuts.


Developments in Washington
HOUSE: Speaker Newt Gingrich told a business group that central elements of the Republicans' Contract With America were progressing well, while others are facing stiff opposition.
But at a news conference, he dispelled any sense that he was really gloomy about the prospects for his legislative program, saying, "We are exactly on schedule." The House yesterday took up an element of the contract, the line-item veto, which gives the President the authority to strike provisions from spending bills and some tax measures.
House members led by Mr.
Gingrich plan to exempt San Diego from the Clean Water Act's requirement to thoroughly purify sewage before piping it out to deep ocean waters, citing this effort as a symbol of their determination to abolish heavy-handed Federal regulations.
But Mr.
Gingrich has not mentioned that last October, with no debate, Congress passed a bill giving San Diego the right to apply for such a waiver, and that Administration officials say it will be granted.


Restaurants
I popped a crisp tiny poori into my mouth and immediately experienced a whole range of contrasting sensations: first came the crunch of the fried shell and then the softness of the potato filling.
Then my teeth closed with a snap on the yellow noodlelike shreds on top.
Next I became aware of the tang of the yogurt and the sweet sourness of the tamarind sauce.
Finally, at the very end, the heat of the spices kicked in.
It was one small mouthful, but to me it was the taste of India.
It was a shock.
Salaam Bombay looks much like every other upscale Indian restaurant in New York City.
The room is large and pleasant and in the daytime the airy front of the dining room is occupied by a lunch buffet that promises mountains of food for $8.95.
The buffet looks inviting enough, but it holds the ubiquitous Indian dishes: pakoras, tandoori chicken, rice pullau, mango chutney.
In the back, a man behind a glass window methodically pulls breads out of the tandoor in a spotless kitchen.
A woman in a sari circulates, smiling graciously.
It all seems very familiar.


Stocks Climb As Earnings Draw Focus
A day after the Federal Reserve raised interest rates, the stock market rose in earnest through most of the session, with little of the volatility of recent sessions.
Traders said yesterday's stock session was an extension of the rally in the last half-hour of trading on Wednesday, which followed the Fed's announcement that it was raising the Federal funds rate by half a percentage point, to 6 percent.
Market speculation has already turned to what the Fed will do next.


Howard Liss; Writer, 72
Howard Liss, the author of scores of books about sports for adults and children, died on Jan. 15 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 72.
Mr.
Liss, who was born in Brooklyn, worked as a factory hand and a shipping clerk before he made writing his career.
He worked as a play doctor in the 1940's, contributed continuity for syndicated comic strips and wrote comedy material for radio and television shows.
He began writing books in the early 1960's.


At the Bar
"What's going on down there?" a pedestrian asked the other day, seeing extra security measures outside the United States Courthouse in lower Manhattan.
The pedestrian was one of the many going about their business who did not know that the biggest terror conspiracy case ever to come to trial in an American courtroom was taking place on the third floor of the big building with columns fronting on Foley Square.


Art in Review
Richard Artschwager
Kent Gallery  67 Prince Street  SoHo  Through Feb. 25
Richard Artschwager is seen at his very funny and slightly scary best in a this smart three-piece show.
The work ranges from a signature lozenge-shaped "blip" of the 1960's, in this case a steel exclamation point that looks like a punching bag, to a painted Formica chair flattened ballistically across the gallery wall (1975), to a fountain made of a single lacquered aluminum water droplet that appears to hang in suspended motion (1990).


Not a Straussian
To the Editor:
First Brent Staples wrote (Editorial Notebook, Nov. 28, 1994), with no basis whatever, that I claim to have been influenced by Leo Strauss.
Now Richard Bernstein, apparently misled by Mr.
Staples, identifies me as a Straussian in "A Very Unlikely Villain (or Hero)" (Week in Review, Jan. 29).
I have never claimed such an influence for the very good reasons that I never met Professor Strauss and have yet to read any of his writings.
ROBERT H. BORK  Washington, Jan. 30, 1995


Exposing the Horrors of Best-Sellerdom
John Trent (Sam Neill), an insurance investigator, is sitting in a restaurant one day when an ax-wielding maniac comes smashing through the plate-glass window.
This event helps send Trent on the trail of Sutter Cane, a wildly popular author of horror fiction, who has recently disappeared.
The maniac in question turns out to be Sutter Cane's literary agent.
Like many of Cane's readers, he has been driven mad by Cane's storytelling skills.
"Yeah, well, you'd think a guy that outsells Stephen King would find better representation," Trent says about the agent episode.
Of course, as "this century's most widely read author" and a man whose horror stories have a New England setting, Sutter Cane is very much in the King mold.
And "In the Mouth of Madness," John Carpenter's sardonic, increasingly wild-eyed nightmare about the apocalyptic dangers of mass-market fiction, goes even further than warning its audience about King-level literary power.
Is this sort of writer "a harmless literary phenomenon," the film asks, "or a deadly, mad prophet on the printed page"?


Vitamin A Deficiency Linked to Transmission of AIDS Virus From Mothers to Infants
A link between vitamin A deficiency and transmission of the AIDS virus from mother to infant has been found in a study in Africa, researchers from the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine in Baltimore and their colleagues in Malawi reported at a meeting here today.
The report is believed to be the first to show that maternal nutritional deficiencies can affect the transmission of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, said Dr.
Richard D. Semba of Johns Hopkins Hospital, the leader of the research team.
He reported the findings at the closing session of a meeting sponsored by the American Society for Microbiology.


On Stage, and Off
'Waterfront' Property, for Less
If Mitchell Maxwell can pull off what he hopes with "On the Waterfront," more than his mother, he figures, will consider him a genius.
He wants a cast of 25, up to 17 locales and 40 minutes of new music by Wynton Marsalis when he opens the Budd Schulberg-Stan Silverman adaptation of the Schulberg novel and movie at the Brooks Atkinson on May 1.
And he wants to do it for just $2.5 million with a weekly break-even point of $220,000 or so, and a top ticket price of $60.
That $220,000 is close to the figure at which "Passion," famous for its thrift, broke even.


Clinton Says Psalms Bring Him Relief
Seeking solace from his recent political troubles, President Clinton said today that he had just read the entire Book of Psalms, 150 hymns that praise God and often ask divine relief from sufferings inflicted by enemies.
Friends, he said, have faxed him passages from Scripture on a daily basis, apparently as gestures of support and encouragement.


Art in Review
'Take Care'
Swiss Institute  495 Broadway (at Broome Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 18
The Swiss Institute, long of West 67th Street, has moved to SoHo, into the boldly named and corniced New Era Building.
Its second exhibition in its new home, "Take Care," delves into past and present examples of craft taken to extremes of obsession or perfection.
Thankfully, there's not a watch or clock in sight.


Fortunes Change For French Sailor
Jean Luc Van den Heede, the French solo sailor whose 60-foot yacht went aground earlier in the BOC race around the world, was in the lead yesterday in the third stage of the 27,000-mile competition.
But he wasn't ahead by much.
Eight miles behind him was Christophe Auguin of France, the race's defending champion.


Diner's Journal
Savors of Brazil
"Have the tutu," said the tall waiter when I asked him for recommendations.
"It's a dish from the north of Brazil and it's very typical of our food."
The tutu feijao linguica was delicious.
On one edge of the plate was a bright green pile of shredded collard greens with little bits of bacon and garlic.
On another edge was a heap of rice.
Right in the middle was a puree of black beans topped with a long coil of sausage.
Eating it was a delight.


Airport Homeless: A Long, Pleasant Layover
Mary Vierck sat patiently in the T.W.A. terminal at Kennedy International Airport, her eyes freshly made up with powder-blue shadow, her salt-and-pepper hair pinned in a tight bun.
At her side stood a cart piled with luggage, including a black vinyl suitcase filled with blankets and pillows.
On a recent early morning, Miss Vierck, 58, was essentially indistingushable from the travelers around her.
But she was not on her way anywhere, not to Phoenix or Chicago or even to Manhattan.
Miss Vierck lives at the airport.


Another Shift By Miller Brewing
The Miller Brewing Company, for the second time this week, has made changes in its agency roster.
Dean Scaros, chief executive at Scaros &amp; Casselman Advertising in Stamford, Conn., said yesterday that his agency had been hired by Miller to handle several new-product assignments for which the billings were not disclosed.
Mr.
Scaros, confirming a report of the assignment this week in The Delaney Report newsletter, said his agency had worked for Miller for a couple of months and now "the relationship has become just a little more formal." Mr.
Scaros and his partner, Carl Casselman, chief creative officer, have worked on campaigns for beer brands like Miller Lite and Heineken.


White House Presses Baseball Negotiators
Concerned about the lack of movement in the baseball strike, President Clinton summoned the Federal mediator in the dispute to the White House yesterday for a progress report.
The mediator then returned to negotiations in an effort to push both sides forward.
The owners and players are working against a Monday deadline set by the President.
Article, page B13.


Sports of The Times; Great Rivals Don't Need Trash Talk
IT has dawned on Jackie Joyner-Kersee that her rivalry with Heike Drechsler could have been spiced by an occasional taunt or the jabbing of an index finger into the air, but that isn't the way it works between them.
"I have always spoken positively of Heike," Joyner-Kersee said. "She's a good person."


Shuttle Blasts Off to Meet Russian Station
The space shuttle Discovery set the dark Florida sky ablaze just after midnight today as it began a historic mission in which a winged American spaceship is to rendezvous with a Russian space station for the first time.
Carrying the first woman to pilot a NASA shuttle, the second Russian astronaut to fly on one and four other crew members, Discovery blasted off on time at 12:22 A.M. through the five-minute window available each day for a shuttle trying to meet the Russian Mir space station orbiting about 200 miles above the earth.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Benetton Touches a Nerve and Germans Protest
The windows of Heinz Hartwich's four clothing stores here have blood-red tape blocking out the name of his former supplier, the Italian clothing manufacturer Benetton Group S.p.A.
At the center of the X's formed by the tape, a sign says in German: "No more Benetton, because we condemn the scandalous advertising using misery, war, sickness and death."


Go Figure


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Mescalero Apaches' rejection of an agreement to store spent nuclear fuel on their New Mexico reservation rendered a statement by a nuclear industry spokesman about the tribal vote incorrectly.
Phillip Bayne, president of the Nuclear Energy Institute, a trade association, said the result of the tribe's referendum "closes out this opportunity to build a private storage site." He did not say it closed out "the" opportunity to build a private storage site.


Ulster Peace: How Fragile?
The furor over a document leaked to a newspaper this week showed just how fragile are the peace efforts in Northern Ireland.
The document was a draft being hammered out by British and Irish officials as a starting point for the time when the Catholics and Protestants who have been fighting 25 years finally sit down at the same negotiating table.


Saatchi Dismissed By Tyson Foods
Tyson Foods Inc. unexpectedly said yesterday that it was dismissing Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York, effective today.
Billings on the account, which the agency has handled for seven years, were estimated at $25 million to $30 million.
Jack Dunn, vice president for retail sales and marketing at Tyson in Springdale, Ark., said in a statement, "While our company has grown dramatically during the period of our relationship with Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, after careful consideration our management has determined that it is simply time for a change."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  UNEASINESS OVER AID TO MEXICO  Reflecting uneasiness over President Clinton's plan to rescue Mexico's economy, financial officials disclosed that several European countries withheld their support from a U.S.-backed loan package.
A1  MIDEAST SUMMIT MEETING  The leaders of Israel, Egypt, Jordan and the P.L.O. agreed to talks to overcome an impasse in progress toward peace in the Middle East.
A1


Haitian Premier Says Security Is Still Fragile
Prime Minister Smarck Michel of Haiti said today that the security situation in his country remained fragile and complained that only about 30 percent of his nation's paramilitary toughs had been disarmed.
Nonetheless, Mr.
Michel, a businessman who was appointed Prime Minister in October, said he was confident that American troops now in Haiti and United Nations peacekeepers who succeeded them would serve to discourage further violence.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about an Italian lyric tenor who sang at the Metropolitan Opera in the late 1940's misspelled his given name.
He was Ferruccio Tagliavini.


CLINTON'S BUDGET FALLS WELL SHORT OF G.O.P. DEMANDS
President Clinton will propose $1.6 trillion of spending in his 1996 budget, and he would more than offset the cost of a middle-class tax cut with savings in other areas of the budget.
But he still falls far short of Republican demands for a balanced budget in the year 2002.
Mr.
Clinton's budget request, to be submitted to Congress on Monday, shows a deficit of $196.7 billion for the 1996 fiscal year, up slightly from the $192.5 billion that he projects for this year.
Although his Budget Message boasts that his economic policies have sharply reduced the deficit from record levels, he says the deficit will probably stay in the range of $190 billion through 2005.


On My Mind; Jihad in America
The Clinton Administration has come to two major conclusions about terrorism in America, and from America.
The first is that the United States is becoming a national safe haven for terrorists from the Middle East: a combination bank, fund-raiser, militarist training ground, recruitment center, political academy and embarkation dock.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Europeans are uneasy over President Clinton's Mexican rescue plan.
Britain, Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium and Switzerland withheld their support from an American-backed loan package approved by the International Monetary Fund.  [ Page A1. ]


The Babe Pinch-Hits for Yankee Regulars
Buck Showalter, Willie Randolph and Gene Michael will be there, but Don Mattingly, Paul O'Neill and Jimmy Key will not.
That is why the usually popular Yankee Fan Festival is expected to open this morning at the New York Coliseum without its typical sellout crowd.
Because of baseball's labor dispute, the Yankees did not invite any current players to the event and that has helped squelch sales of the $35 tickets for today's session at noon and tomorrow's and Sunday's sessions which begin at 9 A.M.
The festival had attracted 12,000 fans a weekend in its first four years, but only about 4,000 tickets have been sold this year.


CHRONICLE
For those who have always wanted their own one-person show, good advice is on the way.
The comedian JULIE HALSTON says it is a plus to have a boyfriend create "buzz" by coming down the aisle with two bouquets of flowers and proposing during a performance.
She should know.
RALPH HOWARD, a WINS newscaster and now her husband, did just that in 1992 during her one-woman show "Julie Halston's Lifetime of Comedy."


John Sayles in the Land of Enchantment
In "The Secret of Roan Inish," the director John Sayles, who has shown such skill at portraying the interplay of individuals and social structures, makes a rare leap into the realm of fantasy.
Examining the obscure Celtic legend of the Selkie, a creature who is half human and half seal, he has created a touching cinematic meditation on people, familial roots and the myths that sustain them.
Mr.
Sayles's venture into the fantastic is the latest unexpected turn in the zigzag career of a film maker who is the equivalent of an old-time general practitioner.
Resisting specialization, he moves from genre to genre, applying his cheerfully level-headed realism to the problem at hand.
Be it baseball history ("Eight Men Out"), modern city government ("City of Hope"), the labor movement ("Matewan") or a woman's recovery from trauma ("Passion Fish"), Mr.
Sayles brings to it his characteristically good-natured curiosity along with a profoundly democratic spirit.


Dutch Rivers Are Receding, But Danger to Dikes Persists
The Dutch authorities said today that river flooding threatening their vast web of protective dikes had slowly begun to recede, but they warned that the dikes could still crumble and that the crisis was not yet over.
Throughout this week and last, downpours across northern Europe have turned the Rhine, Meuse and Waal rivers into vast sheets of menacing brown water that threatened to push through the dikes and cascade onto countless homes and farms in the river lowlands that make up much of the southern Netherlands.


Art in Review
'Still Working'  'Underknown Artists of Age in America'
I.B.M. Building  590 Madison Avenue (at 56th Street)  Through March 10
In his introduction to the catalogue of "Still Working," the curator, Stuart Shedletsky, describes the New York art world as "a community more interested in newsy firsts than developed vision." Because he believed painters and sculptors over the age of 60 weren't getting a fair shake from galleries, Mr.
Shedletsky (himself a painter and a teacher at Parsons School of Design) put together a show to expose their work to a broader public.
Taking issue also with "the popularly held notion that little of artistic merit occurs west of the Hudson River or east of the San Andreas fault," he decided to seek out artists representing "regional developments" and "isolated lineages." His aims, in short, were thoroughly laudable.


High-Speed Collision Sidelines Accola
PAUL ACCOLA, winner of skiing's overall World Cup in 1992, collided with his coach during a high-speed practice run Wednesday and expects to miss most of the season.
The 28-year-old Swiss skier had microsurgery to repair damage to his right knee ligaments and cartilage yesterday.


Another Buddy Story, With a Twist or Two
"Are you gay?" a male prosecutor asks Jane DeLuca (Whoopi Goldberg) during a climactic courtroom scene in Herbert Ross's surprisingly effective "Boys on the Side." "Yes, I am," Jane answers.
"And I'm sure you hear that from women all the time, but in my case it happens to be true."
"Boys on the Side," a three-woman road movie with a wonderful cast and an awful title, doesn't need courtroom drama, so it manages at such moments to seem clumsily contrived.
What matters more is that Ms.
Goldberg, along with her co-stars Mary-Louise Parker and Drew Barrymore, is so sharp, funny and wholehearted that this film creates an unexpected groundswell of real emotion.


A Serb in Western Eyes
This week the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, snubbed the American Ambassador to Croatia.
The snub would not have been that momentous in the great scheme of Balkan problems were it not that for the last several months, the United States and Western Europe have placed their faith in Mr.
Milosevic to bring peace to the area.
The Serbian leader was always an unlikely man for the peacemaking job.
His ruthless assertion, from 1987 onward, of Serbian nationalist aspirations in the Albanian-dominated Kosovo area unbalanced the Yugoslav federation, eventually plunging Yugoslavia into a series of devastating wars.


A Break in Placement Helps Tame the Rough
It was a bizarre first round of the AT&amp;T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am today, one that featured both the predictable -- Bill Murray was hilarious and had the largest gallery -- and the ridiculous -- a Mike Reid tee shot was lost in the rough not six feet from the fairway.
This annual golfing carnival on the Monterey Peninsula is always guaranteed to produce some quirky moments, but this year's version might be even zanier than usual.
Not that the leader board is strange: Davis Love 3d is in front after shooting a bogeyless 65 at Poppy Hills; Nick Faldo is one stroke behind after a 66 on the same course, and Peter Jacobsen is two strokes back after a 67 at Spyglass.


Nets Act in Theater of Absurd
Ten days ago, he wanted out. Ten days later, his life is just ducky.
See what happens when Chris Morris gets his shots.


Evelyn Tripp, 67, A Fashion Model From 50's and 60's
Evelyn Tripp, a leading fashion model of the 1950's and 1960's, died on Monday in her home at Remsenburg, L.I.
She was 67.
The cause was colon cancer, said her husband, Stan Young.


Best Buy
Shares of the Best Buy Company, a consumer electronics retailer, dropped sharply yesterday.
The company said that sales at stores open for at least a year rose 17 percent last month, but that the sales were more discounted than management had expected.


Historical Maintenance in Central Park


Common Cause Backs Inquiry Into Gingrich's Book Deal
Common Cause, the public affairs lobbying group, called today for an outside ethics adviser to examine House Speaker Newt Gingrich's book deal and recommend whether the House ethics committee should allow it or not.
Common Cause's request, made in a letter to the ethics panel, is significant because it was the group's urging in 1988 for similar action in the case of former House Speaker Jim Wright that eventually turned the tide against Mr.
Wright.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press in some editions on Thursday about a Wisconsin radio announcer who asked listeners to call in with jokes about Auschwitz on the 50th anniversary of its liberation omitted his full name.
The announcer, known as Terry T., is Terry Tuszca of Wausau.


More Mexican Anguish Than Gratitude
Two days after President Clinton announced a huge American-led effort to rescue the Mexican economy, there have still been no marches to the United States Embassy here by Mexicans wishing to show their gratitude.
"Really, we are not so convinced about all this money," said Victor Gonzalez, 31, a street vendor who was trying to sell plastic Flintstone dolls today near the Embassy.


Rebuilding a Capitol Landmark


No Headline
"I feel safe here. The Lord protects me. I don't ever have to worry about a thing. This is my home." MARY VIERCK, a homeless woman who lives at Kennedy Airport.  [ A1:5. ]


Fred Perry, Urbane Tennis Champion and Master of Wimbledon, Dies at 85
Fred Perry, the finest male tennis player in Britain's history and the last British man to win the Wimbledon singles title, died yesterday in Melbourne, Australia.
He was 85.
He had been hospitalized on Sunday after breaking four ribs in a fall at a hotel in Melbourne, where he was providing radio commentary for the BBC at last week's Australian Open, the Australian Associated Press reported.
He was released from the hospital but was readmitted after reportedly falling again.
No cause of death has been released.


Police Contend P.B.A. Leaders Hindered Stings
Senior Police Department officials and prosecutors said yesterday that representatives of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association made aggressive efforts to thwart major corruption inquiries in two New York City precincts by warning officers about undercover operations.
In the 109th Precinct in Flushing, Queens, and the 48th Precinct in the East Tremont section of the Bronx, the officials said, union delegates went to officers to describe in detail how to spot the undercover operations -- from the types of vans used by investigators and the variety of decoys that officers could expect to encounter, to identifying people they thought were wearing electronic eavesdropping devices.


Wells Rich Wins A Clairol Account
As expected, Clairol Inc. has further expanded its agency roster by naming Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York to handle its Herbal Essences line of shampoos and conditioners, which LCF&amp; L in New York had handled since October.
Though the billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $15 million to $20 million.


Inside Art
From Visual Arts to Performing Arts
The Brooklyn Academy of Music always tries to be on the cutting edge, and its latest endeavor, "Artists in Action: BAM's Visual Arts Initiative," puts a new spin on an old idea.
Traditionally, the academy has been known for letting the performing arts take the lead and including the visual arts only when appropriate.
But "Artists in Action," whose first three participants were announced this week, reverses this order.
To emphasize that painting, sculpture and audio or video technology can go hand in hand with performing arts like dance or theater, the academy has invited visual artists to develop performance-related projects.


The Unrelenting Burdens of a Full-Time Church
The old-timers at the Progressive Community Church, in a faded part of Chicago's South Side, remember when parents and their children went to church on Sundays for a fiery sermon that would last them through the week.
But Sunday is no longer the only day to go to Progressive, at least among those -- more than 70 percent of the total -- who attend but are not members.
The nondenominational church, which serves a poor predominantly black neighborhood, has become an all-purpose community center open seven days a week, from 6 in the morning to 11 at night.
It offers everything from a hot meal to day care, from nighttime youth programs to diapers for infants of young single mothers.
To provide those services, the church relies on a patchwork of government aid, donations from local businesses and help from congregants who are often hard pressed themselves.


President Pressuring Baseball's Negotiators
A day after President Clinton emphatically stated, "I want this thing settled," the mediator in the baseball labor dispute was summoned to the White House today for an update on negotiations, then returned to the bargaining table to try to shove the owners and players toward an agreement.
Although the two sides did not move closer together on the core economic issue on the second day of their resumed talks, interested Government observers said they hoped that Presidential pressure and fear of the unknown -- what Clinton or Congress might do in the absence of a settlement -- would hasten a deal by the Monday deadline the President has set.


Arab Elites and Poor Speak Same Language
To the Editor:
"A Language Divided Against Itself" (Week in Review, Jan. 29) states that the "poor man's Arabic is not the same as that of the elite, who speak an idiom that the illiterate, and semi-literate, underclass often does not understand."


When One Is Reared By a Nanny, Not a Mom
Jyll Johnstone and Barbara Ettinger, the producers of the documentary "Martha and Ethel" (which Ms. Johnstone directed), set out to study the nannies who raised them while their wealthy mothers were otherwise engaged.
The result, a seemingly fond film marked by staggering condescension and naivete, reveals all the undigested resentment that such an upbringing engendered.
"It would seem that we grew up privileged, with everything we needed," Ms.
Ettinger says sweetly in voice-over.
"And yet I grew up very confused about my family, about why my parents hired someone else to bring us up."


Departing Education Chief Criticizes Cuts
For much of last year's campaign, Gov.
George E. Pataki used the State Education Department as a symbol of almost everything he considered bad about government.
It was bloated, expensive and unresponsive to taxpayers, he said.
But as he prepares to leave office later this year, the man who runs that department, Education Commissioner Thomas Sobol, says Mr.
Pataki has used its bureaucracy as an easy scapegoat for much deeper societal problems that no amount of budget trimming can solve.


Art in Review
Eleanor Antin  'Minetta Lane: A Ghost Story'
Ronald Feldman Fine Arts  31 Mercer Street (near Canal Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 18
Eleanor Antin has often used fictive identities to explore the roles available to women in European and American cultures.
Her nostalgia for lost times and places comes to the fore in this extremely elaborate installation.
Following a path of planks through what seems to be a demolition site, you find yourself on a rooftop in Greenwich Village, circa 1950.
From here you can see into windows and skylights where three ghost stories are unfolding on film.


Kashmir Solution Exists Within India
To the Editor:
Re "India's Valley of Death" (Op-Ed, Jan. 28): It is simplistic to say that the people of Kashmir were denied a plebiscite to determine their own future at the time of India's partition.
None of the ethnically diverse peoples of the British Indian provinces and nearly 600 Indian princely states were granted the right of self-determination either.





Catherine Sweeney, 80, Patron Of Arts, Education and Sciences
Catherine H. Sweeney, a patron of the sciences and arts for whom the Sweeney Mountains of Antarctica were named, died on Jan. 25 at the Miami Heart Institute.
She was 80 and lived in Coconut Grove, Fla.
The cause was heart failure, said her son-in-law, Eric Fraunfelter.


Top Official in AIDS Battle Says Efforts Are Inefficient
The director of AIDS research for the National Institutes of Health says the $1.3 billion program is failing to encourage necessary research, and he plans to reassess Government's entire strategy.
Much of the money already committed by the institutes is tied up in expensive clinical trials, leaving little available for scientists to jump on new research leads, said Dr.
William Paul, the director of the Office of AIDS Research at the institutes.
"Across, the board, we don't have the resources available to fund really good ideas," he added.


Donald Pleasence, Virtuoso Actor, Dies at 75
Donald Pleasence, the intense, virtuosic actor who was acclaimed in London and on Broadway for his performance in the title role of Harold Pinter's play "The Caretaker," died yesterday at his home in St.
Paul de Vence in the south of France.
He was 75 and also had a home in London.
His agent, Tessa Sutherland, said his death was unexpected, and came after he had recovered from surgery in December to replace a valve in his heart.


THE CLINTON BUDGET: THE POLITICS Big Bargaining Chip; President's Budget May Be Dead, But He Can Use It to Make a Deal
Presidential budgets are seldom more than the opening ante in an annual poker game between Capitol Hill and the White House.
But President Clinton's proposals for scattered spending cuts and modest tax breaks are even more preliminary than usual: He is sending them off to a hostile Congress not only ready to match his bet, but eager to raise him.
If the budget is always more a political statement of executive priorities than a reliable guide to legislative reality, this one is at once a dead-letter and an airmail special.
The Republicans who control both houses for the first time in 40 years have vowed to use the Democratic President's plan as the basis for even greater spending cuts and tax reductions.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
5.25
3.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.79
5.88
3.12
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.16
6.17
3.25
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.65
7.65
5.76
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.74
7.74
6.30
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.57
8.60
7.21
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.65
6.64
5.43
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Suspect Held After Flirting With Officer
It was a chance encounter in the aisle of a Brighton Beach drugstore on Super Bowl Sunday.
He said, "You have nice eyes." She said, "What's your name?" And when he lied, she became suspicious.
He is a paroled rapist and, unfortunately for him, she is a parole officer in the office where he reported every other week.
She recognized him from pictures on file and, concerned about his behavior in the store, began making inquiries.
Yesterday, the man, Neil Hassenbein, was under arrest again, in connection with four sex crimes committed since his release from prison a year ago.


After Setbacks in a Hotel, Finding Housing and Help in Building a New Life
Drug dealers roam his building after dark, and bursts of gunfire are not uncommon.
When the heat shuts off late at night, his family huddles for warmth.
But after a period of homelessness, Mitchell T. treasures his small, private space.
A decade ago, at 26, he had a steady income and unmarred optimism.
But he lost his job as a security guard in 1986 and had to abandon his apartment.
He and his girlfriend moved in with relatives, but eventually they had to leave.
Penniless, they were placed in a single-room-occupancy hotel in Manhattan.


Camby of UMass Sidelined for a Month
Massachusetts has lost MARCUS CAMBY, its intimidating 6-foot-11-inch shot blocker, for perhaps a month, jeopardizing the school's top ranking and the nation's longest winning streak.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan gallery shows: LUCA BUVOLI, AC Project Room, 558 Broome Street, South Village (through tomorrow).
A first show from a young Italian artist living in New York who follows the exploits of a character named "Not a Super Hero" through media that here include installation art, Super 8 film and comic books, connecting them with his talent for line and drawing (Roberta Smith).
LOUISE FISHMAN, Robert Miller Gallery, 41 East 57th Street (through tomorrow).
The tiny paintings on view, like fragments of Ms.
Fishman's earlier big ones, explore different modes of handling paint, some of them funny, some flat, some inspired.
There are Tinkertoy sculptures, too.
A transitional show by a gifted artist (Michael Kimmelman).


Excerpts From President clinton's 1996 Budget Message to the Congress
Following are excerpts from page proofs of President Clinton's Budget Message, which he will send to Congress on Monday:
The 1996 budget, which I am transmitting to you with this message, builds on the Administration's strong record of economic progress during the past two years and seeks to create a brighter future for all Americans.


Art in Review
Eva Lundsager
Jack Tilton Gallery  49 Greene Street (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 11
Eva Lundsager's eminently pleasant, Surrealist-flavored paintings have great faith in abstraction, specifically in its ability to be both evocative and straightforward, to simultaneously conjure the world beyond its edges while seeming to tell nothing but the story of its own making.
They express this faith with an orthodox duality -- that between randomness and control -- that has intrigued abstract painters at least since Pollock and has a recent high point in the work of Gerhard Richter.


Joseph Keegan, 88; A Jesuit at Fordham And a Psychologist
The Rev.
Joseph G. Keegan, a Jesuit priest and former chairman of the psychology department at Fordham University, died on Jan. 26 at the Jesuit Infirmary on the university's Rose Hill campus in the Bronx.
He was 88.
The cause was heart failure, said Brother Gerard Schade, the infirmary director.


Cherokee Run to Race On Lasix in '95 Debut
Cherokee Run, who won the Eclipse Award as the champion sprinter of 1994, suffered internal bleeding during a workout on Tuesday and will race on the drug Lasix when he makes his 1995 debut next month.
Frank Alexander, who trains the 5-year-old horse for Jill Robinson, acknowledged the veterinarian's report without commenting further.
"But," he said, "I still intend to run him in his debut in the Gulfstream Park Sprint Championship on March 10."


COLGATE-PALMOLIVE CO. (CL,N)
The Colgate-Palmolive Company reported yesterday an increase of 12.3 percent in fourth-quarter profits, with sales gains in its developing markets and pet food business offsetting declines in North America.
Colgate-Palmolive, the consumer products giant based in New York, earned $137.1 million, or 91 cents a share -- 1 cent higher than analysts' expectations -- in the quarter that ended on Dec. 31, compared with $122.1 million, or 78 cents a share, in the corresponding period in 1993.
Sales rose 8.5 percent, to $2 billion.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  THUNDERBIRD AMERICAN INDIAN DANCERS, Theater for the New City, 155 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, East Village.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 5 P.M.
Tickets: $10; $1 for children under 12 for Sunday shows only.
Information: (212) 254-1100.


3 City Employees Among 14 Arrested in Loan-Sharking Scheme
At 7:30 yesterday morning, three F.B.I. agents entered the Yonah Schimmel Knish Bakery on the Lower East Side just as Alex Wolf, the manager, was starting coffee.
"I thought maybe taxes," he said.
The agents ruffled through business papers and removed from the window a photograph of Sheldon Keitz, who Mr.
Wolf said has operated the legendary 85-year-old establishment for the last five years or so.
The agents left the smiling photo of former Gov. Mario M. Cuomo.


Art in Review
Helen Miranda Wilson
Jason McCoy  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through March 4
These latest paintings are a big change for Helen Miranda Wilson.
They're still small, crystalline and luminous, and the subjects include landscapes, but now there are other subjects, too, and Ms.
Wilson layers them one on top of another.
The effect is like collage, or like looking at series of images through embroidered scrims.


Cold-War Nostalgia
As part of their Contract With America, House Republicans are pressing ahead with a mischievous piece of legislation that would undo the Clinton Administration's modest efforts to adjust U.S. national security policy to post-cold-war realities.
The bill, H.R. 7, has cleared three committees and seems headed toward House passage.
The legislation would increase pressure for higher defense spending, revive efforts to develop "star wars" missile defense systems, encourage reckless expansion of NATO defense guarantees to Eastern Europe and hobble U.S. participation in United Nations peacekeeping.
It would also undermine Presidential authority by creating an unnecessary national security commission designed primarily to amplify the voice of the Republican Congressional leadership.


Duke Extends North Carolina To 2 Overtimes
So maybe Duke's not going to the Final Four.
The path for the Blue Devils is straight uphill, with their coach, Mike Krzyzewski, a distant supporter for the remainder of the season, in his extended recovery from the back surgery that jolted his program.
They still face the mind-boggling reality that with Groundhog Day behind them, the Blue Devils have yet to win an Atlantic Coast Conference game.
But for one night, in the hothouse madness of Cameron Indoor Stadium, this troubled generation of Blue Devils created an achievement that on an emotional level can take its place alongside the most rewarding moments of the Krzyzewski era.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday and in some copies on Wednesday about the director and producer George Abbott misstated the original name of the actor Paul Muni.
It was Muni Weisenfreund, not Muni Weisenfeld.


Eagles Are Latest to Pluck a 49er Coach
If you can't beat them, steal from them.
The Super Bowl champion San Francisco 49ers today lost their second assistant coach since Monday's ticker-tape parade when Ray Rhodes was named the Philadelphia Eagles' head coach.
A stout, 300-pound man in Los Angeles was glad to hear it.
Art Shell was dismissed today as the Raiders' head coach and would like to become Rhodes's offensive line coach.


Clinton Nominates New Surgeon General


Pataki Plans A Sharp Cut In Rental Aid
As part of his plan to cut the budget and restructure the state's welfare system, Gov.
George E. Pataki wants to cut assistance to the poor in myriad ways, including reducing rent allowances and cutting emergency money for utility bills.
On Monday, Mr.
Pataki proposed the deepest cuts in the state's 60-year history of welfare programs.
But it was not until late Wednesday, when he presented a package of bills to the Legislature that will enact his budget, that some of the specific cuts became clear.


A Makeover for Electric Utilities; Power Industry, Facing Competition, Struggles With Change
The prospect of declining utility bills, along with the examples of successful deregulation in airlines and long-distance telephones, is powering a drive to introduce real competition to electricity production around the country.
With many power users capable of going around the system to cut costs, this revolution already brewing in several states seems inevitable and, to many economists, quite desirable.


Abroad at Home; Tilting the Scales
Prevent victims of securities fraud from suing.
Immunize company officials who manipulate the price of stock by false statements.
Stop lawsuits against accountants and lawyers who were involved in savings-and-loan scams.
Good ideas?
Not many Americans would think so.
But those are some of the things that would result from passage of a bill, H.R. 10, that is expected to reach the House floor in about two weeks.
It would carry out point 9 of Newt Gingrich's Contract With America.


Their Day May Come


Witnesses Recall Terror of L.I.R.R. Shootings
The last time Lisa Combatti saw Colin Ferguson, she told a Nassau County jury today, she was seven-and-a-half months pregnant and Mr.
Ferguson was shooting at her and other passengers on the Long Island Rail Road.
"I got into a fetal position on the floor to protect the baby," Mrs.
Combatti said.
"Then I felt a bullet hit me."


The Attorney General Begins Badly
After a mere 30 days in office, Dennis Vacco has taken only one conspicuous action as New York's Attorney General.
He has rescinded a 15-year policy of protecting homosexuals in his department from job discrimination.
This is a poor start for the state's top law officer.
Citizens are left to wonder whether he has been driven by politics or, worse, homophobia.
Two predecessors, Robert Abrams and Oliver Koppell, had made equal job protection for gay employees an explicit part of their rules in the law department's workplace.
Mr.
Vacco does not question their legal authority to issue such internal rules -- even though the state's human rights law does not specifically include sexual orientation.


Carroll Hired To Handle 49er Defense
If there is a coach's paradise, Pete Carroll landed in it yesterday.
Carroll, dismissed as the Jets' head coach after their disastrous late slump, has become the defensive coordinator of the Super Bowl champion San Francisco 49ers.
Because he had three years remaining on his contract, the Jets will pay him the difference between his coordinator's salary and his head-coaching pay.


Hasty Cuts in Medicaid
Gov.
George Pataki's main purpose in cutting the New York State Medicaid program is to close a budget gap created partly by his promise to reduce taxes.
The proposed cuts go too far, too quickly.
If the Legislature chooses the Governor's narrow path, hospital care will suffer.
The poor will lose and so will others -- especially in New York City.
The Governor has targeted Medicaid because its costs are soaring and the program is full of waste.
But the cuts threaten muscle as well as fat.
The answer is to build a system that rewards hospitals that provide high-quality, efficient care.


Showalter, Sighing, Indicates He'll Work
Without fully defining his position, Buck Showalter gave strong signs yesterday that he will manage replacement players this spring training for the Yankees if no settlement is reached in the baseball strike.
But the indications came grudgingly and methodically.
Showalter avoided being too specific about the topic because he is consumed with making the proper impression toward his players and toward the baseball world.
But he said that he had "pretty much" made up his mind about managing, that owner George Steinbrenner knows his feelings and that General Manager Gene Michael knows who will be managing the team when the Yankees conduct their first workout in 12 days in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.


A Streisand Manifesto
Barbra Streisand, director, producer, actress, singer and citizen, went to Harvard yesterday to bury Gingrich, praise Clinton and defend Hollywood's place on the political stage.
Article, page 9.


Jack Lipman, 61, Coat Manufacturer
Jack Lipman, the founder and president of Drizzle, a raincoat manufacturing company, died on Wednesday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 61 and lived in New York City.
The cause of death was leukemia, said his sister-in-law, Naomi Lipman.


For the Mounties, Justice Is Now a Licensing Fee
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police has tired of letting purveyors of key chains, T-shirts, dolls, coffee mugs and other souvenirs profit from its stalwart reputation.
Apart from the maple leaf, nothing evokes Canada more for outsiders than the Mountie in his wide-brimmed hat, scarlet tunic and blue cavalry breeches with a yellow stripe.


Some See a Better Year for Domestic Bonds
The last shall be first.
That's the story behind a rally in municipal bond funds this year.
Their bonds were pummeled in 1994 by a confluence of factors: limited supply, rising interest rates, some exposure to high-risk derivative investments and a thin market.
Come 1995, the prices were so beaten down that municipal bonds looked good again.


Krone Takes Off Cast
JULIE KRONE, who fractured her left little finger in a spill Jan. 13 at Gulfstream Park, had the cast removed from her arm and one of two pins extracted.
The other pin will be removed next week.
"Then," said her agent, LARRY COOPER, "we are hopeful that she will be able to resume riding sometime by the end of February."


Religious Faith and Social Activity Help to Heal, New Research Finds
Faith heals -- at least to some extent, according to new findings on the health benefits of religious beliefs and activities.
In a study of 232 elderly patients who had undergone open heart surgery, those who were able to find strength and comfort in their religious outlook had a survival rate three times higher than those who found no balm in religious faith.


Naked on a Broadway Stage: A Dream? No, a Debut
When 22-year-old David Norona of Sunnyside, Queens, settled into his seat at the Walter Kerr Theater on Thursday night, he scarcely imagined he would be spending much of the evening naked onstage.
But that is just how Mr.
Norona made one of the more striking -- and unexpected -- Broadway debuts of the season, only 11 months after arriving in New York from Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh.


Green Bay's Sharpe Has Neck Surgery
Wide receiver STERLING SHARPE underwent neck surgery yesterday, the Green Bay Packers said.
The team physician, PATRICK MCKENZIE, said the four-to-five-hour surgery, performed by Dr.
CRAIG BRIGHAM at the Carolina's Medical Center in Charlotte, N.C., "went well and as planned." McKenzie said Sharpe, the Packers' leading receiver, was resting comfortably in a neck brace.
LEE REMMEL, a club spokesman, said it was too early to determine how long recovery would take and whether Sharpe can resume his football career. (AP)


HOUSING PROJECTS TO GIVE PRIORITY TO THE EMPLOYED
For the first time in decades, the New York City Housing Authority will soon give preference to working people over welfare recipients in filling many vacancies at its apartments, a move officials hope will restore economic and social stability to the projects.
The rule change is part of an extensive campaign, including advertising and recruiting potential tenants at their workplaces, that the authority plans to attract more working families for the authority's 180,000 apartments.
In the last decade, the agency has seen the number of working families drop from 46 percent to 32 percent.
Now only 8 percent of the applicants for housing are working families.


Pataki's Budget Is Attacked As Contradictory in Its Aims
Gov.
George E. Pataki wants to change New York law so that nonviolent offenders can avoid prison terms.
At the same time, the budget he proposed this week cuts, rather than increases, the probation and drug-treatment programs that may be needed as an alternative to prison.
Lawmakers who support Mr.
Pataki's efforts to change the sentencing laws, which date back to Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller, said that the Governor's budget seemed to undercut his own proposals.


Flow of Illegal Aliens Rises as the Peso Falls
The Border Patrol senior agent surveyed the tattered border fence that separates Mexico and the United States and shook his head in consternation.
In broad daylight, as far as he could see to the east and west, people were slipping through holes and gaps in the barrier, fleeing the poverty of Latin America and making their way, illegally but unhindered, into the land of economic opportunity.


Topics of The Times; The Blood Shortage
Healthy New Yorkers can perform a great service: they can give blood.
The New York Blood Center reports that blood supplies for the metropolitan area, normally five days' worth, are now down to less than two days' worth -- the lowest level in 10 years.
The Blood Center, the largest independent blood-collection organization in the U.S., provides blood to 260 hospitals in the greater New York area.
It is not unusual for blood donations to fall off during the pre- and post-holiday season.
But this year, New Yorkers were also disproportionately assaulted by an aggressive and persistent strain of the flu, which made the shortage worse.


A Drowned Man's View, From the Bottom Up
Christopher Caines is one of the most imaginative of the younger lighting designers working in dance today.
Mr.
Caines is able to be both simple and evocative in his designs.
But those qualities were largely missing from his new theater and dance piece, "Three Men Drowning," presented at the Dia Center on Wednesday night.
The ambitious full-evening solo was filled with Celtic folk imagery and required Mr.
Caines to sing and speak as well as move.
It had the look of necessity, as if he had felt impelled to create it no matter the struggle.
"Three Men Drowning" adroitly drew on family history involving drowned fishermen in Newfoundland, as well as Mr.
Caines's amusing experiences with childhood swimming lessons.
The two parts did not really fit together, and Mr.
Caines's delivery of the childhood stories was on the heavy-handed side.


Warming Climate Has a Message for Us
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 27 front-page article on the resumption of global warming attributed the two-year interruption of cold weather to the eruption of Mount Pinatubo.
Some scientists interviewed by the Arms Control Research Center believe Kuwaiti oil wells in Kuwait, set on fire during the 1991 Persian Gulf war, could be a factor too.
Astronauts on the Space Shuttle that year observed that the smoke plume had circled the earth several times.
SUZY KANE Bedford Hills, N.Y., Jan. 27, 1995


New Director for African-Art Museum
The Museum of African Art, in SoHo, has named Grace C. Stanislaus as its new executive director.
Ms.
Stanislaus was formerly the director of the Bronx Museum of Art.
She is replacing Susan Vogel, who founded the Museum of African Art, which opened in 1984 as the Center for African Art and changed its name in 1993.
Ms.
Vogel left the museum last fall to become the director of the Yale University Art Gallery.
Ms.
Stanislaus, 36, was director of the Bronx Museum of Art from 1992 to 1994.
While there she doubled the size of its permanent collection, increased the budget and strengthened its curatorial and education programs.





Bonds Jump on Evidence Of Slowing Economy
The bond market rallied sharply yesterday on fresh evidence that the economy is slowing, leading some investors to speculate that the Federal Reserve will slow or halt its policy of raising interest rates.
A weaker-than-expected employment report yesterday was the clearest sign yet that the Fed had done its job in keeping inflation subdued.
The rally showed that investors are willing to lock into longer maturities if they are confident that the economy has cooled and that lower rates lie ahead.A flurry of buying sent the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond down to its lowest level since Sept. 8.
Yields and prices move in opposite directions.
Other maturities also rallied strongly.
The price of the 30-year bond jumped 1 9/32 percentage points, to 9817/32 , for a yield of 7.62 percent, down from 7.74 percent on Thursday.
For bondholders, it meant that for every $1,000 invested, they made $12.81.
The Labor Department reported yesterday that the nation's unemployment rate rose to 5.7 percent last month from 5.4 percent in December as the economy created the fewest jobs in nearly a year.
Only 136,000 jobs were added to the payrolls outside of the farm sector, the smallest number since the 101,000 gain in January 1994.
The report, analysts said, provided compelling evidence that the economy was finally beginning to lose momentum, dragged down by the cumulative weight of the Fed's seven increases in short-term rates since a year ago.
Analysts and traders said they saw less need for the Fed, which raised rates on Wednesday by 50 basis points, to move again.
A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.
"We all recognize they're going to step back a little bit," Richard Schlanger, who helps manage $1.5 billion of bonds at Pioneering Management in Boston, told Bloomberg Business News.
Indeed, the spread between the yield of the 2-year note and that of the 30-year bond was 48 basis points yesterday, up from 38 basis points Thursday.
A widening spread indicates that the market does not expect another Fed rate increase for some time.
The weakness of the employment report caught some investors by surprise, causing some large market participants to cover short positions.
Short-covering occurs when traders buy back borrowed securities they had previously sold short in the hopes of profiting from lower prices.
But if prices begin to rise, instead of fall, short-sellers needs to cover their positions by buying back securities to limit their losses.
While the employment report cheered a battered bond market, economists noted that the data also disclosed some signs of inflation, which could halt the rally, or limit follow-through buying in the next session.
Eugene J. Sherman, director of research at M. A. Schapiro &amp; Company, noted that the report showed substantial increases in the workweek and in hourly earnings.
"So, if you combined the hourly earnings with the lengthened workweek, and the additional number of people working," he said, "you'll find a big increase in personal income for the month." Such data suggest then, he said, that the economy is still very strong.
Analysts also noted that the market faces a difficult task of absorbing a heavy supply of new securities next week.
The Treasury is selling $40 billion of new 3-year, 10-year and 30-year debt securities as part of its quarterly borrowing needs, on top of the $27.6 billion in bills that it sells regularly each week.
"Next week's refunding will be more difficult to sell," Mr.
Sherman said, "because investors would be buying securities after a very substantial rally. And history shows that is not a good time to buy, especially if there are no changes in the fundamentals of the market. You still have several months before the last tightening by the Fed takes effect."
In when-issued trading, the 3-year note to be sold on Tuesday was being offered at a price to yield 7.34 percent, while the 10-year note to be sold on Wednesday was offered at a price to yield 7.50 percent.
The 30-year bond, the final leg of the refunding on Thursday, was offered at a price to yield 7.58 percent.
Robin Mesch, chief analyst for Thomson Research in Boston, saw yesterday as a good opportunity for a bear market rally.
"I think the market has been overdone all week long," she said.


NEWS SUMMARY
Simpson's: on one coast, high-cost legal talent defends a sane man accused of murder; on the other, a man considered insane argues for himself. 1  WORKERS TO GET EDGE IN HOUSING  Changing a longstanding policy, the New York City Housing Authority will soon give preference to working people over welfare recipients in filling apartment vacancies. 1  Business Digest 33  Arts/Entertainment 11-17  A dramatic Broadway debut.  11  Film: "The Jerky Boys." 13  Music: "Siegfried" in Chicago.  11  St.
Cecilia Orchestra.  15  St.
Luke Chamber Ensemble.  15  Dance: Tallulah Company.  14  "Operetta Affezionata." 11  Christopher Caines.  14  Sports 26-30  Baseball: Salary cap rescinded.  27  Reluctant Showalter will manage.  29  Basketball: Knicks keep rolling.  27  Columns: Rhoden on baseball strike 27  On Baseball 29  Football: Carroll joins 49ers.  27  Indoor Track: Upsets galore in Millrose Games.  27  Tennis: U.S. and France 1-1 in Davis Cup.  29  SportsPeople 30  Obituaries 25  Jack Sendak, children's-book writer.
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  Hasty cuts in Medicaid.
The Speaker and the ethics panel.
Mr.
Vacco begins badly.
Topics: Invasive questions.
Letters  Russell Baker: Eight easy pieces.
Bob Herbert: Afflicting the afflicted.
Marvin Kalb: The state of the disunion.
Bob Bauman: The man who talked too much.
Brooke Norman: Safety school blues.
Neediest Cases 22  Chronicle 20 Bridge 17 Crossword 16


Topics of The Times; Invasive Questions
After a flood of fully justified criticism, Senator Larry Pressler has withdrawn several offensive queries from a 16-page questionnaire he had sent to the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.
Mr.
Pressler is the new chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee, which controls Federal financing for public broadcasting.
The questionnaire asked the corporation to provide information about the age and salary of the 475 employees at National Public Radio as well as their religious and, to some extent, political affiliation.
One question read: "How many N.P.R. staff have previously worked for evangelical Christian associations? Please list them by name and job category." The letter also requested a list of staff members who previously worked for the Pacifica Foundation, a broadcasting company known for its left-of-center views.


Pressured Owners Lift the Salary Cap
Major League Baseball owners last night withdrew the salary cap they implemented late last year after being told by the National Labor Relations Board that imposing the cap was an unfair labor practice.
The action put the negotiations back where they were last December, before the owners declared an impasse and imposed the salary cap and other new work rules.


Executive Changes
STRUCTURAL DYNAMICS RESEARCH CORP., Milford, Ohio, named Albert Peter president and chief executive.
William Conlin was appointed chairman and Jeffrey Vorholt, vice president and controller since December, was named chief financial officer.


Don't Obscure Value Of Safe Water Act
To the Editor:
It is disturbing that Robert A. Low exhibits such misunderstanding of the standard-setting process and other requirements of the Safe Drinking Water Act, in "Mandate Bill Cancels Threat of Water Plant" (letter, Jan. 28).


I.B.M. Plans to Go Casual But Stay Put in Hometown
When employees at I.B.M. headquarters here turned on their computers today, there was an E-mail message from their boss, LVG 20.
Addressing each of his 700 co-workers as "Armonk colleague," Louis V. Gerstner Jr. announced that the company was planning to sell the 30-year-old concrete-and-glass honeycomb that is its headquarters building and build a new headquarters down the road where employees could do their jobs in a more intimate, collegial and state-of-the-art atmosphere.


Unemployment Jumps in New York Region
As bleak as winter, regional employment figures for January arrived yesterday from the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Labor Department.
While the national unemployment rate was climbing last month to 5.7 percent, from 5.4 percent in December, New York City's unemployment rate surged a full percentage point, to 7.7 percent, as did New Jersey's, which reached 7.2 percent.
In New York State, the rate rose to 6 percent, from 5.7 in the previous month.


Warming Climate Has a Message for Us
To the Editor:
Record heat in the late 1980's and early 90's helped propel agreement on the climate treaty signed at the Rio Earth Summit in 1992.
Since then industrialized countries, including the United States, have been formulating "action plans" to implement the treaty.
Unfortunately, relatively cool weather took the heat off policy makers, and most countries have shied from politically difficult but effective measures, such as cutting subsidies for fossil fuels and raising automotive efficiency standards.


Shuttle Discovery Aims for Rendezvous


Washington Talk; Budget Slashers Seek $1.5 Million for a Study
Republicans have vowed to slash layers of Government, abolish Congressional committees and pare the Capitol Hill payroll.
But their Contract With America also calls for creating a $1.5 million commission to assess the military's needs and problems.
The full House is expected to approve the measure later this month and send it to the Senate.


Dole, on Letterman, Makes It Unofficial: He'll Run in '96
Senator Bob Dole, who is known to be planning to announce his candidacy for President, appeared on "The Late Show With David Letterman" last night and made what he described as an informal announcement of his formal announcement.
Mr.
Dole, a Kansas Republican, did not rise to the level of serious newsmaking that Ross Perot did in 1992 when he appeared on "Larry King Live" on CNN to announce his candidacy for President.
And it appeared that the Senator was trying to present a softer image for Mr.
Letterman's youngish audience.


No Headline
People come to this trial for the same reason they slow down at car wrecks. -- RONALD L. KUBY, one of Colin Ferguson's former lawyers.  [ 24.1. ]


Going Up Against the Dragon
What on earth (or in Valhalla) will the Lyric Opera of Chicago make of the cataclysmic climax of "Gotterdammerung"?


Lamar Smith Charged
The Seattle Seahawks rookie running back LAMAR SMITH pleaded innocent yesterday in Seattle to vehicular assault in a Dec. 1 car wreck that left teammate MIKE FRIER paralyzed from the neck down.
Prosecutor NORM MALENG had said Smith drank at least five beers and six and a half ounces of Scotch shortly before his car piled into a utility pole. (AP)


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.98
3.19
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.78
5.79
3.20
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.05
6.16
3.36
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.48
7.65
5.87
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.62
7.74
6.35
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.48
8.57
7.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.56
6.65
5.46
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Hobson in Minors
The former Boston Red Sox manager BUTCH HOBSON was chosen yesterday to manage the Mobile, Ala., BaySharks, an independent minor league team.
Hobson said he didn't consider it a last resort to move from the major leagues to the Texas-Louisiana League.
"I just know that I've got to stay with the game of baseball," Hobson said. (AP)


Religion Journal
Adina Moshavi's skill with computer languages could guarantee her a bright future in the vanguard of technology.
But it is her love and study of biblical Hebrew that really makes her a pioneer.
She is among a growing number of Orthodox women who are enrolling in graduate programs in Jewish studies to receive the kind of education that had been limited to men who studied in traditional yeshivas.
Some of the women undertake their studies to deepen their faith, while others, like Mrs.
Moshavi, a doctoral student at Yeshiva University, want to break into the ranks of university professors.


S. C. Greenfield, 89, Investment Adviser
Samuel C. Greenfield, a mathematics teacher turned investment adviser, died on Jan. 21 at Kingsbrook Hospital in Brooklyn.
A Brooklyn resident, he was 89.
The cause was kidney failure, his family said.


Ewing Keeps Focus Firmly On the Sixers
The temptation was to look ahead, but Patrick Ewing understands as well as anyone the perils of compromising the future by ignoring the present.
If Ewing was looking to Sunday's rematch with Orlando and Shaquille O'Neal, he was only glancing out of the corner of his eye.
Otherwise he had his attention riveted firmly on Philadelphia, delivering 30 points, 15 rebounds, 5 assists, 3 blocks and a steal tonight as the Knicks overwhelmed the 76ers with a fourth-quarter flurry to win, 106-86, at the Spectrum.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Jan. 24, with an article about Glaxo P.L.C.'s $14 billion takeover offer for Wellcome P.L.C., reversed the names of two acquiring companies in a list of the biggest corporate mergers.
The Gulf Oil Company was acquired by the Standard Oil Company of California (since renamed the Chevron Corporation), not by Texaco Inc.; Getty Oil was acquired by Texaco, not by Standard of California.


Police in the New South Africa Being Torn by Racial Conflicts
In the deadly, skittish months before the end of white rule, Jabulani Xaba's family prayed every day that he would come home alive.
Black policemen like Mr.
Xaba were often shot or hacked to death simply for being part of a despised system.
"After the elections last year, we said, 'Thank God he's safe now,' " recalled his sister, Sizani Mataboge.
"We expected the country would now accept him. Now I'm wondering if we have really left apartheid behind."


Sports of The Times; Baseball Integrity For Hire
THE YANKEES effectively kicked off their replacement season yesterday afternoon as they held the first day of their annual Fan Festival at the New York Coliseum.
This is the fifth year for the festival, where fans have an opportunity to see their heroes before they leave for spring training.
Proceeds from the festival benefit the Yankee Foundation, which supports underprivileged children in the New York City area.
Since 1973, the foundation has raised more than $3 million.


Rebuffing Clinton, Senators Call for an Embassy in Jerusalem
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a New York Democrat, and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, a New York Republican, urged the Clinton Administration today to move the United States Embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem as soon as Israel and the P.L.O. finish negotiations on the status of the divided city.
In releasing a letter they plan to send to the State Department about the embassy, the two senators ignored the Administration's pleas not to revive the sensitive issue.
The White House fears a new debate would undermine Middle East peace negotiations.


The Speaker and the Ethics Panel
Clearly, there needs to be some inquiry into House Speaker Newt Gingrich's various financial dealings.
Mr.
Gingrich recognized that inevitability when he abandoned any idea of abolishing the House Ethics Committee.
Instead he opted for a holdover group of five Republicans and five Democrats who had served on the committee before he became Speaker.
The move was designed to avoid the conflict of interest that would have resulted if Mr.
Gingrich had helped appoint a new committee to rule on the ethics complaint filed against him by his opponent in the last election, Ben Jones.
That complaint raises the accusation that tax-deductible contributions to a foundation linked to Mr.
Gingrich were improperly used to finance a politically oriented course he taught at a Georgia college.
The complaint asserts that his use of his House employees to help with the course violated House rules.
It was recently amended to include aspects of Mr.
Gingrich's book deal with a publishing house owned by Rupert Murdoch.
Mr.
Gingrich, having rejected the sound advice of some Republicans to cancel a deal that has undermined public confidence in his leadership, plans to submit his contract to the committee.


Sea-Land Beats the Odds in Kobe
With ingenuity, good fortune and unusually fast cooperation from a Japanese ministry, Sea-Land Service Inc., one of the largest container shipping companies, has found a way to resume shipping out of Kobe, Japan, months earlier than had been anticipated.
Sea-Land officials said yesterday that they planned to resume shipping on Feb. 22, and thought they would be able to move as much cargo as their ships carried before the earthquake.
But that would still be but a fraction of the total shipments in and out of Kobe, and no other shipping company has announced plans to resume service.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  Job growth was surprisingly weak in January, with the unemployment rate rising to 5.7 percent, the Government said.
The report provided the clearest sign yet that the economy is cooling off.
For all practical purposes, the rise of three-tenths of a point in the jobless rate last month was the first real increase in unemployment in two and a half years.
The latest figures indicated that the interest rate increases by the Federal Reserve may have done their job.  [ Page 1. ]  In New York State, unemployment rose to 6 percent.
The jobless rate jumped to 7.7 percent in New York City and 7.2 percent in New Jersey.  [ 44. ] President Clinton proposed an increase in the minimum wage, by 90 cents, to $5.15 an hour, over two years.  [ 1. ]


CLINTON ASKS RISE IN MINIMUM WAGE
Challenging skeptical Republicans with a popular pocketbook measure that he knows is unlikely to pass, President Clinton today proposed a 90-cent increase in the minimum wage, to $5.15 an hour, over two years.
"The only way to grow the middle class and shrink the underclass is to make work pay," the President said in a Rose Garden ceremony at which he was joined by a number of Congressional Democrats, many of whom had urged him to fight for a higher rate than the $5 figure he originally favored.
"And in terms of real buying power, the minimum wage will be at a 40-year low next year if we do not raise it above $4.25 an hour."


Ghosts of Times Square: Memories Lie Bare in Rubble of 42d Street
INSPIRED by the wrecking crews now tearing down a significant part of 42d Street to pave the way for renewal, I poked around the historic force field of Times Square to see what energies were being stirred up with the rubble.
I found ghosts.
"There's no doubt we have a presence," said Maria Alvorado, the manager of the tourist office of the Times Square Business Improvement District.
The office moved a few months ago into the foyer of the old Harris Theater, on 42d between Seventh and Eighth Avenues, just west of the demolition.


Herman Beerman, Dermatologist, 93
Dr.
Herman Beerman, a professor emeritus of dermatology at the University of Pennsylvania whose research helped advance the diagnosis and treatment of syphilis and psoriasis, died on Jan. 1 in his home in Philadelphia.
He was 93.
The cause was heart failure, said Dr.
Lawrence Charles Parish of Philadelphia, a former student and colleague.


Up to 600 Jobs May Be Cut At Polaroid
The Polaroid Corporation said yesterday that it would dismiss up to 5 percent of its work force, sell $50 million in real estate and push consumer products harder in developing countries like India and China. ,
The company, which has been under pressure from institutional investors to improve its profitability, said the new program would result in annual cost savings of $25 million to $35 million.
But the stock market reacted coolly to the announcement, sending the company's shares down 12.5 cents, to $30.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Laughter and Truths But No Sting of Death  'Grandma Sylvia's Funeral' Playhouse on Vandam


After Delay, F.T.C. Allows QVC's Takeover
In a decision that will make Tele-Communications Inc. of Denver the undisputed ruler of television home shopping, the Federal Trade Commission voted unanimously today to allow it and the Comcast Corporation to take over QVC Inc. for $1.42 billion.
The 4-to-0 vote came after a four-month investigation, during which staff lawyers at the agency had recommended blocking the deal.
Tele-Communications already owns a controlling stake in Home Shopping Network, the only other nationwide television shopping channel, and some agency lawyers argued that the Denver cable television giant would stifle competition.


Form Fails To Hold Up At Games
Sergei Bubka of Ukraine has pole-vaulted five inches higher than anyone else in history.
Jackie Joyner-Kersee has won Olympic and world championships in the women's long jump and heptathlon.
Hassiba Boulmerka of Algeria has won Olympic and world gold medals in the women's 1,500-meter run.
Dennis Mitchell is the world's No. 1-ranked sprinter.
Greg Foster had won the Millrose Games' men's hurdles in 10 of the past 15 years.
These great track and field athletes have something unpleasant in common.
All were beaten badly last night in the 88th annual Chemical Bank Millrose Games, America's blue-ribbon indoor meet.
Throw in among the losers Marcus O'Sullivan of Ireland, who had won the glamorous Wanamaker Mile five times in the past nine years, but at least he lost this time by no more than three or four inches.


World News Briefs; 5 I.R.A. Convicts Freed by Ireland
In a move to encourage the Irish Republican Army to sustain its five-month-old cease-fire in Northern Ireland, Ireland today granted early release to 5 of the 30 I.R.A. convicts held in Irish prisons.
In December, Ireland released nine prisoners early.
The early releases are an effort to bolster the cease-fire and a concession to strengthen the hand of Gerry Adams, the president of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political wing.
Mr.
Adams is credited with having persuaded guerrilla commmanders to suspend a 25-year campaign of violence aimed at ending British rule of Northern Ireland.


INSIDE
Floods' Cost to the Dutch
Rivers are receding in Europe, but the halt in barge traffic has left economic disruption and fears that dikes may still crumble.
Page 4.
The Informal Candidate
Appearing on the David Letterman show last night, Senator Bob Dole made it unofficial, again: he will run for President in 1996.
Page 8.


France Urges New Peace Talks on Algeria
President Francois Mitterrand of France suggested today that the European Union sponsor peace talks to end the growing civil war in Algeria, putting pressure on the military-dominated Government there to compromise with its Islamic fundamentalist opponents.


The Man Who Talked Too Much
Until Representative Dick Armey referred to his colleague Barney Frank as "Barney Fag," I had a good impression of the new majority leader.
Compared to the doctrinaire Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich, Mr.
Armey seemed a thoughtful if somewhat laconic sort, carefully choosing his words to convey his considered beliefs.
Mr.
Armey protested that his comment was merely a slip of the tongue, a mispronunciation requiring no "psychoanalysis about my subliminal or about my Freudian predilections." Those are carefully chosen words, but I, as a gay man, shudder to think that anyone was convinced by them.
Having seen the TV clips and read the transcript, I have to concur with Mr.
Frank, who said, "I don't think it was on the tip of his tongue, but I do believe it was in the back of his mind."


Shock at Photo Arrest
To the Editor:
News articles on Jan. 13 and 30 about the unfortunate father who was arrested for taking nude photos of his daughter begin by citing the number of photos: 110.
Readers may not realize that three rolls isn't extravagant.
Each advertising photo in today's newspaper was probably the pick of hundreds of outtakes.


Shepherdess and Her Swains
Richard Tanner, whose recent choreography for the New York City Ballet has been better and bolder than in the past, is done in by his own cleverness in a new ballet full of deliberate artifice.
It's a nice try, but it doesn't quite work.
"Operetta Affezionata" ("An Affectionate Operetta"), which had its premiere on Thursday night at the New York State Theater, is the frolic that its title suggests.
But this wordless operetta is busier than buffa.
It has some brilliant ideas, not the least of which is the use of eminently danceable music, Carl Maria von Weber's Concerto for Clarinet and Orchestra No. 1 in F minor (Op. 73).
Mr.
Tanner's swift redesigning of space for a 16-member corps, dressed in stylized 18th-century costumes, is admirable.
Yet whatever rococo images seem in store are marred eventually by a central pas de deux of unseemly coyness and quirkiness.


METRO DIGEST
PUBLIC HOUSING TO FAVOR WORKING PEOPLE The New York City Housing Authority will soon give preference to working people over welfare recipients in filling many vacancies at its apartments, a move officials hope will restore economic and social stability to the projects.
The rule change is part of an extensive campaign the authority plans to attract more working families.
Page 1.
A L.I.
TRIAL, THROUGH THE LOOKING GLASS Day after day, the curious and the bored line up for a chance to watch the man whose own lawyers say is mad defend himself against charges of murder.
They have come to see Colin Ferguson, cast in the role of a lifetime: defense counsel in the Long Island Rail Road shootings.
The trial offers an eerie contrast to O.J.
Simpson's.
On one coast, an army of high-priced legal talent defends a sane man accused of murder; on the other, a man whose sanity is in serious doubt argues for himself.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  TRUMP DEVELOPMENT CLEARS MAJOR HURDLE Over the strenuous objections of environmentalists, Harlem residents and some elected officials, the city gave Donald J. Trump permission to connect the first phase of his Riverside South development to the troubled North River sewage treatment plant.
With the certification, Mr.
Trump clears a major hurdle in his long struggle to construct 16 buildings along the Hudson River.
Page 23.
AMID THE DUST OF TIMES SQUARE, GHOSTS "There's no doubt we have a presence," said Maria Alvorado, the manager of the tourist office of the Times Square Business Improvement District.
The office moved a few months ago into the foyer of the old Harris Theater, on 42d between Seventh and Eighth Avenues.
"Lots of people have seen it," she said as she walked to the area behind the movie screen.
"I was unpacking brochures in this storage area when I felt someone watching me. I looked up and there he was. A man, tall and elegantly dressed. In a second he was gone." About New York, page 23.
REGION  CONTRADICTIONS IN DRUG POLICY?
Governor Pataki wants to change New York law so that nonviolent offenders can avoid prison.
At the same time, the budget he proposed this week cuts treatment programs that may be needed as an alternative to prison.
Some see a contradiction.
Page 22.
GOING CASUAL AT THE NEW I.B.M.
When employees at I.B.M. headquarters turned on their computers, there was an E-mail message from their boss, LVG 20.
Louis V. Gerstner Jr. announced that the company was planning to sell its headquarters and build a new one where employees could work in a more intimate, collegial atmosphere.
At the same time, I.B.M. managers began telling employees that they could jettison the company uniform.
In essence, the message in both moves was, lighten up.
Page 24.
TAXPAYERS CAN SUE OVER ASSESSMENTS What's good for General Motors may or may not be good for the country, but it could be very good for New Jersey taxpayers who believe their municipal assessor has it in for them.
In a lawsuit involving G.M.'s plant in Linden, New Jersey's second-highest court ruled that taxpayers can sue their assessors under the Federal Civil Rights Act.
And they can collect damages if they can prove the assessor acted out of malice or prejudice.
Page 24.
Neediest Cases...22


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Dark, Mostly Atonal Works By California Composers  North/South Consonance Ensemble Christ and St.
Stephen's Church


Albany Orchestra Visits Its Big-City Cousins
The eight-year-old St.
Cecilia Orchestra from Albany has gained some exposure beyond its home turf as the pit band for the enterprising Berkshire Opera Festival.
Its contributions to recent Berkshire performances have been memorable, and on Tuesday evening at the Miller Theater its strings, augmented by harpsichord and timpani, stepped into the spotlight for a program devoted mostly to 20th-century classics.
Kenneth Kiesler, the ensemble's principal conductor, was on the podium.
Through much of the performance -- in the fast movements of the Vivaldi, throughout the lush textures of the Vaughan Williams Fantasia on a Theme by Thomas Tallis and in Enesco's "Prelude in Unison" -- the players produced a glowing, seductively rich sound and were the picture of ensemble solidity.


House Chiefs Explore Ways To Rescue Washington
Virtually ignoring Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s proposed solution to Washington's fiscal crisis, Republican Congressional leaders today began exploring other ways to pull the city out of debt and change its relationship with Congress.
In a move that reflected Speaker Newt Gingrich's concern over the problem, Mr.
Gingrich met with the two ranking Republicans on the House District subcommittees, as well as with Jack F. Kemp, the former Housing Secretary, who the Speaker said was invited because of his familiarity with urban issues.


Coast Guard May Close Base on Governors Island Within Three Years
The United States Coast Guard is considering closing its base on Governors Island in New York Harbor, and Representative Susan Molinari of Staten Island said yesterday that she expected the move to occur within three years.
The move would leave vacant the 200-acre island between Manhattan and Brooklyn, and an aide to Ms.
Molinari suggested that the federally owned land could be developed commercially.


John Oswald, 77, University President
John Wieland Oswald, who as president of Pennsylvania State University from 1970 to 1983 was an early advocate for the university's entrance into the Big Ten Conference, died on Wednesday in his home in Philadelphia.
He was 77.
The cause was heart failure, said a daughter, Elizabeth Browne, of Philadelphia.


Trump Development Clears Hurdle Despite Objections
Over the strenuous objections of environmentalists, Harlem residents and some elected officials, the city gave Donald J. Trump permission yesterday to connect the first phase of his Riverside South development to the troubled North River sewage treatment plant.
With the certification, Mr.
Trump clears a major hurdle in his long struggle to construct a mixed commercial and residential development with 16 buildings along the Hudson River, from 59th to 72d Street.


Nominee to Be Surgeon General Is Criticized for Doing Abortions
The Tennessee doctor nominated by President Clinton to become Surgeon General provoked alarm and criticism among some Republicans today when he said he had performed abortions during nearly 30 years of practice as an obstetrician and gynecologist, although he said the number was small.
Some Republicans whose initial response to the nomination was muted said the statement today raised questions both about the choice of Henry W. Foster Jr., the acting director of Meharry Medical College in Nashville, and about the White House's handling of the matter.


If the Jerky Boys Call, Take the Phone Off the Hook
How idiotic does the dumb and dumber school of film comedy have to get before its teen-age and younger audience turns away in disgust?
"The Jerky Boys: The Movie" may prove to be the acid test.
Co-starring John G. Brennan and Kamal Ahmed, the popular telephone pranksters from MTV, the movie is virtually jokeless, unless the constant repetition of familiar Jerky Boys epithets like "sizzle chest" and "liver lips" (and many others that are unprintable) is the same thing as telling jokes.
As telephone guerrillas puncturing institutional defenses with their rude crank phone calls, the Jerky Boys have touched a nerve.
The comic flailings of these self-described "lowlifes from Queens" are comic cries of anger from a social stratum that looks ahead and sees only dead ends.
Adopting funny voices and taping phone calls that make fools of their frequently snippy recipients is as efficient a way as any of momentarily leveling the social landscape.


Observer; Eight Easy Pieces
Due to ease-taking, the next eight issues of this column will not appear.
Following are eight pieces of inspirational material -- some of it's been moldering in our "Ideas" file for years -- on which they would have been based.
Mold doesn't matter in this column.
Its only concern is timeless philosophical truth.
Each of the eight items will make you instantly visualize quite clearly the entire column it would have inspired. (Saves you a lot of tedious reading.) Each comes with an appropriate headline, compliments of the management.


Bosnia Debate: Army as Defender of Islam or Multiculturalism?
A sharp dispute has emerged within Bosnia's seven-member presidency over the degree to which the Bosnian Army is identified with Islam.
The dispute, pitting five members against President Alija Izetbegovic and Vice President Ejup Ganic, reflects the growing tension in Bosnia between those who favor a secular, multi-ethnic model for society and those who favor a strong identification with Islam.


Big Rally For Stocks And Bonds
Wall Street rejoiced yesterday as Main Street showed signs its economy was slowing and unemployment was rising.
In the sixth-busiest trading day on record, the Dow Jones industrial average staged its biggest one-day gain so far this year and its largest jump since last summer.
The Dow rose 57.87 points, or 1.5 percent, to 3,928.64, finishing above 3,900 for the first time since Jan. 18.


Manhattan Cruises And Moves Into First
When Manhattan and Canisius started playing basketball at the Buffalo Auditorium last night, Heshimu Evans of the Jaspers was already hobbling on a sprained right foot.
When the game ended, Evans's replacement, the freshman Jared Stinson, had sent the Golden Griffins limping out of sole possession of first place in the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference.


Let Neighborhoods Tax Themselves to Rescue Their Parks
To the Editor:
"Saving the City's Backyards" (editorial, Jan. 25) calls attention to the sad but subtle decay of vitally needed parks and playgrounds.
Given New York City's inability to return to total public support, you suggest that the city guarantee at least some tax-based revenue and that the balance be supplied from philanthropy, as exemplified by the city's partnership with the nonprofit Central Park Conservancy.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Sliding, Leaping and Lunging Into the Louisiana Backwoods  Sonny Landreth, guitarist Bottom Line


A Second Chance for New Works That Languish
Like nature, the Orchestra of St.
Luke's abhors a vacuum.
Last year it identified two: the comparative lack of opportunities for recent works to get second hearings and the void left when the New York Philharmonic and the Brooklyn Philharmonic abandoned their informal contemporary music programs, Prospective Encounters and Meet the Moderns.
The orchestra's response is Second Helpings, a series in which the St.
Luke's Chamber Ensemble (a group of the orchestra's core players) revisits recent works, revives neglected works by early 20th-century modernists and offers an occasional premiere.
Its second season opened on Wednesday evening in a spacious, acoustically bright gallery at the Guggenheim Museum SoHo.
Other installments are scheduled for March 15 and May 10.


Voters Can Trust New Electronic System
To the Editor:
Re Ronnie Dugger's "Boss Tweed, Hacker" (Op-Ed, Jan. 23): There are good reasons to be confident in the electronic voting system being developed by New York City.


Gregory Smith Arts-Licensing Executive, 48
Gregory Smith, an executive of Music Theater International, the stage-production licensing agency founded by the composer Frank Loesser, died last Saturday at Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan.
He was 48 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was facial cancer, said Freddie B. Gershon, chairman of the company.


Chronicle
What do ELTON JOHN, the rock star, and MSTISLAV ROSTROPOVICH, the Russian cellist, have in common?


Barbra, the Speech, Plays to a Packed House at Harvard
Barbra Streisand, director, producer, actress, singer, philanthropist and citizen, came to Harvard tonight to bury the Speaker, praise the President and defend the right of Hollywood celebrities to speak out on politics.
Rebutting those who criticized the stars circling President Clinton as "bubbleheads" who should not meddle in serious matters of state, Ms.
Streisand gave an address to a hanging-from-the-balconies crowd of 700 at the John F. Kennedy School of Government


Shuttle Heads for Rendezvous With Russians
The space shuttle Discovery set the dark Florida sky ablaze just after midnight today as it began a historic mission in which a winged American spaceship is to rendezvous with a Russian space station for the first time.
Carrying the first woman with the title of pilot on a NASA shuttle, Lieut.
Col.
Eileen M. Collins of the Air Force, and five other crew members, the Discovery blasted off on time at 12:22 A.M. through the five-minute window available for a shuttle trying to meet the Russian Mir space station orbiting about 200 miles above Earth.
One crew member is the second Russian astronaut to fly on a shuttle.
Three Russian astronauts are aboard Mir.


Owners Scrap Salary Cap to Create a Ray of Hope
As baseball's striking players and owners moved in slow motion toward President Clinton's Monday deadline for a settlement, the National Labor Relations Board made its move today, inducing the owners to rescind the salary cap they implemented six weeks ago.
The board, through its general counsel, Fred Feinstein, achieved that feat by informing the owners that it would issue an unfair labor practice complaint against the owners on a charge the players filed Dec. 27, five days after the clubs declared an impasse in negotiations and imposed the cap.


Now the Waterlogged Dikes Threaten the Dutch
With flood waters ebbing rapidly, the Netherlands turned today to a paradoxical question: Will the dikes that largely contained the rivers when they rose withstand their equally threatening fall?
The absence of an easy answer means that many of the 200,000 people evacuated this week from towns like this empty settlement might have to wait days -- and by some accounts longer -- before they can return in relative safety.


Geoffrey Parsons, Pianist, Dies at 65
Geoffrey Parsons, a pianist who accompanied many of the world's leading singers in recitals, died on Jan. 26 at Middlesex Hospital in London.
He was 65 and lived in London.
The cause was cancer, said Peter Bloor, his manager.


WEAKNESS IN JOBS SIGNALS A SLOWING OF THE ECONOMY
In the clearest sign yet that the economy is cooling off, the Government reported today that job growth was surprisingly weak in January and that unemployment rose to 5.7 percent.
For all practical purposes, the three-tenths of a point rise in the jobless rate last month was the first increase in unemployment in two and a half years.
There was an artificial jump, which made comparisons invalid, when a new method of computing the jobless rate was introduced at the beginning of 1994.


Simpson Threw Wife Into Wall, Her Sister Tells Jury
Taking the stand in the O. J. Simpson murder trial, a pale and tearful Denise Brown gave a chilling account today of her former brother-in-law's physically lifting up her sister Nicole Brown Simpson, throwing her against a wall and then tossing her out of their house in the late 1980's.
As Mr.
Simpson sat at the defense table 30 feet away with a tight frown on his face, Ms.
Brown traced in dramatic detail how he became furious after she, her younger sister and several friends returned one night from a Mexican restaurant.
At one point, Denise Brown said, she turned to Mr.
Simpson and told him that "he took Nicole for granted."


Surviving a Stolen Car Ordeal
On the Sunday after Thankgiving, LaRae Mardesic of Los Angelas discovered that her 1988 Nissan Sentra had been stolen from the carport at her apartment.
She alerted police then her insurer, Farmers Insurance Group.
"My greatest fear was that they would low-ball me, and I was very cautious when I started to negotiate," she said.
Rental -- As an account executive for the United Way who visits companies constantly, Ms.
Mardesic needed a replacement qiuckly.
Her insurance policy required her to pay for a rental car for the first two days -- $16.99 a day at a special insurance rate.
After that, she paid $1.99 a day and the insurer paid the balance until the claim was settled.
REIMBURSEMENT -- Ms.
Mardesic began working with her insurance claim adjuster.
Using a car appraisal service, the adjuster placed the car's value at $4,488.
After producing recent receipts for repairs and maintenance, she was credited for 20 to 25 percent of those bills.
Farmers also covered the sales tax, the remaining time on the car registration and some contents.
Ms.
Mardesic received a check for $5,033 on Dec. 21.
CAR RECOVERED -- The day she received the check, the police found her car.
Ms.
Mardesic had the option of keeping the cash or taking her old car back.
She did not owe any money on the old car, but she decided to keep the money and trade up to a more reliable car.
REPLACEMENT CAR -- She settled on a 1993 Sentra, paying $9,990 including tax and licence.
Rather that using the insurance check as a down payment, Ms.
Mardesic paid down credit card debt that carried a high annual interest rate, 15.15 percent.
She borrowed the full cost of the car with a five year loan at 10.5 percent.
Over five years, she will pay $13,083 for the car.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CHASE MANHATTAN BANK, New York, said it had an agreement with Nynex to introduce a co-branded Visa credit card throughout New York State that will offer holders the opportunity to earn points that can be applied to monthly telephone bills or be used to order Nynex products or services.


Player Banned From School
Richard Parker, the star New York City high school basketball player who lost a scholarship to Seton Hall after pleading guilty to sexual assault last month, has been been found guilty of parallel school charges and banned from his former school, Manhattan Center.
The Board of Education, which announced the action yesterday, ordered Parker to continue his studies at another, unnamed program, where he will not be allowed to play basketball, but can complete his requirements for graduation in June.


Chronicle
The actress ISABELLA ROSSELLINI no longer needs to feel guilty if she leaves her Lancome lipstick home.
Lancome, the French cosmetics company, said yesterday that it would release Ms.
Rossellini at the end of the year from her exclusive contract advertising its products.
Ms.
Rossellini, who is 42, has appeared in Lancome ads around the world for nearly 14 years.
The announcement ended rumors that her contract -- reported to be worth $2 million a year -- would be terminated because the company considered her too old to sell cosmetics.


Bradley Ball AIDS Group Founder, 34
Bradley Ball, a founding member of Act Up, the protest group for people with AIDS, died on Jan. 24 in his home in Manhattan.
He was 34.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Michael Paller of Brooklyn.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about earnings of the Ford Motor Company for the fourth quarter of 1994 and for the year misstated the net profit margin for the year.
It was 4.3 percent; 3.6 percent was the margin for the company's automotive operations.


Faxon Takes Lead With 64
Brad Faxon took advantage of some new-found confidence and some soft conditions today, aggressively attacking the Poppy Hills layout for a round of 64 that gave him a 36-hole total of 10-under-par 134 and a one-stroke lead over Tom Watson, Guy Boros and Fuzzy Zoeller in the AT&amp;T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am.
Watson, who somehow managed to shoot 70 in the first round despite three three-putts and a four-putt, rebounded with a spectacular round of 65 at Spyglass today.
Close behind is Davis Love 3d, the overnight leader who followed his opening round of 65 with a 71 today at Pebble Beach.
Love, who struck the ball solidly but struggled with his putter, stands at eight under par.


Bridge
A part-score contract due to be set by a trick or two does not rate to create great tension, but the diagramed deal is the exception.
It was played in September in the Rio de Janeiro Championship, and Gabriel Chagas said the audience watching on Vugraph "was held breathless."
It was the 96th and last deal of the match, and Chagas's team had gained 48 imps in the previous 95 to tie the score.
The audience knew that in the closed room, East-West had scored 120 in two no-trump.
Could they do better?


1996 Course A Hilly One
Atlanta Olympic officials announced their proposed 1996 marathon course today, one that features hilly terrain that will probably preclude Olympic or world records.


Flooding in the Netherlands Is a Severe Blow to Business
As flooded rivers in the Netherlands begin to recede, the economic devastation caused by the halt to shipping traffic along some of the world's busiest inland waterways is becoming increasingly evident.
In addition to forcing 200,000 people from their homes, floods caused by heavy rains and melting snow have paralyzed shipping along virtually all inland rivers in northwestern Europe since Jan. 29.
More than 10,000 European barges remain moored along quays, harbors and levees.


Chronicle
DEE DEE MYERS, President Clinton's former press secretary, and MARY MATALIN, the deputy campaign manager for George Bush's re-election campaign, are facing off again.
Ms.
Myers will be a guest host, opposite Ms.
Matalin, for two weeks on the CNBC cable talk show "Equal Time." The show, broadcast from 8:30 to 9 on weeknights, has used a variety of mostly liberal hosts to spar with Ms.
Matalin since Jane Wallace left the show in April.
Ms.
Matalin has filled the conservative seat since the show began in May 1993.


On the Waterfront; Investor Builds Reputation as He Develops a Recreation Complex on the Chelsea Piers
Roland W. Betts was inspecting construction on his sprawling West Side sports and entertainment center at the Chelsea Piers when he decided to stop by the sound stage there where NBC's "Cosby Mysteries" is filmed.
The show's star, Bill Cosby, was not in.
But just outside Mr.
Cosby's dressing room, a middle-aged woman was hunched over a mop, dutifully cleaning floors.
Mr.
Betts, the principal owner of the Texas Rangers, the major league baseball team, financier of major motion pictures and chairman of Chelsea Piers Management Inc., rushed over to hug and kiss her.
After all, it was his wife's sister.


Aluminum Poles Swing And Sway With Humans
There were 12 dancers in Llory Wilson's "Lush Mechanique." Only six were human.
The others were swaying aluminum poles, each with a glowing light bulb at one end.
Flesh-and-blood and aluminum were harmoniously paired in this work, which Ms.
Wilson's Seattle-based Tallulah Dance Company offered on Wednesday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.


Chronicle
No one was supposed to be bidding on the 350 works displayed at Sotheby's on Thursday night at the opening of an exhibition of art by students and teachers from the New York City public schools.
"But people are making offers anyway," said LOIS H. RIVKIN, president of Friends of the Public Schools, a nonprofit group that serves as a liaison between the schools and the cultural and business worlds.
"This isn't supposed to be a fund-raiser," she said.
"It's just a party."


A Murder Trial, Through the Looking Glass
Day after day, the curious and the bored line up in the cavernous hallway of the Nassau County Courthouse for a chance to watch a man, whose own lawyers say is mad, defend himself against charges of murder.
They have come to see Colin Ferguson, cast in the role of a lifetime: defense counsel in the Long Island Rail Road shooting case.
For a week and a half, he has been turning in a performance as startling as it is strange.


Museum Comes to Life
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 27 news article on the planned overhaul at the American Museum of Natural History describes many of the museum's departments as "better known for their long, musty corridors and dreary dioramas than for their ability to excite visitors."


Jack Sendak, 71, a Writer Of Surrealist Books for Children
Jack Sendak, an author of children's books noted for their magical and even surreal qualities, died yesterday at Centra Medical Center in Freehold, N.J.
He was 71 and lived in Clarksburg, N.J.
He had suffered a brief illness, his family said.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Myth as a Universal Idea In Its Ukrainian Guise  'Waterfall/Reflections' La Mama E.T.C.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
The Place of Perfection In the Music-Making Art  Wolfgang Holzmair, baritone Metropolitan Museum


NATO Exercise Held In Eastern Germany
NATO grew a little bit bigger today, with its first exercise in the former East Germany.
Thus the alliance staked a claim to 41,757 square miles of what was enemy territory just five years ago.
German soldiers took to the field outside Berlin where Leonid Brezhnev, then the Soviet leader, once watched Warsaw Pact maneuvers.
Without winning a war, the German soldiers have pushed the alliance's eastern border to the Oder River.


Government Magic: Cap Disappears
Never mind.
That's how easy it is, apparently, for a government to remove a portion of the bad dream that is major league baseball.


Ian Pitt-Watson, 71, British Preacher
Ian Pitt-Watson, a professor at the Fuller Theological Seminary who had been a commentator and preacher on religious programs on British radio and television for nearly four decades, died on Jan. 11 at the St.
John's Hospice in London.
He was 71 and had lived in Pasadena, Calif.
The cause was cancer, his son, David Pitt-Watson of London, said.


How It Feels to Be on Anti-Abortion Hit List
To the Editor:
While I feel ambivalent about your decision not to report the American Coalition of Life Activists' hit list of a dozen doctors it wants eliminated, I am grateful for "The Escalating War on Legal Abortion," your Jan. 28 editorial criticizing this announcement.
Not a bullet has been fired at any of us since then, as far as I know.
But speaking as one of those physicians, I can testify that such an announcement goes a long way toward destroying one's life.
That, of course, is the intended effect.
I am grateful also for the protection of Federal marshals, who were assigned to me and my colleagues after this announcement.
But why should it be necessary for doctors who help women to be protected by armed guards?


Jericho Spotlight Has Moved On, and Hopes Dim
Iyad Abu Niel has this sinking feeling that Jericho went through its allotted 15 minutes of fame, and nobody noticed.
A year ago, someone offered 60,000 Jordanian dinars for his sliver of real estate on the main square.
That was equivalent to about $84,000, and amounted to an astonishing $800 per square foot.


Massachusetts Set to Enact Tough Welfare Restrictions
Massachusetts lawmakers are putting the final touches on legislation that would give their state one of the most restrictive welfare systems in the country.
The measure, slightly differing versions of which were approved by both houses of the Legislature this week, would require at least a third of the state's able-bodied welfare recipients to have found work after 60 days of benefits, would eliminate the practice of adding to the benefits of families whenever they have another child and would end payments altogether for beneficiaries who have been receiving assistance for two years.


In America; Afflicting The Afflicted
The anger, the fear and the despair are building.
Gov.
George Pataki has rolled up the sleeves of his tuxedo, picked up a machete and begun hacking away at the social welfare safety net in New York.
Pleasant, soft-spoken and quick with a smile, the Governor seems absolutely unaware of the devastation, the human carnage that is sure to follow as tens of thousands of poor souls fall through the shredded net to absolute bottom.
"Where does he think people are going to go?" asked Anne Erickson of the Greater Upstate Law Project, which fights for, among other things, legislative support for humane treatment of the poor.
Ms.
Erickson's voice was a mix of astonishment and dismay as she reflected on the Governor's plans to eviscerate the Home Relief program and to roll back other welfare benefits, including aid to the elderly, the blind and the disabled.


Court Says Taxpayers Can Sue Over High Property Assessments
What's good for General Motors may or may not be good for the country, but it could be very good for New Jersey taxpayers who believe their municipal assessor has it in for them.
New Jersey's second-highest court ruled today that taxpayers can sue their assessors and their municipalities under the Federal Civil Rights Act.
And they can collect compensatory and punitive damages, plus their legal fees, if they can prove the assessor acted out of malice or prejudice in setting an unfairly high assessment on their property.
The ruling involves a lawsuit filed by General Motors over the tax assessment on its auto assembly plant in Linden.
In 1986, the company saw its assessment rise dramatically in what company officials said was retaliation for past appeals, prompting them to file the suit.
A lower court ruled that, under state law, an assessor enjoys absolute immunity from lawsuits.
The lower court further said that it lacked jurisdiction and that the matter should be handled by the state's tax court.
A three-judge panel of the Appellate Division of Superior Court today overturned the lower court's ruling on both counts and sent the case back for more hearings.
It also agreed that General Motors could press a claim for violation of its constitutional rights under the Federal 1871 Civil Rights Act if it can prove the Linden tax assessor and other city officials were trying to punish the automotive giant for prior tax appeals.
"This is a very, very significant decision that provides an additional arrow for taxpayers fighting unfair assessments," said John E. Garippa, a lawyer for General Motors.
"In rare instances where an assessing official acts so egregiously outside the bounds of propriety in setting assessments that it appears to be retaliatory, you can now allege a civil rights violation for that act, no matter whether you're an individual or a major corporation."
While the appeals panel said that assessors did not enjoy absolute immunity from lawsuits, it nevertheless recognized a qualified immunity that protects assessors from lawsuits for honest mistakes.
The 23-page ruling written by Judge Stephen Skillman recognized that allowing civil rights lawsuits may have a "chilling effect" on a tax assessor's performance and may be "disruptive of a state tax system." But the court held that "these dangers are not a sufficient basis" to bar legal action based on the Civil Rights Act "to a party whose constitutional rights have been violated." Judges Thomas F. Shebell Jr. and Steven Z. Kleiner joined in the opinion.
"If we were to hold that a civil rights action is not maintainable in the law division solely because an alleged deprivation of constitutional rights relates to a tax assessment, it would mean that a tax assessor could engage in a practice of racially discriminatory tax assessments without being subject to personal liability under the Civil Rights Act.
"Since prevention of racial discrimination by state officials was the essential reason for the enactment of the Civil Rights Act, we are unwilling to read a limitation into the scope of its operation which would prevent a state court from granting complete relief, including compensatory and punitive damages, for such a violation of constitutional rights."
The appeals court pointed to other state and Federal court opinions that have held that tax officials can be liable for damages if they "intentionally and unjustifiably" raise an individual's property tax assessment "merely because of the individual's race, ethnic background or political affiliation."
In 1985, General Motors built an addition to its Linden plant that cost $5 million, Mr.
Garippa said.
He said the municipal tax assessment on the plant increased by $30 million.
"That's a 600 percent increase and that's what led to the filing of court papers alleging the new assessment was in retaliation for prior tax appeals," he said.
Telephone calls requesting an interview with Donald P. Jacobs, the lawyer for Linden, and Mr.
Frangella, the tax assessor, were not returned.
Because the ruling was unanimous, there is no automatic right of appeal to the New Jersey Supreme Court.
But the defendants can petition the state's highest court for certification while the lower trial court conducts its hearing on the tax appeal.


W. S. Richman, 73; Led Furniture Maker
William S. Richman, who led what was once the nation's largest maker of upholstered furniture, died on Thursday at his home in Glencoe, Ill.
He was 73.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, Marilyn.


The Neediest Cases; Helping a Single Mother Realize the Dreams She Has for Her Son
On the Upper West Side of Manhattan, near the elegant sprawl of Riverside Park, Mary L. wakes each day to a life that is bleak and unforgiving.
Mrs.
L., a Haitian immigrant, is raising her 6-year-old son in a one-room apartment in public housing.
They share a kitchen and bathroom with other residents, and must wait in line to bathe and cook.
With no room to run around and play, the little boy developed behavioral problems as a toddler.
Last year, when he started acting up in school, Mrs.
L. was frightened and ashamed.


World News Briefs; Acquittal of Neo-Nazis Angers Many Germans
A German court has stirred outrage among leaders of Jewish groups and opposition politicians by acquitting two neo-Nazis who had used a telephone answering machine to describe the Auschwitz death camp as a myth.
The men, 23 and 24 years old, were accused after recording a message in March 1994 on an answering machine used to advertise right-wing activities.
The men's names were not disclosed.


Cairo Journal; Ramadan Tales: Long Nights of Radio Soap Opera
There is an old Arabic superstition that warns that whoever tells stories during the day will grow horns and see his gold turn into iron.
Night is the time for stories.
And the best stories, as has been true for generations in the Muslim world, are saved for the languid evenings during the holy month of Ramadan.
At dusk during the holy month, which started on Wednesday, Muslims break their daylong fast of penance with iftar, the evening meal.
They feast on dates and figs, on qatayif -- small pancakes filled with raisins and nuts -- and on bamia, a beef stew with okra and onions.


Courier Gets U.S. Even On Slow Court Surface
For its Davis Cup match here today against France, the United States Tennis Association chose a carpet surface called plexi-court, which has a slowing effect on the ball.
The U.S.T.A. might as well have spotted France a 1-0 lead in the three-of-five first-round match at the Bayfront Center Arena.


Memorial for Philip Foner
A memorial service for Philip S. Foner, a labor historian and author, will be held at 2 P.M. tomorrow at the Martin Luther King Jr.
Labor Center, 310 West 43d Street.
The program includes dramatic readings from the writings of Frederick Douglass by Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee, and songs by Ronnie Gilbert.
Dr.
Foner died on Dec. 13 in Philadelphia at age 84.
The service is open to the public.


Corrections
A chart in "Your Money" last Saturday, with an article about the problems faced by employees of Orange County, Calif., with their retirement plans, misrepresented the number of participants nationwide in deferred-compensation arrangements known as 457 plans.
The scale in the chart should have gone from 0 to 2 million, not 20 million.


Two Big Banks Cancel Loans Against Refunds
FOR taxpayers who want a loan in the amount of their tax refund, the choices will be fewer this year -- if any can be found.
Two of the four major banks that made the loans last year have canceled their programs because of a change by the Internal Revenue Service intended to curb fraud.


Yuri Dyshlenko, 58, Artist From Russia
Yuri Dyshlenko, a Russian artist who emigrated to the United States in 1989, died on Monday at his home in Richmond Hills, Queens.
He was 58.
The cause was lung cancer, said his wife, Alexandra.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Magic Loses Its Second Straight Game  Rik Smits had 27 points last night as the host Indiana Pacers dealt the Orlando Magic its second straight loss, 118-106.
Matched against Orlando center Shaquille O'Neal, Smits came out the winner, hitting 10 of 16 from the field.
O'Neal, who entered the game averaging a league-high 29.9 points, finished with 20 points on 7-for-18 shooting. (AP)


Do Tuition Bills Loom? Here's Your Homework
AS the Federal Reserve raises rates yet again, parents may be drawn even more strongly to zero-coupon bonds, a favored way to turn today's money into tomorrow's tuition.
But to earn high marks, buyers must crack the books.
Unlike regular bonds, which give investors periodic interest payments, zeros plow the payments back into the investment and pay the investor everything at maturity.
Their charm is certainty.
Used for retirement, cruises and down payments as well as school expenses, these bonds "give you a known amount at a known time," said James Lebenthal, a municipal bond dealer in New York.
For a set sum now, he said, "parents know that come the year 2006 they'll have Princeton paid for," assuming college costs follow a predictable path.


Leetch Likely to Play
BRIAN LEETCH did not participate in the Rangers' workout at their practice center in Rye, N.Y., yesterday, but the injured defenseman said he will most likely play tonight at Ottawa, where his team (2-5-1) is in desperate need of a victory.


U.S. Vehicle Sales in January Appear to Show Slight Gain
Sales of cars and light trucks in January appear to have narrowly topped last year's level after adjusting the figures for recent changes in the reporting of sales.
Seeming weakness in initial figures released on Wednesday led some analysts to conclude that the market had substantially softened.
But the recent changes in reporting methods by most auto makers made year-to-year comparisons confusing.
As other sales reports trickled in during the last two days, a better, but still blurry, picture of demand has emerged.


Manslaughter Conviction for Man Who Killed Officer With Bucket
A man who hurled a bucket off a rooftop in Washington Heights in 1993, killing a housing police officer in the street below, was convicted of second-degree manslaughter yesterday, but acquitted of murder.
The defendant, Pedro J. Gil, a 23-year-old former dishwasher at his parents' restaurant, did not dispute having thrown the 30-pound bucket of spackling compound from the roof of the six-story apartment house at 501 West 175th Street where he lived.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 26 about historical research and scholarship in the former Soviet bloc misstated the number of institutions of higher education in Estonia.
While only Tartu University offers a broad program in the arts and sciences, more than half a dozen schools are devoted to specialties, like music, engineering, theology and agriculture.


Christopher Palmer, Orchestrator, 48
Christopher Palmer, an orchestrator for several Oscar-winning film composers and the author of books on film music, died on Jan. 22 at St.
Bartholomew's Hospital in London.
He was 48 and lived in London.
The cause was AIDS, said Patrick Russ, a colleague.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
99.85
99.40
109.25
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5268
1.5156
1.7623
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.4010
1.4150
1.3287
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5639
1.5890
1.4770
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$375.90
$376.40
$386.55
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Two Trips to Help Endangered Animals
Two trips designed to help save two endangered animals, the Bengal tiger and the snow leopard, will be leaving next month and in July for the Himalayas and northern India.
Profits from "Save the Tiger," says the sponsor of the 16-day trip, Mountain Travel-Sobek, will go to finance programs against poaching in the wildlife parks of Bandhavgarh and Khajraho in India and Chitwan National Park in Nepal.
Tour participants, limited to 15, will search for the tiger, learn about the threat to its survival and explore what can be done to save it.


The World That Created August Wilson
"NOW BESIDE THIS BUILDING HERE, there used to be another building that created an alley. And if you can see all the way back there, where the windows are boarded up, those are the windows of what was the living room. And there was a backyard there, which is where I set my new play, 'Seven Guitars.' It's in the backyard of this building here, in 1948."
August Wilson, the 49-year-old playwright whose acclaimed chronicles of the black American experience have won him two Pulitzer Prizes, was looking out the window from the back seat of a chauffeur-driven sedan.
In front of him was the house where he spent the first 13 years of his life.
A narrow brick structure with unexpected grace notes of stained glass, it probably looked much as it did in 1948.
The vista around it, in which barren, empty stretches alternated with stores and houses that stood like the last teeth in an old man's smile, obviously did not.


Wildlife Is Back, and Mostly Welcome
TRAPPED for its fur and losing its habitat to farmland, the beaver declined in Connecticut throughout the 19th century until there were none left.
Attempts to reintroduce beavers in 1914, 1926 and 1934 met with only limited success, and wildlife managers abandoned the efforts.
Then, in the 1940's, the animals started to cross into Connecticut from New York and Massachusetts.
By 1961 there were 121 colonies, and as the end of the century draws near, the beaver population has swelled to an estimated 3,500 to 4,000 statewide.
To some, it's a nuisance.


The Skinny on the Fatmobile
Call it performance activism.
The Fat of the Land Project, a five-member San Francisco collective of female film makers and media activists, tried to run their diesel-powered '84 Chevy van across the country on cooking oil.
They wore waitress uniforms throughout the trip, and stopped at restaurants for used oil.
To power the van they mixed the oil with a bit of methanol and a soupcon of lye in a five-gallon pickle bucket.
The result is something called biodiesel, an alternative fuel.
Sometimes they had enough oil and time to make fuel to run the van on grease alone.
More often they added diesel.
And frequently they started with diesel and added cooking oil.
One member estimates they used about 30 percent cooking oil over all.
"We're trying to fight corporate control of the market in terms of energy and petroleum," said Florence Dore.
With mixed success.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
THE Prize Patrol panicked.
Its members acknowledge that.
Pressure became too much this year, the first year the Publisher's Clearing House Prize Patrol from Port Washington was to give away $10 million on live television.
Maybe it was because the presentation was to be part of the Super Bowl from Miami, and their winner, they found out, was in Phoenix, Ariz.


'Enclosing' a Neighborhood With a Symbolic String
It's a little hard to see, but there is a string of translucent fishing line hanging at treetop level around a large portion of the Upper West Side.
And it is having a big effect on the lives of the area's Orthodox Jews.
The string forms a boundary, along with existing walls and buildings, to create a kind of fence, called an eruv.
The eruv extends the symbolic boundaries of a single domain; within its bounds, Orthodox Jews can enjoy otherwise prohibited activities during the Sabbath -- in particular, they can carry things and push their children in strollers.


Word for Word / Advice for Republicans; Attention! All Sales Reps For the Contract With America!
THE civics books would tell you that the election is over and Congress and the White House are now about the business of governing.
But the apparatus of the campaign has not withered away.
Witness the memorandum that came into the hands of a Democratic strategist (who insisted on anonymity) and was made available to The New York Times last week.
The "research executive summary" was written by Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster who worked on his party's Contract With America and was now advising Congressional Republicans on the coming struggle over the budget.
Mr.
Luntz, on the basis of polling and focus groups, talks about how to talk about the issue.
Poll-driven strategy memos like this are not unusual these days in the increasingly campaign-like struggles over major legislation.
But they rarely come into public view.


Ellen N. Epstein and R. F. Brunsberg
Ellen Nan Epstein, the daughter of Elaine and William Epstein of Suffern, N.Y., was married last evening to Raymond Fredrick Brunsberg, the son of Margit Brunsberg of Claymont, Del., and Friedrich Brunsberg of Wallingford, Pa.
Rabbi Charles Lippman performed the ceremony at the Puck Building in New York.
Mrs.
Brunsberg, 30, graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a senior associate in real estate at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.
Her father is an assistant secretary and associate patent counsel at the Hoffmann LaRoche pharmaceuticals company in Nutley, N.J.
Her mother is a consultant at Education Systems Inc., a computer software consultant in Hackensack, N.J.


How to Be Difficult
We live in a time in which, increasingly, people are celebrated -- nay, rewarded -- for their ability to harass and vex.
And you don't have to be Speaker of the House to join the fun, or even a bilge-spewing talk radio host.
Almost anyone can play, provided they follow the successful models laid out below.
TEEN-AGE GIRLS: Suggest that the theme of the prom be Human Rights Violations.
Insist that Ritz crackers would make really good earrings.
Make your own cosmetics; ask your father where you can get some placenta.
Invest the lyrics of popular songs with an unrealistic amount of meaning.
Ask if you can read a poem at the renewal of your parents' wedding vows; recite "Because I Could Not Stop for Death." Refuse to eat veal.
Regale your family with the atrocities of the vealing process; quote the dimensions of your own bedroom in attempt to elicit sympathy.
Say that you aren't going to read any more books unless they are written by J. D. Salinger.
Emblazon your mother's hardcover copy of "The Catcher in the Rye" with the note "Merry-Go-Round = Life." Accept responsibility for toilet-training your little brother; put him in the bathroom, slam the door and yell, "You're not coming out till I see some results!" Clog your father's fax machine with an article about the orgasm.
Sign your library card "Mrs. Christian Slater." Practice screaming "I'm on the phone!" even when you are not.


How to Keep PBS (and Satisfy Conservatives); Art by Consensus?
To the Editor:
In Berlin at present -- 50 years after the end of World War II -- there is a wonderful opportunity to see exhibitions of the work of two important satirical American artists: George Grosz, who arrived in the United States in 1933, became a citizen in 1938 and lived on Long Island until a few weeks before his death in 1959; and Robert Cenedella, his last pupil, who still lives and works in SoHo in New York City.


Nasdaq's Secret: Insiders Can Sell More Stock
THE Nasdaq stock market is under attack.
Academic studies document that investors are often treated badly.
The Securities and Exchange Commission under Arthur Levitt is pushing relentlessly for reform and the Justice Department is looking for antitrust violations.
But as all this activity swirls, one question seems to go unasked: If Nasdaq is so bad, why do so many companies choose to list their stocks there?


Pay Phones
To the Editor: I read with great interest the letters of Nov. 27 concerning the phone rates charged by Oncor Communications and, in particular, the response by Oncor saying that it functions in areas where competitors do not choose to go.
Baloney.
Brooklyn is not the hinterland, yet Oncor charged me $8.81 for a three-minute call from Brooklyn to New Jersey, while AT&amp;T charged less than $5 for a 19-minute call from California to New Jersey.
The Federal Communications Commission has received my complaint on Oncor's charge.
For others seeking to complain, the telephone number for the F.C.C.'s Enforcement Division for the Common Carrier Bureau is (202) 632-7553.
JOHN B. WOLF  Kendall Park, N.J.


A Spiritual Language
To the Editor:
Only a poet as gifted as Nuala Ni Dhomhnaill could illustrate the beautiful dilemma of the Irish speaker in a world dominated by the English language.


From Reed to Players, Second-Guessing Continues About Choice of Dare
They filed into the conference room last June 30 in East Rutherford, N.J. -- the owners, a half-dozen scouts, the new head coach, Butch Beard, and General Manager Willis Reed.
It was draft day in the National Basketball Association, and the Nets, with the 14th pick, had already made their intentions clear:
They needed a shooting guard.


A Trade Tie That Binds
Nearly a year and a half ago, the United States decided that it had to end the deterioration in relations with China by embracing rather than isolating the Beijing Government.
Since then, there has been a steady stream of high-level diplomatic, economic and military contacts.
There have also been setbacks to American goals concerning human rights, weapons proliferation, Taiwan and trade, culminating in today's decision to impose the toughest retaliatory trade sanctions in American history.


An Expanding Base For Hartford Action
IF Hartford does not strike anyone as a city meant for theater, perhaps it's time for reconsideration.
And we aren't just talking Hartford Stage, which is in the middle of a banner season, or The Bushnell, where megashows and big-time musicals pass through.
Next week, for example, Carol Channing will appear in the latest "Hello, Dolly!" tour.


The End of Jewish History?
THE SACRED CHAIN The History of the Jews.
By Norman F. Cantor. 472 pp.
New York:  HarperCollins Publishers.


A Chamber Music Week
CHAMBER music dominates the concert schedule this week, starting with Chamber Music Brunch at Zenny's in Storrs.
Brunch starts at 11:30 with chamber music at 1:15.
The artists are Anne-Marie McDermott, piano; Carmit Zori, violin, and Warren Lash, the cellist and the series' music director, who says that "the beauty and intimacy of the room, and the excellence of the concerts create an ambiance rarely matched at chamber music events." For reservations, 429-7510.
At 1 P.M. today, the Eastern Connecticut Symphony Orchestra invites the public to sit in on the finals of its 36th annual Young Artists Competition in Dana Hall on the campus of Connecticut College in New London.
Competing for the $1,000 cash prize and the opportunity for a solo appearance with the orchestra next season, are a cellist, clarinetist, and several flutists, violinists and pianists.
There is no admission charge, and listeners will be offered free refreshments while the judges are deliberating (443-2876).


The Elders of Zion in Tokyo
JEWS IN THE JAPANESE MIND The History and Uses of a Cultural Stereotype.
By David G. Goodman and Masanori Miyazawa.
Illustrated. 360 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $24.95.


Meandering Beneath Aegean Skies
FIRST time in Greece, first time in Turkey, first cruise on a trans-Atlantic-size vessel -- so many unknowns were riding on this trip that my husband and I felt apprehension as well as the usual sea-voyage exhilaration when we caught our first glimpse of what would be home for the next eight days.
The ship was the Stella Solaris, of Greek registry, sailing from Piraeus, five miles southwest of Athens, to seven ports of call: Volos, Rhodes, Crete, Mykonos and Santorini in Greece, and Kusadasi and Istanbul in Turkey.
That extensive itinerary fitted into the allotted time in a more leisurely fashion than we had expected, and sightseeing from a floating hotel proved as trouble-free as we had hoped -- no tedious airport-to-hotel transfers, no fuss about bags or porters, no search for the perfect Greek taverna or Turkish lokanta.
But this trip is not for the lazy.
If you want to see the ruins of King Minos' palace in Crete, the Blue Mosque and the Topkapi Museum in Istanbul, and the clifftop monasteries at Meteora, start your exercise regimen now.
Off-shore excursions to the local wonders were available at all ports except Mykonos, and most of them began early.
Breakfast before 7, departure at 7:30 or 8:00 for a three-to-five-hour tour was more the rule than the exception, and some tours occupied a full day.


The World; Tidings of Abuse Fall On Deaf Ears
IN December, Amnesty International issued a grim report on the human rights violations committed by the various factions in the civil war that has engulfed Afghanistan during the last six years.
There were stories of young girls raped, of prisoners tied for days to dead bodies and of detainees forced to eat human flesh.
"The human rights catastrophe in Afghanistan has reached appalling proportions," Amnesty International said in its statement accompanying the report, "and yet governments around the world are ignoring the tragedy."
The United States is no exception.
Not only have Congress and the press disregarded the tragedy in Afghanistan, they have also disregarded Amnesty International's report.
"We distributed copies of the report on the Hill," said Christine Haenn, a spokeswoman for Amnesty International's Washington office.
"There was no interest."
Does Anyone Care Anymore?
The Afghanistan report may be an extreme case.
But it does raise some serious questions: Just how much impact do reports on human rights violations have?
Does anybody care about the issues they raise?
Do they influence public policy?
Have they done more harm than good by giving the world the impression that every country is guilty and therefore that none deserves special reprimand?
Has the public become inured to the depredations in places like Rwanda, Angola, China, Chechnya, Saudi Arabia and the United States?


Oscar for Sale (for a Good Cause)
Celeste Holm's Oscar sits on a Chippendale card table in her Central Park West apartment.
The actress used to display the award, which she received for her supporting role in the 1947 film "Gentleman's Agreement," in her office.
"But so many people wanted to see it, I just brought it out here," she said.
Ms.
Holm is hoping that at least one person who beholds the golden statuette will covet it enough to part with a quarter of a million dollars.
A New Jersey car dealer offered $75,000.
"But that wasn't enough," she said.
"I'll sell it for $250,000. That's what it will take to put us on our feet."


New $1 Coin Is to Honor Special Games
Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin has approved the design of a $1 silver coin that will feature the profile of Eunice Kennedy Shriver in honor of the 1995 Special Olympics World Games, to be held in Connecticut.
Organizers of the games, to be held July 1-9, said the approval Friday marked two "firsts." They said the coin will be the first to honor the Special Olympics, and the first to contain the portrait of a living woman.


Big Change In Teaching Of Foreign Languages
NEW technologies and curriculums are transforming the teaching of foreign languages in the state's high schools, supplanting techniques that have produced generations of foreign-tongue-tied Americans.
Minitel, a French version of America Online, and the Internet are being used to keep students tuned in and turned on to language study, and the emphasis has shifted from textbooks and grammar to conversation.
The changes, experts say, help explain the increase in enrollment in foreign language courses in recent years.


Corrections
An article yesterday on the decision by International Business Machines to build a new headquarters in Armonk, N.Y., misstated the population of the surrounding town of North Castle.
It is 10,000, not 100,000.


Emily Kay Lyon and John E. Sherman
Emily Kay Lyon, the daughter of Martin and Rheva Lyon of Greenwich, Conn., and Dr.
John E. Sherman, a son of Ruth Sherman of New York and the late Bernhard J. Sherman, were married on Thursday.
Rabbi Alvin D. Kass performed the ceremony at the "21" Club in New York.
Mrs.
Sherman graduated from the University of Arizona.
She is a saleswoman at Meditech Diagnostics, a medical equipment sales company in Rahway, N.J.


An Intimate Dinner For Valentine's Day
WHEN dinner for two for Valentine's Day is a homemade meal there has to be love in the preparation and serving.
This intimate feast starts with a rosy pasta dish followed by shrimp with artichokes and potatoes.
The dessert is chocolate, a warm baked pudding for two, which is best made about an hour in advance.
As for oysters, supposedly endowed with aphrodisiac qualities, some of these ordered on the half shell from a reliable fish market might be served with Champagne to start.


More Prisons Are Banning Cigarettes
Charles Sanders gets a lot more than a nicotine fix from cigarettes.
He wagers them in blackjack games, and he can even swap them for shampoo, shaving cream, candy bars, hamburgers, sandwiches and other goods.
He is an inmate at the Westchester County Jail here, and cigarettes serve as the currency of daily life for him and other inmates.
"Cigarettes are like money to us," said Mr.
Sanders, 39, who has served 13 months.
"A lot of guys buy cigarettes and don't even smoke. They just buy them to trade."


Many States Are Limiting The Power to Pass the Buck
The idea of imposing regulations while requiring those who are regulated to pick up the cost of compliance did not start in Washington, and neither did the rebellion against it.
Since the 1970's, at least 17 states have either amended their constitutions or enacted statutes to limit the ability of their legislatures to foist so-called unfunded mandates on counties, cities and towns.


U.S. Drug Tests Have Reduced Accidents
To the Editor:
Your negative article on drug testing in the transportation industry ("The New Deal on Drug Testing," At Work, Jan. 8) fails to discuss the success achieved by the Transportation Department's drug-testing regulations or the concerns of the traveling public.


Where Retirees Can Continue Learning
ONE of the best getaways for retirees is on the campus of Iona College in New Rochelle.
There, members of the Learning in Retirement Institute have the opportunity to roam through the world of new ideas and new experiences.
What separates this study program from others, said Peggie Cashman, the institute's director, is its purpose, which is to provide an opportunity for men and women to share their experience, talent and skills with their peers.


City vs. County Over Protection Of Watershed
PROPOSED rules intended to protect the quality of New York City's drinking water in the Catskill, Delaware and Croton watersheds -- and help the city avoid an expense estimated at $2 billion to $8 billion to build a chemical filtration system mandated by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency -- have drawn criticism from a coalition of municipal supervisors in the northern part of the county and some county leaders.
The coalition includes the leaders of North Salem, Bedford, Pound Ridge, Lewisboro, Somers, Yorktown, New Castle, North Castle, Mount Kisco, Harrison, Mount Pleasant and Cortlandt.


Sports of The Times; Scabs Are Ultimate Owner Scam
WE may be saved from the repugnant scenario of scab labor in spring training.
The President and the National Labor Relations Board have finally put some real pressure on the owners and the players to settle the baseball strike.
It may not be as simple as it sounds on the airwaves.
Yes, the owners have given up their demand for a salary cap, that panacea that was supposed to stop them from their compulsive spending habits.
But now the owners may be demanding some alternative luxury tax, so it isn't settled yet.


To Be Sure . . .
WANT TO ANticipate a rebuttal?
Want to show how profoundly you understand your opponent's arguments before demolishing them?
Then play the popular rhetorical game of to be sure . . . but.


No Cheers for Greenspan
To the Editor:
Alan Greenspan does not deserve the accolades Floyd Norris heaped on him for having created the speculative bubble the Fed is now trying to deflate without causing an economic crash landing ("Man of the Year: High-Wire Artist Alan Greenspan," Market Watch, Jan. 1).


St. Petersburg
St.
Petersburg is a town with aspirations.
It has long attracted tourists with subtropical weather, 28 miles of beaches and its perch on a peninsula overlooking two bodies of water -- Tampa Bay and the Gulf of Mexico -- on Florida's West Coast.
During the 1920's St.
Petersburg, which had been co-founded by a Russian nobleman who named it for the Russian city, was a favorite resort of the rich.
But by the 1960's it had declined, and Tampa, its sister city across the bay, seemed to get all the attention.


Outside Pressures on the U.S. Inflation Rate
To the Editor:
One hopes Michael Marn's analysis of the factors reshaping economic realities in America ("Inflation: It's Not What It Used to Be," Viewpoints, Jan. 8) will catch the attention of the Federal Reserve and others who provide the micro impacts on our economy.


Pick-Me-Up for Plants Without Overkill
NEW approaches to growing things are becoming deeply rooted in the garden world.
Some of these developments make the tasks a little bit easier.
Many are driven by market demands or production requirements.
A few have been spawned as a result of consumer agitation.
To boost plant growth, there is the plethora of fertilizers and extensive claims.
Most recently, gardeners have witnessed extraordinary results with a fairly new product that utilizes the benefits of research.
These are the enzyme growth stimulants applied directly to the soil.
Plants respond by producing stronger and deeper root systems, which lead to stronger growth.


U.N. Missions In 2 Countries Attract Troops
In a turnaround for United Nations peacekeeping appeals, new missions planned for Haiti and Angola have already attracted more troops than they need, and countries offering soldiers are being turned away.
But in a move that is drawing criticism in the Security Council, the United States will demand that conditions be attached to sending peacekeeping forces to Angola, where fighting resumed after an earlier United Nations accord collapsed in 1992.
The Clinton Administration appears to want to avoid the same situation, or the failed mission in Somalia.


Manager's Profile
Robert L. Rodriguez  Fund: FPA New Income, $134 million in assets; 4.5 percent sales charge.
Manager since 1984. (Sponsor: First Pacific Advisors Inc., Los Angeles.)


UP AND COMING: Phil Leeds; If Kramer Were 78 and Had Arthritis
"DOUBLE RUSH," CBS'S NEW sitcom about a bicycle messenger service, is replete with actors clambering for stardom.
Except Robert Pastorelli, the house painter who never left Murphy Brown's house, they are all young and unknown.
Except the one nicknamed the Kid.
That role is inhabited by a fragile-looking elderly man whose Yoda-like face -- such a face! -- is familiar to viewers with an eye for character actors.
With wispy gray hair, hawkish nose, weak chin, bulging eyes and a raspy voice like that of a wisecracking kid who never grew up, Phil Leeds has become the Kramer of "Double Rush": an audience-loving, scene-stopping clown.


Dutch Floods Came in the Back Door
When the Meuse River barreled over bottom lands last week and flapped against the tips of the dikes, farmers in the Dutch heartland said they knew all about the power of the river that swells each spring because of rains and melting mountain snow.
And even when the water rose to record levels and the Government ordered 200,000 people to leave, many farmers stayed.


BENEFITS
Benefit for Gilda's Club  TUESDAY -- A Monopoly party will benefit Gilda's Club, a support group for cancer patients and their families.
The event will begin with cocktails at 6 P.M. at the Rainbow Room and will include dinner and the chance to play Monopoly with one of several celebrities including Phil Donahue, Madeline Kahn and Wendy Wasserstein.
Tickets, $250 for the dinner, or $750 to play at a celebrity table, from (212) 545-2833.
Ducks Unlimited  TUESDAY -- The New York City chapter of Ducks Unlimited, an organization of sportsmen that seeks to conserve wetlands, will sponsor a dinner and sportsmen's exhibition at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The evening will begin at 6 with cocktails and the exhibition, followed by dinner at 8.
Items including decoys, artwork and trips will be auctioned.
Tickets, $140, from (516) 921-4730.
Thurman Munson Awards  TUESDAY -- The 15th annual Thurman Munson Awards dinner, at the Marriott Marquis, will honor eight professional sports figures, including the tennis player Tracy Austin, the former heavyweight champion Evander Holyfield, the former Detroit Pistons guard Isaiah Thomas and the figure skater Nancy Kerrigan.
The event, which will benefit the Association for the Help of Retarded Children, will begin with cocktails at 6 P.M., followed by dinner at 7 and the awards ceremony.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 780-2686.
Hunt for the Hippo  WEDNESDAY -- A party for children and their families will be held from 6 to 8 P.M. at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The event will include gallery hunts to identify objects on display (children will be given maps and clues) and projects like mask and hat making.
A lutist will play medieval music.
Tickets, $75 for adults, $35 for children 15 and under, from (212) 570-3948.
Cancer Society Benefit  THURSDAY -- The junior committee of the American Cancer Society will hold a "Cupid's Cocktail Party" to raise money for the society's programs in cancer research, education and patient care.
The party, from 8 to 10 P.M., will be at Rouge, a club at 131 East 54th Street, and will include dancing.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 237-3890.
Tribute to Scaasi  THURSDAY -- A Valentine dance will honor Arnold Scaasi, the fashion designer, and will benefit the Girl Scout Council of Greater New York.
The evening, at the St.
Regis Roof, will begin with cocktails at 7 and will be followed by dinner at 8 and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 645-4000, extension 202.
Hungarian Piarist Ball  FRIDAY -- The 43d Hungarian Piarist Ball, at the Plaza, which will raise money for Piarist schools in the United States and Hungary, will present debutantes of Hungarian ancestry.
The Piarists are a Roman Catholic teaching order founded in 1597.
White or black tie.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $160, from (212) 744-8594.
For a Sarcoma Cure  SATURDAY -- Dinner and dancing at the Metronome Restaurant, 915 Broadway (21st Street), will benefit the Kristen Ann Carr Fund, a research fellowship dedicated to the study, care and prevention of sarcoma.
The evening, which begins at 9, will include drinks, hors d'oeuvres and party favors.
Tickets, $65, from (212) 332-9877.
Dinner at the Opera  SATURDAY -- The Opera Festival of New Jersey will benefit from a dinner and concert at 100 College Road East in Princeton.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 7.
There will be a silent auction for items including a weekend in Paris, rare recordings, silver and wines.
Tickets, $175, from (609) 936-1505.
Central Park Safety  SATURDAY -- The New York Road Runners Club will hold a dinner-dance to benefit the Central Park Safety Patrol.
The event, at the Manhattan Center, 311 West 34th Street, will begin with cocktails at 6, followed by dinner at 7.
Awards will also be presented to some top runners in the New York area.
Tickets, $80, from (212) 423-2278.
Pearl Is a Pearl Is a Pearl  FEB. 13 -- The Pearl Theater Company will benefit from an auction at Christie's East, 219 East 67th Street, from 6:30 to 9:30 P.M.
Items to be auctioned include fashion accessories, tickets for "Saturday Night Live," Tourneau watches, wine and a champagne party at the Pearl.
Information: (212) 505-3401.
Israel Philharmonic  FEB. 13 -- The American Friends of the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra will hold a concert to benefit the orchestra.
The black-tie event will begin with dinner at 6 at Avery Fisher Hall, followed by the concert, with Zubin Mehta conducting and featuring the pianist Yefim Bronfman.
The evening will conclude with a reception.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 972-2268.
A Red Ball  FEB. 13 -- A Red Ball at the Plaza will benefit the Mary Lea Johnson Richards Institute, an organization for research and treatment of liver and pancreatic diseases and organ transplanting at the New York University Medical Center.
The evening will honor Michael and Diandra Douglas and Sale and Robert Wood Johnson 4th.
The black-tie evening will begin with cocktails at 7, followed by dinner at 8 and dancing.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 721-1443.
Sports Awards  FEB. 13 -- The V Foundation, an organization supporting cancer research, will benefit from the third annual Espy awards ceremony at Radio City Music Hall.
The evening begins with a cocktail reception at 5.
Award recipients will be announced at the ceremony at 7:30.
A second reception will follow at the Rainbow Room in Rockefeller Center.
Black tie.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 245-6570.
Honoring Thomas Murphy  FEB. 13 -- The New York City affiliate of the American Heart Association will present its Heart of New York award to Thomas S. Murphy, the chairman of Capital Cities/ABC Inc., at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The event will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner, the awards presentation and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 661-5335, extension 226.


Baymen Rejoice As Sweet Bay Scallops Return
AFTER lean times that lasted almost 10 years,East End baymen are celebrating a bountiful harvest of bay scallops.
"Incredible" is a word that comes up when baymen and others in the seafood business speak about the season that opened in October and runs through the end of next month.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about completion of the Westchester mall in White Plains misidentified the place where work was occurring, misidentified one worker and omitted the name of another.
The site was the Food Court, not Nordstrom.
The man working on the terrazzo floor was Blaise Toneatto, not the tile finisher Tracy Haughey.
The other man was Mr.
Toneatto's father, Edward Toneatto.


The Executive Computer; The Geographic Interface Puts the World on the Desktop
WHEN you're staring at the computer screen, it sometimes seems as if all innovation began and ended in or near Palo Alto, Calif., in the 1970's.
As most students of information science know, the windows and pull-down menus first commercialized in Apple Computer's Lisa and Macintosh machines and later in Microsoft's Windows software were invented at Xerox's Palo Alto Research Center.
The companion mouse was conceived just up the road at SRI International, in Menlo Park, at roughly the same time.
To be sure, the software's desktop metaphor, with its file folders, documents and icons representing their paper equivalents, was a vast improvement over the command-line interface of earlier computer software.
But using it has never been as intuitive as its proponents claimed, or there would be no need for "Windows for Dummies" and countless other help books.
And the desktop metaphor becomes much less adequate when users venture off the desktop, onto a local area network or the Internet.


Corrections
A map with the What's Doing column on Jan. 8, about Cairo, located the Cairo Opera House incorrectly.
As the article correctly noted, it is at the end of At-Tahir Bridge on Gezira Island, not east of the Nile River near the Khan al-Khalili Bazaar.


Channel Tunnel
To the Editor: We enjoyed the article "At Last, a Train Under the Channel" (Dec. 4).
My wife and I traveled on the Chunnel train from London to Paris in November.
As the article said, the convenience and economy of traveling from central city to central city is unbeatable.


For Day Laborers, a New Hurdle
Most mornings on Northern Boulevard, scores of men wait for vans whose drivers are searching for day laborers.
The men, mostly Salvadorans and often undocumented, dicker over the day's wages.
Recently, though, residents and storeowners have complained that the men are intimidating to passersby and customers.
Last week, the local City Council member, Julia Harrison, introduced an anti-loitering bill that would make it illegal to remain in a public place while "engaging in a course of conduct designed to harass, seriously annoy or alarm another person."


Confused? Well, Just Join the Crowd
Let's see if we can understand this.
Marquis Grissom, John Wetteland and several other players are among 38 players who have been restricted free agents for the past six weeks.
Their agents basically negotiated lucrative contracts with new clubs, but the players couldn't sign the contracts because the union had imposed a signing freeze.


Wintertime Fun That Has a Purpose
There's a whirl of dining and dancing to honor generosity and benefit others.


Not Resting on Its Laurels, a Lauded Restaurant Adds to Its Chef Corps
ONE of the Island's outstanding restaurants is striving to become better.
The restaurant, Panama Hattie's in Huntington Station, ranks high among the culinary elite.
It has consistently received excellent ratings, but the restaurant, at 872 East Jericho Turnpike (351-1727), has not been resting on its laurels.
Last month it reopened after a major revamping of decor, staff and menu.
The pubby look of Panama Hattie's, which was never in harmony with its exceptional, innovative food, is gone.
June Gioia, a young designer from Manhattan, has given the room a neoclassical appearance, adding a marble foyer and country doors, new lanterns, art works, upholstered banquets, carpeting, tables, chairs and silverware.


Ann M. Thomas and Justin Skala
Ann Mack Thomas, until recently an associate research analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, a New York investment research and management concern, was married yesterday to Peter Justin Skala, the director of international marketing at Hills Pet Nutrition Inc. in Topeka, Kan.
The Rev.
Herbert G. Draesel Jr. officiated at the Episcopal Church of the Holy Trinity in New York.
Mrs.
Skala, 32, graduated from Lawrence University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father, John Edward Thomas, is a lawyer in Milwaukee.
Her mother, Florence M. Kelly, is an equity research assistant at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.


BEST SELLERS: February 5, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
49
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
2
33
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
3
3
3
KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The police detective Alex Cross pursues a serial killer and the kidnapper of his niece.
4
4
4
SELF-DEFENSE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tries to help a woman who says she is being stalked.
5
5
3
EYES OF A CHILD, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $24.) The apparent suicide of a San Francisco man leads to courtroom encounters.
6
13
2
ACCEPTABLE RISK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $23.95.) A researcher's quest for the ultimate drug to treat depression has devastating consequences.
7
6
130
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
8
14
2
THE MURDERERS, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Putnam, $23.95.) A series of murders and "willful deaths" beleaguers the Philadelphia police force.
9
11
2
TRUST ME, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $22.) A canceled wedding leads to a curious romance between the groom and the caterer.
10*
9
18
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
11
8
23
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
12
7
10
WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World War II America.
13
12
13
THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote themselves to solving crimes.
14
10
16
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work in their small Maine town.
15
1
ALWAYS A RECKONING, by Jimmy Carter. (Times Books/Random House, $18.) A collection of poems by the former President.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
17
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
2
1
14
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of belief, suffering and hope.
3
6
6
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters of varied callings and backgrounds, reported in words and pictures.
4
3
18
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
5
15
2
INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE, by Ronald Kessler. (Pocket, $23.) Anecdotes about events at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue during the past 30 years.
6
7
59
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
7
4
22
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
8
5
10
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
9
8
48
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
10
16
2
ALL MY CHILDREN, by Gary Warner. (General Publishing, $25.) A scrapbook of photographs and mementos about the long-running television show.
11
9
19
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.
12
10
14
THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence affect American life.
13
11
16
NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World War II.
14
2
LONG WALK TO FREEDOM, by Nelson Mandela. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The autobiography of the first freely elected President of South Africa.
15
14
17
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the country singer.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
89
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
1
41
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
4
3
FOOD, by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Information about recipes, nutrition and diets.
4
3
6
ILLUMINATA, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $20.) A celebration of the power of prayers, with examples of those fitting a variety of situations.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 21, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) ADMITTING THE HOLOCAUST: Collected Essays, by Lawrence L. Langer. (Oxford University, $23.) Mr.
Langer, a retired professor of English, illuminates the literature of the Holocaust -- the chronicles of ghetto and camp, the fiction and poetry wrought out of the horror, the representations in film and on television.
Mr.
Langer is also the editor of ART FROM THE ASHES: A Holocaust Anthology (Oxford University, $30), a remarkable collection of personal accounts, both by well-known survivors and by victims otherwise obscure, and of fiction, poetry and art related to the cataclysm.
ALL THE DAYS AND NIGHTS: The Collected Stories of William Maxwell. (Knopf, $25.) Stories, balanced, gentle and humane, concerned above all with reconciliation, from six decades of work by a master writer and editor who is now 86.
ANGEL ANGEL, by April Stevens. (Viking, $19.95.) A strangely persuasive novel about a family petrified by a father's desertion, then restored to humanity by an ebullient young woman with enough excess mental health to go around.
ANTARCTIC NAVIGATION, by Elizabeth Arthur. (Knopf, $25.) A first-person novel, alive with feeling and animated energy, whose heroine's aim is to vindicate by imitation the vision and morals of Scott of the Antarctic.
DEMOCRACY ON TRIAL, by Jean Bethke Elshtain. (Basic Books, $20.) A thoughtful professor of ethics argues that the weakness of democratic institutions in America reflects the replacement of rights conceived as immunities from government interference by rights conceived as individual entitlements.
FELICIA'S JOURNEY, by William Trevor. (Viking, $21.95.) Mr.
Trevor's latest novel concerns an unmarried, pregnant, vulnerable Irish girl, wandering England's industrial Midlands until she encounters a predatory Englishman whose monstrosity remains long concealed.
THE GENERALS' WAR: The Inside Story of the Conflict in the Gulf, by Michael R. Gordon and Bernard E. Trainor. (Little, Brown, $27.95.) A lucid, meticulously researched report by the chief Pentagon correspondent of The New York Times and a retired general who is director of national security programs at Harvard's John F. Kennedy School of Government.
NIGHT: Night Life, Night Language, Sleep, and Dreams, by A. Alvarez. (Norton, $23.) Personal and literary explorations of the less visible (and therefore more conjectural) half of life by a gifted critic and acutely intuitive memoirist.
THE PAPERBOY, by Pete Dexter. (Random House, $23.) An eerie and beautiful novel whose emotionally alienated title character, a reporter in quest of facts only, is outmaneuvered by violent half-wits who know what they want.
REFLECTIONS OF EDEN: My Years With the Orangutans of Borneo, by Birute M.F.
Galdikas. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) An offbeat personal memoir that examines her own life and work, by a woman who studied the most autonomous ape.


LIVES WELL LIVED
In your "Lives Well Lived" issue (Jan. 1), Richard Nixon was the only one whose "tribute" was written by one of his bitterest critics.
Not a single notable achievement of this extraordinary man was mentioned.
Linus Pauling, on the other hand, was included without apology and without mention of his appropriation of the work of others that he claimed as his own or of his promotion of vitamin quackery.
The one specific scientific discovery attributed to Pauling in the tribute, the discovery of the alpha helix, was actually the brainchild of Dr.
Herman Branson, a black scientist who worked under Pauling at Caltech, in 1948-49.
Branson, who later became president of Lincoln University, wrote about his findings in the summer of 1949.
A year later, Pauling published them, listing Branson as a co-author, but in his 1988 book, he forgot Branson and took all the credit himself.


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
When I graduated from Mount Holyoke in 1954, I hoped I was headed for big things and important places, but who would have guessed the Smithsonian?
MARY L. SCHREIBER Ossining, N.Y.


Clinton Decides to Control, but Not Cut, the Deficit
In drafting the budget proposal he plans to send to Congress on Monday, President Clinton seriously considered more aggressive efforts to make deep reductions in the budget deficit.
Instead, a variety of political reasons led him to settle for keeping the deficit near its current level, Administration officials said today.
The President's budget calls for spending $1.6 trillion in the 1996 fiscal year, which begins in October.
It shows a deficit of $196.7 billion in 1996, up slightly from the $192.5 billion projected for this year.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Have Furniture, Need Home: Ikea Moving to Manhattan
Ikea, the Swedish furniture chain, is coming to Manhattan. Somewhere.
"We are looking all over," said Pamela Diaconis, a company spokeswoman in Plymouth Meeting, Pa.
"We're definitely coming, but there's nothing to report on the location yet."


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
Rosenbaum's damply amusing article on nude photos and body typing quotes a small calumny on E. A. Hooten, Harvard's influential and honored professor of anthropology.
W.
H.
Sheldon, building on much older ideas, introduced his three-vector (ecto-, meso-, endomorphy) system of somatotyping from nude photos.
He went on to develop another three-vector system for psychological typing.
The physical system appealed to Hooton, who had become frustrated by standard anthropological methods of measuring, which then had no way of synthesizing or integrating any whole-body aspects.
However, in his own research, he took no notice of Sheldon's other works, on temperamental types or criminality.
Rather, he called his system body-typing, not somatotyping, and he did not use Sheldon's terms.
He developed his own criteria for rating; in its main application, for the armed services, he sought to assess suitability for different kinds of service of different body types.
He never went in for "characterological" studies, as Profesor Hersey asserts, And he was not a racist.
His own system did not outlive him, and his armed forces study was never published.
W.
W.
HOWELLS Professor of Anthropology, Emeritus Harvard University Kittery Point, Me.


When Loss Yields To Magic and Hope
A Screenplay in Progress: Satchmo's Gang  A mixed-media event today at 2 P.M. and the next three weekends at the Walter Reade Theater, Lincoln Center, Manhattan Performed by the Fearless Theater Company and presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center as part of its Movies for Kids series Directed by Louise Tiranoff and Lynne McVeigh No rating 90 minutes


Birthday Party Disasters: The Search for Perfection
To the Editor:
I read the Jan. 22 article on children's birthday parties, "The Birthday Boom," as the survivor of two such extravaganzas.
First, my husband and I had an "at home" fourth birthday party for our daughter.
It was fun to plan and prepare, including baking the cake, but a disastrous execution: the apartment and I weren't the same for weeks.


How Owners Can Survive Delays of Justice System
To the Editor:
In regard to "Life of a Small Landlord," Jan. 15: More than 60 percent of all multifamily property owners are just like Oscar Perez: hardworking, proud people from different backgrounds willing to make an investment in New York's future.


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
Rosenbaum's article brought a flush to my cheeks, as I recalled my first summer job, back in 1963.
As one of four 18-year-old girls restricted to a back room in Widener Library, I sorted through 18,000 photos of naked Harvard men.
Our employer: the Harvard School of Public Health.
Our goal: to relate body measurements and body type to cause of death.


Union Point Journal; Pilloried On a List That's Guilt By Name
Wanting to squelch a rash of shoplifting, burglary and vandalism, the authorities in this small eastern Georgia city came up with a list of those assumed to be responsible.
Then they published it, an exercise that has turned into a variation of the colonial practice of using pillories to display residents for the scorn of fellow citizens.
But there was a troubling racial twist. All those on the list were black.


Jan. 29-Feb.4; Dial 1-800-MY-GURU
THINNER thighs.
Bigger bank account.
Steamier sex.
A successful Presidency?
So much is promised in the land of self-fulfillment where there is a man or woman with a plan in an infomercial, book, video, CD-ROM or even in cyberspace.
Americans have made the self-help business and its proponents millions of dollars a year. (Infomercials alone rang up $1 billion in sales in 1994, according to the National Informercial Marketing Association.) So it should come as no surprise that even President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton invited a trio of self-help gurus to Camp David just before the new year.


Jan. 20-Feb.4: The Mahatma's Legacy; Mandela Appeals to India For a Common Future
For those who see history as furnishing its own justice, Nelson Mandela's just-concluded visit to India was something to ponder.
In 1899 Mohandas K. Gandhi followed Indian indentured laborers to South Africa and started a 20-year sojourn there as a lawyer.
On his return, he brought the tactics of nonviolent protest developed in South Africa for use in India's independence struggle.


Wall Street; The Next Magic Bullet? Mediation
TRUE or false: Arbitration is a cheap, painless, streamlined way to settle disputes between brokers and customers, circumventing ugly court battles and leaving everyone smiling in the end.
If you answered true, you haven't been right about securities arbitration since the days when junk bonds were respectfully referred to as high-yield securities.


'He Called Me a Black Hoodlum'
"With a Child's Heart" is a small book produced by the Teachers and Writers Collaborative, a nonprofit group that sends writers to schools.
It is a collection of the work of fifth graders at P.S. 197 in Harlem last year.
Fai Walker-Davis, the writer-in-residence, handled the assignment, with the help of the school's teachers.


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
I wonder if Rosenbaum could use his excellent research technique to find my nude posture pictures, taken at Fort Lewis, Wash., in Oct. 1946.
We were just in from Japan, mostly draftees, with two years in the service.
A frontal picture was taken as part of the discharge procedure.


When Loss Yields To Magic and Hope
The Navigator  Buster Keaton, Kathryn McGuire Beginning Friday at Film Forum 2, 209 W. Houston St., Manhattan Directed by Buster Keaton and Donald Crisp No rating 64 minutes


Students Without Desks
Imagine conducting a second-grade class on a stairway landing, or holding science classes in a hallway, or having your office in a boys' lavatory.
These are real-life scenes that too many New York City teachers and schoolchildren do not have to imagine.
City schools are now so overcrowded that 1 out of every 11 students does not have a desk or chair.
Gymnasiums, auditoriums, even closets have been converted to classrooms.
The space crunch will get worse.
Total enrollment is expected to increase by 250,000 students in the next eight years, swelling the school population to more than 1.2 million by the year 2003.
These projections far exceed the system's ability to produce classroom seats -- especially now that operating and capital budgets for schools are being slashed to help balance the city budget.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Ho-Ho-Kus; A Borough That Guards Its Traditions
ALTHOUGH it is less than 20 miles from Manhattan and 2 miles from five major shopping malls in neighboring Paramus, the well-maintained 1.8-square-mile borough of Ho-Ho-Kus has changed little in the last 50 years.
Most of its housing stock is turn-of-the-century or earlier.
Its last major housing development, the Cheelcroft section, dates to the Great Depression, and a score of its houses are on the National or New Jersey Registers of Historic Places.


Fleece Fabric: Not Just for Skiing Anymore
WHAT: Polartec, the soft, cozy, synthetic fleece fabrics by Malden Mills of Lawrence, Mass.
Manufacturers like L. L. Bean, Timberland and North Face turn Polartec into outerwear for everything from skiing and kayaking to walking the dog.
ALIASES: Whether it's called Polarfleece, Polarplus, Polarlite (all Malden trademarks) or Synchilla (Patagonia's version), it's basically the same thing: knitted polyester occasionally mixed with materials like Lycra or nylon to make it more form-fitting.
BEYOND THE GREAT OUTDOORS: Henri Bendel started selling a private-label Polartec shirt with pinked edges ($98) last June.
Now, the store is making Polartec cardigans, vests, A-line skirts, baseball jackets and leggings in 18 fashion colors like sage, maize and cappuccino.
Nicole Miller's fall collection featured Polartec skirts, dresses and twin sets, and J. Crew recently added a Polartec bathrobe ($78) to its catalogue.
THE ATHLETES' CASE FOR POLARTEC: The fabric -- Malden makes it in 100 varieties and nearly 5,000 colors, prints and patterns -- is lightweight but extremely warm, and it dries quickly; garments meant to be worn next to the skin have anti-microbial properties, meaning they are hypoallergenic and resist mildew.
And unlike wool or cashmere, Polartec can be thrown into the washing machine.
The labels even say, "Do not dry clean." Malden Mills, which is privately owned, said Polartec's popularity had caused the company to grow at an annual rate of 20 percent for the last decade.
Last year, the company had worldwide sales of $400 million.
THE ENVIRONMENTALISTS' CASE FOR POLARTEC: Since 1993, Malden has been offering its Recycled Series -- Polartec made in part from recycled clear plastic soda bottles.
About 15 large bottles are used per jacket.
Malden estimates that it will use more than eight million pounds of recycled plastic this year (about 140 million bottles).
GROUNDS FOR APPEAL: "Customers have reacted viscerally to the feel of this fabric -- it's warm, cuddly and plush," said Gail Goldberg, a divisional merchandise manager at Bendel's.
"It's the Rolls-Royce of fleece fabrications." FIRST EXPERT WITNESS: "I live in a Polartec cocoon," said Sandy Pittman, the New York socialite, who has climbed the tallest peaks on all five continents and has traveled to both the North and South Poles.
"I was one of the last converts to it, because I tend to be a traditionalist. But after a soggy trip to the Arctic in wool knickers, I became a man-made-fiber gal."
Ms.
Pittman can't get enough of the stuff.
"I saw those great pieces at Bendel's and bought one of everything!" she said.
"I don't need to wear my technical pieces with gusseted arms and high-altitude zips while sitting in my New York apartment." SECOND EXPERT WITNESS: "I just wore one of my dresses to go ice skating," Nicole Miller said.
"It's the greatest fabric. It's more comfortable and versatile than wool. It's putting the ski-sweater business out of business. I feel the possibilities for it are unlimited. I'm thinking of making little suits out of it to wear to the office." THIRD EXPERT WITNESS: "I have a piece in every closet in my house," said Joan Alvarez, publisher and editorial director of Outdoor Retailer, a trade magazine.
"Anything that you can make out of fleece makes sense, whether for your head, hands or body." A SMALL DISSENT: "Personally, I wouldn't wear a dress made out of it," continued Ms.
Alvarez, who likes to wear a fleece sweater over her nightgown for early morning gardening.
"If you're talking about a garment that will add a half an inch to your butt, well, not a lot of women would like that." DAN SHAW


County Initiatives Gain Social Service Spotlight
ALTHOUGH much of the state and national spotlight has focused on Westchester's success with its workfare program as a means of achieving welfare reform, there are other elements of the county's social services initiatives that are being studied as potential models.
A program known as Front-End Detection, which has been in operation for the last five years, was intended to screen more effectively applications for public assistance.
Under this program, social service field investigators assess applicants' actual need for assistance, as part of an overall effort to reduce possible fraud.
Existing Home Relief cases are also investigated regularly to determine continuing need.


Stressing The Positive
To the Editor:


In Israel, a Utopia Recedes
IN 1934, IN PALESTINE, THE Polish violinist Bronislaw Huberman had a vision of an artistic utopia.
In this paradise, he said in a lecture, no class would have an exclusive claim on mankind's highest esthetic achievements.
Great art would be the birthright of all citizens.
He envisioned a place where populism would mean a universal dedication to the sublime.
Palestine could be such a place, he suggested, "the first country where we shall witness the miracle of an entire community culture." And the first step toward realizing that miracle was to create a new orchestra that would, in its performances, help create "One Great Spiritual Unity." "Let's work for Music in Palestine," he urged his audience.


Coleman's Out; Nets Lose
The Nets dressed only nine players tonight, and Derrick Coleman wasn't one of them.
Cut-and-paste basketball may work in other cities around the league, but it does not for New Jersey.
Dee Brown, coming off the bench, tied Larry Bird's club record, connecting for 7 3-pointers, and finished with 31 points as the Boston Celtics held off the Coleman and Kenny Anderson-less Nets, 92-78, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Even at the Bijou
To the Editor:
The exaggerated sound level to which the public has become accustomed seems to demand higher decibels; certainly rock concerts and recordings bear this out.
Even movie theaters are guilty of playing unbearably loud soundtracks.
ERNEST ULMER  New York


Whither 'Dog Man' and Dogs?
Eight months ago, the "Dog Man" disappeared.
Julius Feinstein, a scraggly, white-haired homeless man who ate and slept with a family of mixed-breed black Labrador retrievers, was a familiar sight in the East Village for more than a decade.
He and his canine friends -- estimates range between 4 and 14 -- lived in Tompkins Square Park and in dilapidated abandoned buildings.
Then, suddenly, they were gone.


Views of Humanity at the Stamford Museum and Nature Center
WHEN the talk turns to permanent collections, the Stamford Museum and Nature Center doesn't immediately come to mind.
Nevertheless, it seems that this bosky enclave owns as many works of art as it shelters animals, wild and domestic, displaying the items in installments.
The present excerpt consists of 65 paintings, prints, photographs and sculptures, all of them acquired during the last 25 years and all having to do with the human figure.


The Revenge of the Un-Hip
IT'S OFFICIAL: IT'S HIP TO BE square.
Collectors are paying top dollar for original albums from such 50's and 60's easy-listening fare as LP's designed for stereo testing and music played on Moogs and other primitve synthesizers.
The music's quirky arrangements and zany sound effects, its aura of opulence and optimism, are providing light relief for latter-day hipsters who have tired of the heaviness -- musical and emotional -- of today's alternative rock.
There are the beginnings of a reissue boom: "Space Age Bachelor Pad Music," a 1993 anthology of avant-Muzak compositions by Juan Garcia Esquivel, has sold so well that the independent label Bar/None will release a second Esquivel collection this spring.
Clubs have sprung up where martini-sipping nuevo sophisticates can chill to the mellow, mellifluous sounds of yesteryear.
London has Sound Spectrum and Indigo, Los Angeles has the Lava Lounge and Mr.
Phat's Royal Martini Den, and New York has Loser's Lounge at Fez, where the Kustard Kings, the house band, pays tribute to middle-of-the-road deities like Henry Mancini for a wig-wearing, lame-clad audience.


Jewelry With Radiance
TWO exhibitions of jewelry in radiant colors and gleaming gold can cheer the spirit and help dispel the gloom of winter.
The Princeton Enamel Guild is showing brooches with spring flowers, and there are hearts aplenty in the Valentine Jewelry Show at the Sheila Nussbaum Gallery in Millburn.
The Valentine show features a profuse selection of high-style brooches, earrings and necklaces that were handmade by 26 artists from 16 states.
One artist brought her work from Germany.
The craftsmanship throughout is top-notch.


The Nation; How the Federal Reserve Drops Hints
IN voting Wednesday to raise interest rates for the seventh time in a year, the Federal Reserve couched the justification in its usual language -- fear of rising wages and rising inflation.
But there was another dynamic also in play that in a way preordained the rate increase days before it happened.
A dialogue developed in January between the Fed's policymakers and the bond market, the latter being a collection of people who trade or manage or own trillions of dollars in Government bonds and other securities.
These securities depend for their value on interest rates.
So naturally, the bond market has strong views about which way rates should be moving -- lately up, thank you.


Virtual Democracy
I LOOKED IN THE mirror one morning and could no longer avoid the hard truth: I was a second-wave woman in a third-wave town.
I had never downloaded.
I had never demassified.
I had never even massified.
I had refused to get interactive.
I shuddered at the thought of gigabytes.
The last thing I wanted was a personal information manager, much less an E-mail address where a lot of digit-heads could flame me.


Tradition on the Wane: College Drinking
Not very long ago, Smokey Joe's, like a magnet, drew students to its horse shoe-shaped bar, with its wooden booths and photos of old University of Pennsylvania sports heroes.
The beer flowed freely.
Students from Penn, Drexel University, St.
Joseph's University and other colleges still come to the bar, but these days they are just as likely to order a Coke as a pitcher of Bud.
Call it the age of moderation.


Profile; A Silk Blouse on the Assembly Line? (Yes, the Boss's)
Deborah S. Kent remembers well her first day on the job.
There she was, standing at the entrance of the Ford assembly plant here, awed by the cavernous 3.3 million-square-foot building sitting on 419 neatly manicured acres.


Tradition on the Wane: College Drinking
Not very long ago, Smokey Joe's, like a magnet, drew students to its horse shoe-shaped bar, with its wooden booths and photos of old University of Pennsylvania sports heroes.
The beer flowed freely.
Students from Penn, Drexel University, St.
Joseph's University and other colleges still come to the bar, but these days they are just as likely to order a Coke as a pitcher of Bud.
Call it the age of moderation.


Sticking to the Rules -- A special report; Japan Reluctant to Accept Help From Abroad for Quake Victims
Colds and flu viruses, the medical aftershocks of last month's devastating earthquake, are rippling through the refugee camps where 270,000 people live huddled together in classrooms and tents here in western Japan, and some of the fragile elderly are dying of the flu.
But this week when an American relief organization offered to fly as many as one million doses of flu vaccine to Kobe within 48 hours, free of charge, the Government politely declined.
The Health and Welfare Ministry explained that Japanese-made vaccines would be sufficient, even though by its own calculation it would not have enough vaccine ready for nearly two more weeks.


DISSENT IMPERILS NOMINEE TO HEAD PORT AUTHORITY
Gov.
George E. Pataki's choice of a Conservative Party leader to head the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is facing growing resistance from the commissioners of the powerful agency, signaling that the much-criticized nomination may have to be withdrawn, or at the least delayed.
Nearly a month after Mr.
Pataki indicated that he would name the Conservative politician, George J. Marlin, to the influential post, few of the 12 commissioners who must approve the selection have spoken out in support of him.
And Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey, whose views will be carefully weighed by the commissioners, continues to withhold her endorsement.


Take a Broom And a Ball; Add Ice And Team Spirit. Call It Broomball.
IN the dense smoke that filled the lobby of Building 5 after the bombing of the World Trade Center in 1993, three lawmen briefly greeted one another.
Two had been on duty at the Port Authority Police command: Lieut.
George Leather, of the West Side Passenger Ship Terminal, and Officer Bernie Frain, of the PATH Journal Square Station.
Bob Irwin had responded as a member of the Treasury Department's Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms unit.
The three men were working together that day, but usually when they meet, they are at odds, facing off on an ice rink in Warinanco Park in Union County.
Each is a team captain in the Port Authority Police Broomball League.


The World; Bad Fences Make Bad Neighbors
FOR the moment, the shooting in the Andes has abated, and Peru and Ecuador may be content merely to trumpet their respective claims to a disputed section of their border.
But last week's conflict, which sparked patriotic marches and other nationalist outbursts in both countries, was sufficient to send a wave of alarm and resentment throughout Latin America, reminding more than a dozen other countries in the region that they too are parties to boundary grievances that could explode at any time.
Indeed, Latin American countries that have not engaged in some sort of border dispute are hard to find.
Argentina and Chile, two of the guarantors of the treaty that delineates the Peru-Ecuador border, nearly went to war themselves in 1979 over the chilly Beagle Channel in Tierra del Fuego.
Nicaragua claims a pair of islands in the Caribbean that are under Colombian control, and Colombia in turn has quarreled with Venezuela over a peninsula they share, while Venezuela has long argued with Guyana over their common border, and Guyana and Suriname have found it difficult to fix sections of their frontier.


On a man, a tuxedo is cool and debonair. But on a woman, it's positively . . . SMOKIN'


El Nino Takes a Supporting Role in Snowstorm
The influence of a weather pattern known as El Nino was evident once again in yesterday's storm, but a number of atmospheric forces converged by chance to drop more than a foot of snow in the Northeast.
By turns brutal and benign, El Nino -- a vast pool of warm water that appears from time to time in the tropical Pacific and sets off atmospheric reactions around the globe -- can show many faces.
Earlier in the winter, meteorologists say, it played a major role in southern California's disastrous rains while at the same time helping to bestow unseasonably mild weather on the Northeast.


Pick-Me-Up for Plants Without Overkill
NEW approaches to growing things are becoming deeply rooted in the garden world.
Some of these developments make the tasks a little bit easier.
Many are driven by market demands or production requirements.
A few have been spawned as a result of consumer agitation.
To boost plant growth, there is the plethora of fertilizers and extensive claims.
Most recently, gardeners have witnessed extraordinary results with a fairly new product that utilizes the benefits of research.
These are the enzyme growth stimulants applied directly to the soil.
Plants respond by producing stronger and deeper root systems, which lead to stronger growth.


On West 100th, the Parking Party's Over
With six wide traffic lanes, West 100th Street between Amsterdam and Columbus Avenues has always tempted drivers to double and triple park, with the results sometimes comic and sometimes distressing.
Motorists routinely drove onto sidewalks to extricate themselves from awkward spots, and neighbors recall frequent near-collisions between cars and pedestrians.
But don't even think of trying to double park on the block now: The police have started aggressive enforcement of parking rules there, and scofflaws are being ticketed and towed.


Tax 'Nightmare' Prompts Nassau To Seek Change in Fiscal Year
Faced with what members called an unanticipated tax nightmare, the Nassau County Board of Supervisors will seek state permission to repeal a recently enacted law that changed the county's fiscal year.
Officials said the new system, proposed by County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta and unanimously supported by the six board members last year, changed county and school tax collection dates in a way that sharply increased property taxes for 1995.


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
If I had I known I was in such potentially select company, the humiliation of being photographed might have been less painful, but I doubt it.
To learn that, figuratively, I've rubbed shoulders with Hillary Rodham Clinton and Diane Sawyer makes it somewhat easier to bear.
JUDITH WHITE POCKRISS Freeport, L.I.


Metro-North Works On East-West Axis
THERE is only one problem with moving around Fairfield and Westchester Counties by train: You can't always get there from here.
The three Metro-North passenger lines that serve Connecticut and Westchester Counties -- the New Haven, Harlem and Hudson lines -- all run roughly north to south.


Gen. Marshall Saw Dropping of Bomb on Japan as Necessary
To the Editor:
Re "Hiroshima, Rewritten" (Op-Ed, Jan. 31): Who can argue with Barton J. Bernstein that debate should occur about the use of the atomic bomb and that those who question the decision are not unpatriotic for so doing?
However, much of what he writes is so selective that we can understand why it raises the hackles of those who disagree with his view that the bomb was unnecessary and immoral.


Debra Chirichella, Charles Sabino Jr.
Debra Ann Chirichella, the director of operations and planning at K-III Communications, a media company, was married yesterday to Charles Anthony Sabino Jr., a marketing manager at Pfizer Inc., the pharmaceutical company.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Francis T. Maione, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Manhattan Penthouse in New York.
The bride, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
The bride's parents, Marilyn and James Chirichella, live in Carle Place, L.I., and work in the public schools there, she as a secretary and he as a maintenance worker.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
MONSTERS FOR ALL AGES
A special event for adults and one for children are scheduled today at the Katonah Museum of Art in connection with its current exhibition of "Medieval Monsters: Dragons and Fantastic Creatures."


2,009 Reasons to Play, but One Not To
The closer major league baseball comes to perhaps its most divisive and troubled spring training ever, the closer it comes to pitting its 750 striking major league players against those who would seek to replace them.
Intense negotiations between union and management officials continued here today in an effort to avoid that scenario.
Still, clubs are hiring replacement players.


Subway Fraud Suspect Sought In the Theft of Metrocards
The transit police are searching for someone who has been encoding blank Metrocards and then reselling them, at discount rates, to subway riders in the city, officials said yesterday.
Using supplies stolen from the New York City Transit Authority, the suspect has apparently been able to activate the electronic fare cards.
But so far, the cards' security code for use at the turnstiles has not been cracked, and the Transit Authority's main system has automatically invalidated the tampered cards, officials said.


Celebrating Black History
An exhibition by black architects in Chicago, jazz performances in New York and an archeological excavation at a Florida plantation are some of the events that will celebrate African-American culture across the nation during February, Black History Month.
Chicago's Museum of Science and Industry has a monthlong exhibition on black creativity in architecture, highlighting the first African-American architects, such as Paul Revere Williams, who built homes for celebrities in Hollywood in the 1940's, and Walter T. Bailey, who built churches in Chicago's "Black Metropolis" on the South Side.
Children can play with draftsmen's tools and architectural blocks.
For more information, write to the Museum of Science and Industry, 57th Street and Lake Shore Drive, Chicago, Ill. 60637, or call (312) 684-1414.
The museum is open from 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Monday through Friday; weekends and holidays from 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Admission is $6; $5 for seniors 65 and older; $2.50 for children ages 5 to 12; children under 5, free.


One Employee Buyout That Actually Worked
DAVE SIMARD, a 35-year-old worker at the sprawling paper mill here, is feeling flush these days.
He has just plowed $6,000 into a new roof on his trim, white-frame, three-bedroom house with forest-green shutters.
"Things are looking up, for sure," says Mr.
Simard, a 15-year veteran of the mill.
"Otherwise, I certainly wouldn't have undertaken all of this."


Jan. 20-Feb.4: Being an Amigo; Clinton Evades A Balky Congress To Prop Up the Peso
The White House always knew its $40 billion aid plan for the Mexican economy would be a tough sell in a Republican-controlled Congress.
What it didn't know was that Democrats, as well, would fight the President, denouncing the package as a bailout for rich investors and a waste of taxpayer money.
Last Tuesday, President Clinton pulled the plug.
Mexico's problems were too urgent to let Congress dither, he said.


He Wrote The Booklet On Brevity
THE PROPER MEMORIAL TO ANTON Webern's music will be about 100 words long.
No adjectives, please.
Some sentences will have no verbs at all.
In those that do, subjects will appear in sudden bursts of uppercase, predicates in small letters, relative clauses perhaps in italics.
The sentences, however few, will be swift and self-obliterating.
Webern has left no grand monuments to his art but in their place a string of miniatures fitting comfortably on three CD's and lasting less than four hours.
He died just 50 years ago, and what remains are those shining little sound bites so filled with passionate elegance.
The source of light they give off seems to vanish by the time we apprehend it.


Carrying the Chinatown Lions, Multiethnic Feet
In the Fu-Jow Pai studio in Chinatown last week, Nelson Lai tried to teach Avon Morgan, Joseph B. Fenton and Angel Cruz to move more like a Chinese lion -- that is, a bit less rock-and-roll in the hips.
At Wing Hong Yip's Dragon-Style Kung-Fu Studio, Mauricio Morales, 14, was too light on his feet.
The step should be rigid, not rhythmic.


The Wrong Road to the Greening of America
To the Editor:
"Big Environment Hits a Recession" (Jan. 1) describes the recent falloff in memberships and finances of major environmental organizations that boomed in the 1980's.
The writer quotes a report from the Center for the Study of American Business that cites a need to "trim down and stick to core competencies" as the best way to regain influence and check the decline -- a most unfortunate analysis that fails to recognize the primary reform that is required.


Irene Y. Bick, Edward A. Kister Jr.
Irene Yee Bick, a daughter of Edward and Ting Yee Bick of Toledo, Ohio, and Edward A. Kister Jr., a son of Edward and Geraldine Kister of Jekyll Island, Ga., were married yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
Galen Guengerich officiated at the Unitarian Church of All Souls.
Ms.
Bick, 39, is keeping her name.
She is a vice president and an account director at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct, a direct marketing agency in New York.
She graduated from Smith College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.


Romance Is Triumphant in 'Talley's Folly'
ON a moonlight July 4 in 1944 in a decaying Victorian boathouse, Matt Friedman, a 42-year-old accountant, comes to woo a very evasive 31-year-old nurse's aide named Sally Talley.
Matt tells the audience at once how long his "no-holds-barred love story" will last: 97 minutes, no break.
What happens in "Talley's Folly," in revival at the Forum Theater Group, during those 97 minutes is all talk, but what talk it is.
Lanford Wilson bathed the courtship tale of "two such private people, so much alike" with an appreciation of natural wonder that evokes the woods and the willows, the river and the fragrance of honeysuckle and the sound of crickets -- and a lyric grace that invited comparisons to the delicate poetic flights of early Tennessee Williams.


Return to the Fold
After a year in which he received national attention for a moment of support for President Clinton and an ill-fated endorsement of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is once again sounding like a Republican.
Breaking ranks with most other New York City officials, Mr.
Giuliani praised Gov.
George E. Pataki's austere budget, and even skated close in recent weeks to saying that he was mistaken during the fall campaign when he harshly assailed Mr.
Pataki as bad for the city.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about divisions on military issues among Republicans in Congress misstated the cost of closing a military fuel center in Anchorage, Alaska.
The cost is $500,000, not $500 million.


Kirsti Hastings and Alec McCabe
Kirsti Hastings, a daughter of Kari Hastings of Washington and the late Charles Hastings, was married yesterday to Alexander David Brackenridge McCabe, the son of Inger McCabe Elliott of New York and Robert K. McCabe of Paris.
The Rev.
Dr.
Peter Meek, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the summer residence of the bridegroom's family in Stonington, Conn.
Ms.
Hastings, 28, is keeping her name.
The bride and her husband, who is 31 and is known as Alec, are reporters in New York.
She works for the A.P.-Dow Jones News Service and he for Bloomberg Financial Markets Commodities News.
In the spring the bride expects to become a correspondent for A.P.-Dow Jones in Shanghai.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University.
The bridegroom graduated from Johns Hopkins University.
They received master's degrees in international affairs from Columbia University.


Full-Text TV
I HEARD WHAT SOUNDED LIKE A RACHmaninoff piano concerto on television the other day.
In its austere fashion, C-Span didn't identify the music it played to pass the time as the Senate moved toward a vote on, I think, a motion to table a Democratic amendment to the Republicans' Congressional Accountability Act.
I'm shaky on the details because C-Span encourages the mind to wander.
Mine wandered from Rachmaninoff and the sight of those Senators finally voting to subject themselves to the same laws they've imposed on the rest of us.
I then drifted into Robert Byrd's courtly cameo an hour earlier, protesting oh so sadly this usurpation of his West Virginia sovereignty, and into Edward Kennedy's shrewd taunt the day before that the Republicans might also give the rest of us the benefits they give themselves, like Government health insurance.
You too may have experienced such drift, stimulated by the alternating currents of tedium and excitement on C-Span's two channels.
They show the House and Senate at work and also their committees grilling or fawning over governors, lobbyists and Cabinet members.
They cover debates about the collapse of the peso, battles in Chechnya as covered by the 6 o'clock news in Moscow and weekly conversations with authors -- Steven Waldman last Sunday, discussing "The Bill: How the Adventures of Clinton's National Service Bill Reveal What Is Corrupt, Comic, Cynical -- and Noble -- About Washington." Talk, talk, talk.
Questions without answers.
Cameras that hardly budge projecting faces that delight, or bore, like dinner guests.


Northern Lights, South of the Park
CHINA GRILL * (212) 333-7788; 60 West 53d Street; $$$$; all major credit cards


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BETWEEN TWO WORLDS  Realism, Idealism, and American Foreign Policy After the Cold War.
By David Callahan.
HarperCollins, $25.


A Cozy Trip Close to Home
IT was a cruise devoid of glitz and glamour.
The ship had no spiral staircases, vast atriums or gilded accouterments, and if there were any slinky white satin gowns around, they were being slept in.
The weather was chilly and the destinations anything but exotic.
Yet the October week on the Star Odyssey was pleasant and relaxed.
The moderately sized ship provided a compact backdrop for the features that mean the most in a cruise, and for shore trips enhanced by glorious fall foliage.
The cruise essentials were all there -- vast quantities of food, good service, enjoyable if unremarkable entertainment and the inevitable gambling.
The difference in this cruise was twofold -- the ambiance, best described as cozy rather than elegant, and the passengers themselves.
Seven days in late October cruising on the Gulf of St.
Lawrence, the Atlantic Ocean and Cape Cod waters, even with visits to historic sites and the burnished colors of fall leaves, isn't everyone's cup of hot bouillon, but it sold out the ship.
That week (and, with minor changes, the three previous weeks) 750 passengers sailed on the 28,000-ton ship from Montreal to Quebec City; Sydney, Nova Scotia; Boston; Newport, R.I., and New York.


Habitat/41 Central Park West;
IN a flurry of accounting legerdemain worthy of a clerical Houdini, a film maker named John Huszar refinanced a country home and got a Manhattan co-op apartment -- for a grand total of $82 a month.
At least, that's what he tells people.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


A Spiritual Language
To the Editor:
Only a poet as gifted as Nuala Ni Dhomhnaill could illustrate the beautiful dilemma of the Irish speaker in a world dominated by the English language.


Legally or Not, 1-Family House Is Often Home To 2 Families
GEORGIANA and John Grant have raised eight children in their sprawling ranch-style house here while accumulating enough memories, friends and nearby grandchildren to want to stay in their home forever.
Thanks to the rental income from their second floor, now a two-bedroom apartment, they can.
"I hope they never move," Mrs.
Grant said of Kathleen and Hubertus Franke, the young professional couple who live upstairs.
"When they do, we would have to if we didn't have someone else to move in." Mrs.
Grant, a trustee of the village, is seeking re-election.
"We love Croton," she said, "and we're not moving. That's why we have the accessory apartment."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  U.S.
SETS TARIFFS ON CHINA  The Clinton Administration imposed punitive sanctions on more than $1 billion of goods, the largest such action in American history, charging that Beijing had refused to crack down on pirating of American software, movies and music.  1  U.S.
REVERSAL ON CHINA  News analysis: Despite moving last year to embrace China, Washington is now imposing tough sanctions.
But officials say the "engagement" policy endures.  1


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
THEATER OF THE DEAF
The broad, physical comedy involved in Eugene Labiche and Marc-Michel's 19th century French farce titled "The Italian Straw Hat" is particularly adaptable to the style of the National Theater of the Deaf.
For the past year the troupe has been on the road with the show in a 55-city tour of the United States and parts of Europe.
A single Connecticut performance will be given in Storrs, at the Jorgensen Auditorium on the UConn campus, today at 7 P.M.


Journal; PBS -- Better Than Nothing?
The only thing longer and less enlightening than a public television fund-raising drive may be the debate over the future of public television itself.
When we reach the point where Bert and Ernie hand puppets are appearing before a Congressional committee to plead for their lives, who wouldn't rather start worrying about the peso?
Both camps in this battle are now deep into hyperbolic overdrive, and neither has a monopoly on virtue.
So before I explain why I strongly believe public TV must be spared the Gingrich ax, let me say why reformers should nonetheless go after public television with a machete.


Liza M. Greene, Robert Pondiscio
Liza Melissa Greene, the promotion design director at Time magazine in New York, was married yesterday to Robert Anthony Pondiscio, Time's public affairs director.
The Rev.
John E. Denaro performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
George's Chapel in New York.
The bride graduated from Carnegie Mellon University.
She is the author of "New York for New Yorkers," a book to be published by W. W. Norton in the fall.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter L. Greene of New Canaan, Conn.
Her father, now retired, owned the Lawrence Company, a marketing concern formerly in New Canaan.


The Bill Murray Show Is Back and Swinging
He can, without any warning at all, slip into one of his many comedic personae.
Walking down the fairway, Bill Murray suddenly becomes Todd, the geeky "Saturday Night Live" guy who was Gilda Radner's comic foil in the Lupner living room.
He isn't wearing a plastic pocket protector for his ballpoint pens, but he is about to deliver a noogie to that bald guy over by the gallery ropes.
Then he is Dr.
Peter Venkman in "Ghostbusters," sidling up to an attractive woman as he did to Sigourney Weaver in the movie, stretching his rubbery features into a puppy dog gaze.
Pointing to her black leather jacket, he says, "Are you in a gang?"


No Headline
"When you can slide down a hill, with the snow blowing in your face, it's the best  feeling. It's a feeling you can't buy." LINDA ARNOLD, who sells sleds on Manhattan's East Side.  [ 43:4. ]


Investors Drop Mexico and Woo Peru
To the Editor:
Now that Mexico is no longer the darling of Latin America among investment bankers, it is good to know that Peru is.
Your Jan. 31 Business Day juxtaposition of "Peru: On the Very Fast Track" with "Plunge by Mexican Peso Jars U.S. Stocks" is ironic.
The Wall Street analysts who were so bullish on Mexico right up until the peso plunged in December now reassure investors that "Peru keeps getting better and better."


Some Gems: Excerpts
NEW YORK REVISITED By Henry James Frankin Square Press


Tour Complaint
To the Editor: In November a year ago my wife and I took a Club ABC Tour to Spain and Morocco.
On our return, I wrote a strong letter of complaint to ABC about some of our inadequate accommodations and, even more important, the practice of imprisoning the tour members in various rug and luggage shops while we waited to see the sights.
Though we complained to the local guide, it was clear that this general practice had the sanction of ABC.
Several hours of each day was wasted in this fashion in Morocco.


Data Bank/February 5, 1995
Data Bank/February 5, 1995
Index of Leading Indicators
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Monthly percent change
0.1
0.3
-0.1
Construction Spending
Monthly percent change
1.1
0.6
1.4
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
1.7
2.7
-0.4
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
0.8
-0.1
1.3
Employment
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
In thousands
124,639
124,600
124,600
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
7,498 (5.7)
7,200 (5.4)
7,300 (5.6)
Consumer Confidence
1985=100
102.1
103.4
100.4
Weekly Jobless Claims
Jan. 27
Jan. 20
Jan. 13
In thousands
326
325
339


Removing Obstacle, Helms Backs Nuclear Treaty With Russia
Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican, came out in favor of ratifying the Start-2 arms reduction treaty this week, thereby removing what the Administration had feared could be one of the biggest roadblocks to its quick approval.
Administration officials had worried that Mr.
Helms, who has opposed many treaties, would use his power as chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to delay Start-2.


Educating Billy


A Key State Rental-Housing Program Survives Test
WHEN the owner of a regulated apartment is allowed a rent increase to pay for major capital improvement work, should the increase become part of the permanent base rent?
Or should it drop off, as though it were a surcharge, after the cost is recovered?
This was the most significant question that the New York State Court of Appeals laid to rest in reaching a decision in December on a case that has been perking in the court system for 12 years.
The increase becomes part of the base rent, said the unanimous court, supporting the position of the state's Division of Housing and Community Renewal, which administers the Major Capital Improvement program, and of property owners themselves.


RESULTS PLUS
FIGURE SKATING  Bonaly Rallies to Take Fifth Title  Surya Bonaly of France surged from behind to win her fifth straight title at the European championships in Dortmund, Germany.
On an afternoon of mediocre skating, Bonaly's performance was clearly the best, with seven triple jumps, including a difficult and rare triple-lutz-triple-toe-loop combination.
Olga Markova of Russia, who led after the short program, had to settle for the silver medal, while Elena Liashenko of Ukraine placed third.
Bonaly's marks ranged from 5.7 to 5.9. (AP)


The Latest From Nascar: A 20-Race SuperTruck Series
Nascar's racing empire, already far-flung, gets a little bigger today when the sanctioning body inaugurates its SuperTruck Series, which now seems limited only by how fast the race-fabrication shops can build the newest racing vehicles in the United States.
The truck series begins at 5 P.M. (TNN cable, live) at Phoenix International Raceway with an 80-lap race around the mile oval.
The starting field was limited to 36 trucks, and with late entries rolling in over the last few days, the field may be full by race time today.
Phoenix is the first of 20 races in the series, which has already attracted such high-profile owners as Richard Childress and the man who drives his Winston Cup car, Dale Earnhardt.


CRIME
In bare outline, the plot of Margaret Woodward's enthralling first novel, STILL WATERS (Putnam, $22.95), sounds like yet another sensational treatment of a sordid crime of passion.
Someone has shot to death a rich and prominent socialite and her 15-year-old daughter, right in the foyer of their elegant home in an old, fashionable neighborhood in Mobile, Ala.
Someone is sitting in jail awaiting trial for the murders -- a richer and more prominent socialite, who is also the mistress of the dead woman's husband.
In the wry view of the family matriarch, the case boils down to this: "Money. Sex. Murder. It's great for TV."
The trial is hot and trashy, all right, and the outcome is a real jaw-dropper -- but that's beside the point.
What's the point?
"The interconnectedness of things, of families," according to the same wise matriarch.


A Spiritual Language
To the Editor:
Nuala Ni Dhomhnaill's essay "Why I Choose to Write in Irish, the Corpse That Sits Up and Talks Back" (Jan. 8) is sure to generate a bit of envy in American poets.
How affirming it must be to live in Ireland, where relatives lament the choice to write poetry in Irish rather than in English.
Here my relatives lament my choice to write poetry instead of crime novels.
JOAN MURRAY  Old Chatham, N.Y.


Fishing-Boat Owners Are Caught Between City Hall and the Deep Blue Sea
"Fresh fish! Fresh fish here!" Frank Russo's voice is clear as the winter sky, hawking piles of brilliant silver mullets on the foredeck of the Pastime Princess on Pier 3 in Sheepshead Bay.
A Russian woman tries to bargain and he shoos her away.
"She wants fresh fish for cheap," Mr.
Russo explains.
Alan Dresner says, "The whole economy here is built on fish." Mr.
Dresner, 44, is the owner of the 90-foot Apache V, another of the bay's 18-boat fleet.
"I don't have to put up with the rest of the planet most of the time because I'm not there."


PRESIDENT IMPOSES TRADE SANCTIONS ON CHINESE GOODS
The Clinton Administration imposed punitive tariffs today on more than $1 billion of Chinese goods, the largest trade sanctions in American history, and warned of further action if the Communist Government continued to refuse to crack down on rampant piracy of American software, movies and music.
The decision to impose 100 percent punitive tariffs on goods ranging from silk blouses to cellular telephones was met almost immediately by an angry Chinese announcement of tariffs against American goods.


An Unwelcome Reception for Megakitchen for Prison Meals
For much of its history, College Point was an underdeveloped community off Flushing Bay, with many vacant, swampy sections.
Its corporate park, along the Whitestone Expressway, was always searching for tenants despite its proximity to highways and bridges.
"For years, we waited for people to discover it," said the Queens Borough President, Claire Shulman.
"Now everyone wants to locate there."


It Might As Well Be Spring
A long flowered skirt seems to be many a young woman's cure for midwinter blahs.
Long day dresses and skirts in challis, satin and sheer fabrics printed with a profusion of blooms are usually worn over leggings for warmth.
While the weather has been mostly mild thus far, the spirits seem to need some brightening by this point in the season.
And the urge to defy the calendar is an old one: in the 1940's and 50's, women donned flower-trimmed velvet hats or pastel-colored felt ones.
The prints are worn with a variety of winter jackets, work boots or shoes with clunky heels and the proverbial backpack.





Patricia Highsmith, Writer Of Crime Tales, Dies at 74
Patricia Highsmith, the American writer whose tales of gentlemen murderers and psychological intrigue were often explorations of her own obsessions, died yesterday at Carita hospital in Locarno, Switzerland, near the village where she had lived since 1982.
She was 74.
No cause of death was given by hospital officials, The Associated Press reported.


11 Almost-Masters Ascend From the Vaults
FOR NEARLY A CENTURY, Louis Remy Mignot's "Niagara" has rested quietly in the vaults of the Brooklyn Museum, a likely candidate for eternal neglect.
Its surface, brown and dull with age, looked as if it had been painted with beef stock.
Because the painting is large, about 4 feet by 12 feet, it languished near the bottom of the museum's crowded restoration schedule.
In any case, the subject invited unflattering comparisons with the great Niagara Falls paintings of Frederic Church and George Inness.
"I walked right by it in storage for years," said Linda S. Ferber, the museum's chief curator and curator of American paintings and sculpture.
"I thought of it as a very large, extremely dirty knockoff of Church."


The Renter's Tale
It was not the first time I had made travel arrangements in haste.
When I reached the Dallas-Fort Worth airport I realized I hadn't reserved a rental car.
At the counter I was told cars were available only for those who had made a reservation.
I pleaded, I cajoled, I begged, to no avail.
Then I noticed a bank of telephones.
Leaving my luggage by the side of the rental car line, I went over and phoned the car rental company's 800 number.
I got a reservation.


The Maybrook Line And Its Rise and Fall
METRO-NORTH'S newest acquisition, the Maybrook Line, has a colorful history, one that parallels the ups and downs of train travel throughout the country.
The Maybrook is nearly 125 years old.
It was once a heavily used passenger and freight route, which eventually went into decline, said J. W. Swanberg, a transportation supervisor for Metro-North and -- as a railroad buff -- the company's ad hoc historian.
The route has been owned by several railroad companies.
It regained main line status in 1974, only to lose nearly all of its traffic by 1993.
Purchased last month by Metro-North, with an eye toward future passenger service, the Maybrook's future again is promising.


Salary Cap Vanishes; Problems Don't
Negotiators in baseball's increasingly complex labor dispute fought over the critical payroll tax issue again this evening, keeping one eye on the nearby White House and one on the ramifications of the owners' agreement with the National Labor Relations Board to withdraw their implemented salary-cap system.
The players, saying that "salaries would crash," rejected the tax plan the owners proposed last Wednesday and presented a new plan of their own.
The owners quickly provided a preliminary view, saying the proposal offered "little or no movement." Under the owners' plan, the Yankees would have paid $14 million in taxes on their 1994 payroll; they would pay $1.5 million under the players' plan.


A Touch of Class
For rail enthusiasts who long for glamour -- and can pay handsomely for it -- Abercrombie &amp; Kent has added a new car, the City of Angels, to its fleet.
With five double bedrooms and a dining room lighted by a crystal chandelier, the car can carry 10 overnight guests to any destination served by Amtrak in the United States or Canada.
With a chef, a steward and a concierge, passengers can roam the car, built in the style of a 1928 luxury coach.
Packages include an eight-day jaunt from Chicago through Glacier National Park to Seattle for $4,495 a person for eight. (800) 323-7308.


Ghettos, Energy, Romance, Wit: Six New Yorkers Give Their Picks
MICHELE WALLACE Associate Professor of English and Woman's Studies at City College and the C.U.N.Y.
Graduate Center
Her choices: "Enormous Changes at the Last Minute," by Grace Paley; "Invisible Man," by Ralph Ellison; "Brown Girl, Brownstones," by Paule Marshall; "Another Country," by James Baldwin; "Black Manhattan," by James Weldon Johnson; "Our Nig," by Harriet E. Wilson Jr.; "Harlem: The Making of a Ghetto," by Gilbert Osofsky; "Low Life," by Luc Sante; "The Devil Finds Work," by James Baldwin.


Mayor Returns to Fold
After a year in which he broke ranks with his party, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is again sounding like a Republican as he struggles to move beyond the gubernatorial election that put him on the wrong side of the national G.O.P. sweep.
News analysis, page 39.


Mississippi State Beats Arkansas, and Handily
Mississippi State 83, Arkansas 62
Darryl Wilson scored 25 points as Mississippi State beat the defending national champion, No. 8 Arkansas, 83-62, yesterday, taking over the lead in the Southeastern Conference Western Division and making a strong case for a top-25 ranking.


On the Far Side Of Reality
To the Editor:
The installation of television sets in theaters, as Vincent Canby speculates in "Look Who's Talking: Microphones"  [ Jan. 22 ] , may not be a trailblazing event after all.
Television monitors at many live events have already begun distancing us from the reality.
In August, more people view Saratoga's thoroughbred races on track monitors, in tents, under grandstands and in restaurants than at the rail side.
Yankee Stadium provides similar views of the game at various locations, including refreshment stands and on a huge screen over the outfield fence.
Overflow crowds for popular commencement speakers are sometimes moved to a separate room to allow monitoring of the ceremony.


Unfair Coverage
To the Sports Editor:
For a long time, it has been clear that the coverage in The New York Times of the current baseball players' strike has been heavily pro-union -- to a greater degree, in our judgment, than in any other newspapers in the country.
The Times's coverage reached new lows, however, last week.


In the Region/Connecticut; The Odds Favor More Gaming Locales in the State
SHORELINE STAR, a $40 million greyhound track and clubhouse with a seating capacity of 2,600 is under construction in Bridgeport on the banks of the Pequonnock River.
It will replace the Bridgeport Jai-Alai Fronton that has been operating since 1976 on 22 acres off exit 28 of Interstate 95.
When it opens in November it will feature remote betting computers at each seat, restaurants, bars, parimutuel wagering, simulcasting of nationwide sporting events and parking for 1,050 cars.


Washington's Other Crisis
The nation's capital -- Washington D.C. -- has a budget deficit equal to almost one-quarter of its whole budget.
The rapidly worsening fiscal mess is a scandal, largely the result of years of lax management by mayors and City Councils.
But it also reflects underlying political and economic forces that keep the city in the poorhouse.
The first responsibility for a solution lies with Mayor Marion Barry and the Council.
In that respect, the Mayor's emergency plan, announced Thursday, was disappointing.
It put too much emphasis on the need for a Federal bailout while proposing too little in the way of new cutbacks.


Streetscapes/1009 Fifth Avenue; Luxury Rental Units in a Fifth Avenue Mansion
ONE mansion on Fifth Avenue, the ebullient Beaux-Arts house at the southeast corner of 82d Street, is still in the hands of the descendants of its original owner, the tobacco magnate Benjamin N. Duke.
But although the descendants are still in charge of the house the family has owned since 1901, they have now shrunk their presence to a single room and are renovating the rest of the mansion as luxury rental units.
One of the units will be a quadruplex apartment renting for $50,000 a month.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about a rezoning plan for TriBeCa referred incorrectly to Jim Stratton.
He is a former chairman of Community Board 1; the current chairwoman is Anne Compoccia.


Ideas &amp; Trends: It's Pataki, Sounding Like Cuomo; Drug Wars, Cont.: The Liberals' Unlikely Ally
NEARLY a quarter of a century ago, when heroin addiction was at one of its peaks and no place was suffering more than New York City, Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller defied his own liberal reputation and came up with a plan: prison sentences so long that no one would dare have anything to do with drugs.
The Mayor of New York, John V. Lindsay, and his police commissioner, Patrick Murphy, argued that the Governor's sentences -- in some cases, life -- would have little effect on the compulsions of drug users but might very well bankrupt the state as the courts and prisons overflowed with addicts and others at the bottom of the drug world's feeding chain.


Jazz: International Language
To the Editor:
Joe Lovano  [ "A Saxophonist Who Doesn't Wear Armani," Jan. 15 ]  is a talented, hard working, exceptionally creative musician.
His success is because of these things.
What he wears and the color of his skin have nothing to do with it.


Thirty Cakes, Hold the Bride And Groom
VALENTINE'S DAY beckons, a time when the love industry kicks into overdrive.
Thirty wedding cakes are arriving by plane, car and van at Christie's Auction House for the third annual wedding cake competition sponsored by Domaine Carneros, Taittinger's California label.
The cakes are from all over the eastern seaboard, from Kittery Point, Me., to Sarasota, Fla.
The entries will be judged in two categories: "classical," for traditional creations, or "celebrity," in which designers and pastry chefs invent a whimsical cake that could be served at the wedding of their favorite celebrity, whether of the literary, historical, political, Broadway or Hollywood variety.


Jan. 20-Feb.4: Tribal Democracy; Apaches Spurn a Chance To Run a Nuclear Dump
For lack of a permanent resting place for high-level nuclear waste, piles of spent fuel rods continue to accumulate at nuclear reactors across the country.
The industry thought it had been granted a respite when Wendell Chino, president of the Mescalero Apaches in southern New Mexico, said his tribe might be willing to temporarily store the used fuel.
During the 40 years he proposed to care for the waste, he estimated that the fees would bring his people some $250 million.
Never mind that the state legislature and congressional delegation roundly condemned the plan, as did officials and business leaders of the neighboring town of Ruidoso, who felt that nuclear waste would scare off tourists.
So confident was Mr.
Chino that this was a good thing for his people that he put the matter to a vote, insisting all the while that tribal law gave him and the tribal council the power to make the final decision.


Business Diary: January 29 - February 3
THE ECONOMY Is This What the Federal Reserve Was Waiting For?
That was quick.
On Wednesday, in the most unsurprising event of the week, the Federal Reserve raised interest rates half a point, putting the Federal funds rate at exactly twice its level of a year ago (in the days of mortgage-refinancing bliss).
And on Friday came news that January's unemployment rate had turned higher for the first time in over two years, to 5.7 percent from 5.4, with job growth at a weak 134,000.
That's bad news for the jobless, of course, but it's just what the Fed wanted -- a too-strong economy means inflation.
But even as the Fed clamped down over the past year, the unemployment rate headed stubbornly lower -- until that mirror image cracked last week.
Needless to say, the stock market was giddy, with the Dow industrials rushing ahead by 57 points, its largest jump since summer, on the Big Board's sixth-busiest day ever.


Nursing Home Loses a Round On Extension
For two years now, neighbors of the Amsterdam Nursing Home on 112th Street and Amsterdam Avenue have been fighting a losing battle to stop the home from building a 13-story extension.
Residents say the construction would destroy the neighborhood's historic feel, deprive them of open space and spoil the view from the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine across the street.


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
Another anecdote for Ron Rosenbaum: it was widely circulated around New Haven in the 1960's that a Yale fraternity invited a group of women from one of the Seven Sister schools to a formal dinner party.
The women arrived at the fraternity house, met their hosts over cocktails, then adjourned to the dining room, where they discovered the basis on which they had been invited: around the table, as place cards, were their posture photos.
STEVEN D. PRICE New York


When Loss Yields To Magic and Hope
The Secret of Roan Inish  Jeni Courtney, Mick Lally, Eileen Colgan Directed by John Sayles PG 102 minutes


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
I can't believe you wasted space on such a nonscandal.
A "shocking, disturbing, dignity-piercing procedure" so "bizarre" it required a "two-step torching" to dispose of the evidence?
In no way!
If others have morphed as much as this 1947 Wellesley graduate has, there wouldn't be much cause for concern about recognition anyway.
TRUDY PERT Glenmont, N.Y.


In Hot Pursuit


The World: Models for China; Either Filthy and Free Or Clean and Mean
AT first glance, they couldn't be more different.
The tiny city-state of Singapore is scrubbed clean.
The authoritarian Government has made it a crime to chew gum or fail to flush a toilet, and litterers are humiliated by having their faces splashed across the pages of the Government-owned newspapers.
Taipei, the capital of Taiwan, is filthy, arguably the least inviting city in Southeast Asia.
The chaos of the streets there is matched only by the mayhem of the democratically elected legislature.
Fistfights are a regular event on the floor of the Parliament.
But different as they are, these two island-nations have one important thing in common.
Both offer a vision of the future for 1.2 billion Chinese on the mainland.
It is a future in which a Chinese-run government provides prosperity and security without sacrificing a distinctly Chinese way of life, with its reverence for the family and its reliance on hard work.


Tight Defense by Cavaliers Puts Pinch on the Pacers
Cavaliers 82, Pacers 73
John Williams scored 19 points and Bobby Phills made a short bank shot to stop a Cleveland dry spell in the fourth quarter last night as the host Cavaliers held off the Indiana Pacers, 82-73.


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
These were savvy students, the cream of the crop.
Didn't it occur to them to say no?
Whatever the photographs show, they reveal no backbone.
VIVIAN F. GILFEATHER Stamford, Conn.


Securing a Beachhead


Arkansas Senior Is Young, Gifted and Smart Enough to Capture a Wanamaker Mile
Older runners are invariably wiser than the young bucks who are always challenging them, so they often win races with the head.
But when the young runner has a good tactical mind and can stay with the old master, another truism takes over:
Young legs can beat old legs.


Safe or Brash: Men's Shows Walk the Line
TEN days ago, Judy Rice, a fashion show producer, started auditioning models for the sportswear designer Barry Bricken's first runway show.
"How was Milan?" she asked Troy Hixson, a model who had just returned from the men's shows in Italy, where some male models carried clutch pocketbooks on the runway at both the Versus and Moschino shows and wore red nail polish at Dolce &amp; Gabbana.


Bless Her Pointy Little Feet
FOREVER BARBIE The Unauthorized Biography of a Real Doll.
By M. G. Lord.
Illustrated. 326 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $25.
DREAM DOLL  The Ruth Handler Story.
By Ruth Handler with Jacqueline Shannon.
Illustrated. 230 pp.
Stamford, Conn.: Longmeadow Press. $19.95.


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
I inferred from your article that the photos of my Yale class ('58) probably vanished in "the Yale bonfire of the late 70's," but my feelings are perhaps more mixed than those of some of my more illustrious classmates.
What would be an embarrassment to them could be my 15 minutes of fame.
"Nude Photo of Hitherto Obscure, Aging English Instructor Scandalizes Campus."


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
Aaargh!
Ron Rosenbaum and, no doubt, Chief Blue Eagle saw my posture pictures!
Aaargh! (Jan. 15.) I well remember that long-ago day and the embarrassed freshmen in the Vassar gym.
Titters, and rumors that the pictures would surface at Yale.
I also remember that a number of goddesses who looked so cool in their cashmere sweaters and circle pins had awful body proportions.
Cheered me up.
My proportions were pronounced "almost ideal" (ha!), except that my spine curved a bit.
LYN STALLWORTH Brooklyn


Boom Bypasses Argentina's Jobless
Despite a booming economy in Argentina, the unemployment rate has risen sharply over the last two years, after the Government began selling off state-owned industries in 1990 as part of its economic reform program.
"The Government makes these big economic changes that look good on paper, but it doesn't think about what impact they will have on the average person in the street," said Adolfo Grassi, a 42-year-old machinist who worked for the railroads for two decades and who has been without steady work since 1992.


The Neediest Cases; Finding Aid and Support On Road Back to Health
As she lies quietly in her hospital room, Ramona S. said, her gaze may be unfocused but her mind is working at full speed, recollecting her past, leafing through a picture album of memories.
She realizes that the best times have been those of good health.
In April 1989, Mrs.
S., 55, then an administrative aide at Police Department headquarters in Manhattan, fell while running to answer a co-worker's phone, fracturing her leg and severely spraining her back.
Her recovery was complicated when she developed thrombosis, or blood clots, in her legs.
She was out of work for a year.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Can a String of Numbers Tie the Universe Together?
DRIVEN by the faith that God must be a geometer, physicists have spent the century searching for particles -- tiny shards of mathematics -- that show we live in a symmetrical world.
Many of the particles have been discovered raining from the sky, unleashed by cosmic rays bombarding the atmosphere.
But many times the particles have been discovered not in the scientists' laboratories but in their equations.
They were imagined into existence, conjured from thin air.
Last week, when scientists at Los Alamos National Laboratories announced that they had taken a giant step toward a goal high on physics' agenda -- showing that the neutrino has a tiny mass -- they spoke of these barely corporeal particles with all the confidence of a geologist describing rocks.
How far they had come from the day more than 60 years ago when neutrinos were invented as an accounting device, a mathematical fiction to make a set of equations fly.


The Education of Robert Rubin
ROBERT E. RUBIN first heard about Mexico's currency crisis when he was on Christmas vacation in the British Virgin Islands, just weeks before his move from the National Economic Council in the White House to the office of Secretary of the Treasury.
His initial instinct, he tells visitors with the self-deprecating half-smile that has become his trademark in Washington, was to let the Mexicans and the market sort it out, and to return to the important business of casting for bonefish in the azure waters of the Caribbean.
"My first reaction was that financial distress in Mexico was a very serious problem," he said the other day.
"But other countries have had financial problems and the appropriate adjustments get made." The phone kept ringing, though, with a series of increasingly dire warnings from the undersecretary of the treasury, Lawrence H. Summers, and the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, about what could happen next if a currency crisis turned into something far worse.


Old Faithful Caper
To the Editor: My husband and I found Betsy Wade's article on Yellowstone Park ("Yellowstone's Subtler Rites of Passage," Dec. 18) and the origin of the Old Faithful Caper most interesting.
As summer employees of the Yellowstone Park Company in 1954 and 1955, we were very familiar with the story of the youthful workers and the steering wheel.


Choreographing a Singular American Creation
ASKED IF THEY'VE EVER SEEN any jazz dance, most people, dance enthusiasts included, would be stumped.
It isn't the latest hip-hop step on MTV.
It isn't the nimble footwork of most chorus lines on Broadway.
And for all their high kicks, the Rockettes aren't jazzy.
But think of Fred Astaire, rhythm reverberating through his fingertips, as he dances "One for My Baby" in "The Sky's the Limit." Or Rita Hayworth, hair flying, as she gleefully jitterbugs in "Tonight and Every Night." "That's a dreadful musical," says Billy Siegenfeld, a jazz-dance choreographer who teaches at Northwestern University.
"But the dancing is just -- ah!"
Those dances to ah over, so clever, so vivid, so familiar, belong to the rich heritage of an all-American genre nearly everyone has seen but surprisingly few know by name.
Purists define jazz dance as American dancing performed to and with the rhythms of jazz music -- dance that swings.
Aficionados can spot it by its syncopation and rhythmic complexity, with the rhythm articulated by the entire body.
Like modern dance, jazz dance moves low into the ground; it never defies gravity like ballet.
And the fluid, physical movements are strictly vernacular, based on the way real people move.
Some call it urban folk dance.


Artichokes Spread to Easterners' Back Yards
FOR years, the artichoke has been something only Californians could grow.
But now, agricultural gurus are saying that we poor deprived Easterners, given enough horticultural gymnastics, can grow them, too.
"And the taste is fantastic," said David E. Hill, an agricultural scientist at the Connecticut Research Station in New Haven, who has been growing artichokes since 1987.
"They're better than California artichokes, because those are 10 days old by the time they get here. These are fresh. There's nothing like cutting an artichoke off the plant and putting it in boiling water."


In the Bizarre L.I.R.R. Trial, Equally Bizarre Confrontations
THEY dreaded the moment, they said, when they would be face to face with Colin Ferguson, the accused killer of six Long Island Rail Road commuters a year ago.
But however painful, the surviving victims and family members said, it was a moment that they wanted to put behind them, if only to see justice done.


SOUND
Portable record players with built-in speakers, from the 1960's, are the latest points on hipster score cards.
In some cases, they are the only way to listen to many of the old LP or 45-r.p.m. recordings still around but not released on cassette or CD.
Usually available in white plastic or metal, they can be found in flea markets and secondhand stores.
One style has the arm cast in the shape of a cobra. (Don Hogan Charles/The New York Times)


The Hotspur Connection
THE HOUSE OF PERCY  Honor, Melancholy, and Imagination in a Southern Family.
By Bertram Wyatt-Brown.
Illustrated. 454 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $30.


INSIDE
Pain of the Budget Cuts
A billion-dollar-plus proposed cut in New York State's Medicaid and welfare programs has stirred anger, fear and confusion among those enrolled.
Page 39.
F.A.A.
Accused of Cover-Up
An official said the Federal Aviation Administration apparently tried to conceal intervention by a senator in a crash inquiry.
Page 24.
Dutch Face Flood's Legacy
For generations, the Dutch put faith in technology to prevent flooding in their low-lying country.
That faith has been severely tested.
Page 10.


Thompson Technical Helps Miami Stun Georgetown
Miami 67, Georgetown 61
The Miami Hurricanes took advantage of a late technical foul against Coach John Thompson and upset No. 13 Georgetown, 67-61, last night in Miami.
The technical, which came when Thompson protested a foul called with 4 minutes 14 seconds left, cost Georgetown momentum and allowed the Hurricanes to score 4 points on their next possession for a 60-49 lead.


A Week Underscored by Piano Concerts
MUSIC for the keyboard is plentiful this week, highlighted by visits from three outstanding pianists.
This afternoon at 3, Peter Serkin meets the Greenleaf Chamber Players at Purchase College, joining the ensemble for Mozart's Trio for Oboe, Cello and Piano (K. 502), and the F minor Quintet of Brahms.
Another guest artist, the soprano Jayne West, sings works by Bach and Stravinsky.
Tickets will be available at the door.
The number for more information is 251-6200.
Usually, Menahem Pressler's schedule with the Beaux Arts Trio leaves little time for solo appearances, but the pianist is giving a recital this afternon at 4 at the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck, where he willl play two Beethoven Sonatas and the 24 Chopin Preludes.
For more details, call 698-0098.


Experts Focus On Stagnating Food Supplies
Confronted with the expectation that the world's population will grow by at least 2 billion people in the next two decades and the reality that demands for basic foods are already outstripping supply, international experts will meet in Switzerland on Thursday to discuss urgently needed advances in agricultural technology.
"Unless there is a major investment in transforming technology, we are in for very severe problems," said Ismail Serageldin, the World Bank's vice president for environmentally sustainable development and the chairman of its Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research, which called the meeting.


Clearing the Air A Bit in the Skies
THERE is good news for air passengers yearning to breathe free.
Mexico, yielding to pressure from the United States, is dropping its requirement that the cabins of arriving planes be sprayed with insecticide.
This means that at least 5.1 million air passengers who travel there each year from the United States -- the total is for 1993, the most recent year available -- will no longer be subjected to the insecticide d-phenothrin before they land.
Mexico said its own airlines would act immediately and foreign lines would be notified promptly.


Virginia Legislature Rejects Tax-Cut Proposal
The Virginia Legislature this week sank a fleet of Gov.
George F. Allen's plans for change in a single afternoon, leaving him to gaze with envy at his fellow Republicans across the Potomac River in Washington.
In what Mr.
Allen called a "Thursday evening massacre," the Democrats who control the General Assembly killed his bills to cut taxes, build prisons, restrict welfare, discourage abortion and deregulate some schools.
Mr.
Allen got a hint of what was coming the day before, when his effort to repeal sex education in the schools failed.


Foreign Affairs; Maybe, Maybe Not
To understand the mood in Israel today you have to understand what the handshake between Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat did for Israelis -- even the most hard-line.
What it did, say Israelis, was introduce a new word into their diplomatic lexicon: "Maybe." Maybe this war with the Palestinians is not forever, maybe we can live together in two states, maybe tomorrow can be different from yesterday.
Maybe.
But after the latest Palestinian suicide attack on Israelis at Beit Lid, an older phrase is creeping back into the Hebrew lexicon: "Maybe not." That is why this peace process is in trouble.
That is why the next stage -- Israeli redeployment from Arab areas in the West Bank, followed by Palestinian elections -- will not happen any time soon.
That is why some anonymous soul just draped a banner on a bridge in Tel Aviv, which says simply: "Rabin: Wait A Second."


A Spiritual Language
To the Editor:
Thank you for Nuala Ni Dhomhnaill's essay on the Irish language.


Sleep Disorders And Lyme Disease
As a former sufferer of chronic sleep disorder, I read with great interest the article "Sleep Disorders and Sleep Centers Are on the Rise" (Jan. 15).
It is a welcome relief to learn that physicians and hospitals are moving to help those who suffer from this disturbance.
However, I would strongly advise any and all "sleep specialists" and physicians, when dealing with patients suffering from sleep deprivation or sleep disturbance disorder, to consider ruling out Lyme disease, as these disorders can be a major maker of neurologic Lyme.
I was riveted by the "coincidental" escalation of sleep centers in New Jersey just as the state's cases of Lyme disease continue to escalate.


In Pursuit of Nature's Beauty
THE first canvas in "American Landscapes," on view in the gallery at Bristol-Myers Squibb here, is "Marsh Scene at Dusk With Sailboat" (1868), by Martin Johnson Heade.
The work is characteristically Luminist, not only in its preternatural stillness but also in the quality of its sunset, which recalls the historian John Wilmerding's observation that the "meteorology" of Luminism was facilitated by the introduction of cadmium pigments.
It is a small work, all but overwhelmed by a gold frame that is its equal in area -- perhaps larger.
There are many such frames in the show and, as usual, they prove that ornament designed to separate art from a busy 19th-century context becomes an irritating distraction when used in a simple contemporary setting.


How The County's Workfare Set a Trend
TWO years ago, William Howard, 35, was out of work and as he describes it, "down on my luck," barely getting by from one month to the next on a welfare check.
He has since obtained a driver's license, landed a full-time job and become the father of a son who is now 3 months old.
Similarly, Agnes DiRenzo, 55, was unemployed with few prospects until recently, unable to pay her bills and afraid she would lose her small apartment, the only home she has known for more than 30 years.


Greek Food and Unassuming Charm
TO say Athena in Bellmore is a Greek storefront is like calling the Empire State a tall building.
Yes, the newcomer next to a Chinese takeout on Merrick Road clearly fits the definition of storefront.
But its exceptional food and charming look incorporating classical architectural features and masses of green plants set it apart.
Cream-colored walls are outlined with a white chair rail in the Greek key pattern.
Near the ceiling a wallpaper frieze of Greek vases encircles the room.
Doric and Ionic columns are everywhere, in pictures, as plant stands and as wood carvings affixed to the wall.
Tables with the look of green marble mesh with the Hellenic style.


Where to Dine With Views Of Sydney's Famous Harbor
SYDNEY, like any gastronomic capital, attracts the best: sardines from Western Australia, scallops from Queensland, Pacific oysters from Tasmania, olive oil from South Australia, cheeses from Victoria and wines from all over the continent.
Combining with these are the city's own specialties, like the delectable Sydney rock oyster, or the distinctive red and white wines of Hunter Valley, just a couple of hours north of the city.
Having worked with such choice ingredients for years, today's chefs are past the stage of rampant experimentation.
Their cuisine, while still innovative, now shows maturity and confidence in the blending of flavors and the application of techniques.
Their restaurants reflect the self-assured style of the city: slick, breezy and at times brash, and quite distinct from other large Australian cities like Melbourne or Adelaide.


The World: The History That Tripped Over Memory; War of Words: What the Museum Couldn't Say
IF the curators and historians had had their way, a visitor to the National Air and Space Museum would have had a chance, starting in May, to walk through an extraordinary exhibition designed to provoke questions, thought and perhaps debate about the dropping of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima 50 years ago.
The exhibit was going to be big, so big they figured they would have to restrict entry.
But nobody will see that exhibit as it was originally envisioned, and as it is depicted here.
I.
Michael Heyman, who inherited what became the Enola Gay debacle when he took over as Secretary of the Smithsonian four months ago, announced last week that the renovated fuselage of the plane that dropped the bomb, along with a plaque and a video, are all that will remain.


Shelley Zacharia, Norman M. Brier
Shelley Zacharia, a daughter of Susan Hazan of New York and Isaac H. Zacharia of Southampton, L.I., is to be married today to Dr.
Norman M. Brier, the son of the late Aaron and Estelle Brier.
Rabbi Arnold B. Marans is to perform the ceremony at the St.
Regis in New York.
The bride is the founder and director of Tutoring for Children, an educational service with headquarters in New York for children working in television, theater, film and music.
She graduated from New York University and received a master's degree in elementary education from Hofstra University.


How Queens Got Its Name
Queen Catherine?
"Most people don't realize that the borough of Queens was named for Catherine of Braganza," says Manuel Sousa.
She was the Portuguese-born wife of King Charles II of England.
A 35-foot statue is under construction at the Tallix art foundry in Beacon, N.Y.
Catherine's statue, pictured above, is now incarnated in clay, an intermediate step to the final bronze.
In 1998 the full statue will be erected on the waterfront at Hunters Point, across the East River from the United Nations.


Pumping Energy Into Urban Spaces
IT IS THRILLING TO SEE THE WORK of Zaha Hadid that just went on view at Grand Central Terminal.
Part of the pleasure comes from knowing that the prime midtown Manhattan location will make it possible for a large and diverse audience to see this extravagantly gifted architect's designs.
In addition, a great metropolitan transportation hub provides Ms.
Hadid's work with an ideal setting.
Like Erich Mendelsohn, the early-20th-century German Expressionist, Ms.
Hadid designs buildings that powerfully convey a sense of dynamic movement.
To see them here, in America's finest temple to civilized circulation, is to gain a deeper sense of their historical and urban dimension.
Ms.
Hadid, who is 43 and lives in London, was first introduced to New York audiences in 1988 at the Museum of Modern Art's show "Deconstructivist Architecture," where she was represented by her design for the Peak athletic club in Hong Kong.
Two years ago, she created the superb exhibition design for "The Great Utopia," the Guggenheim's monumental survey of the Russian avant-garde.
"Zaha Hadid: Projects," which is on view this month in the terminal's main waiting room, allows the Iraqi-born architect to shine on her own.
She dazzles.


'Sensitive' Budget for a Single Constituent
The mixed reactions in New York City to Gov.
George E. Pataki's budget plan has highlighted a truism of state and municipal finances: what's good for the Mayor's budget may not always be good for the average New Yorker.
That fact goes a long way toward explaining why Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani praised the state budget as "sensitive to the needs of the city" -- even though Mr.
Pataki proposed cutting $128 million in aid to the city's subways and buses, $158 million to the City University of New York and nearly $2 billion from Medicaid and welfare programs that roughly 1 in 7 New Yorkers rely on.


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
Throughout history, scientists have embarked upon investigations that have turned out to be dead ends.
It is small minded to look back, through the lens of political correctness, and indict the practitioners of what seems to have been just a naive idea.


An Ordinary Boy In the Weirdness Of Hollywood
OUTGOING and gracious, Zane Carney handles questions about his career with aplomb.
But he would rather show off his collection of video games or talk about how much he likes the rock band Aerosmith and the action movie "Street Fighter." Given any kind of small, round object, he turns into a perpetual-motion machine, offering a juggling exhibition with only the slightest encouragement.
Sometimes this exasperates his mother, Marti Heil-Carney, who has a bowl full of balls that she has confiscated from him.
In other words, Zane, a 9 1/2-year-old Clinton native, acts like an ordinary boy.
But these days he is caught up in extraordinary circumstances.
For two years, Zane has worked in Hollywood, portraying Tommy Barry in the sitcom "Dave's World," seen on Monday nights on CBS.


St. John's A Double Loser To UConn
It would have been nice if the current group of St.
John's basketball players could have proudly defended the legacy of the players who had gone before them.
Chris Mullin, Mark Jackson and Walter Berry must have taken great pride in setting the Big East record with 14 straight regular-season victories during the 1984-85 season.
It was a record that stood for 10 years -- until last night.
Despite being in position to at least save a piece of that record as part of its own tradition, St.
John's proved just how much things can change in a decade.
Fourth-ranked Connecticut, with an obvious edge in talent, depth and determination, outclassed the Red Storm, 99-82, at Madison Square Garden, claiming a record 15th consecutive Big East regular-season victory in the process.


Major Turns Cool to British Links With European Union
Four years ago, when the drive for closer integration of European countries seemed to be moving ahead inexorably, Prime Minister John Major signaled his desire to join in by proclaiming that Britain belongs "at the heart of Europe."
Now, it is not at all certain that the drive is still gaining ground.
And as far as Mr.
Major is concerned, one thing is clear: Britain's heart does not belong to Europe.


U.S. Pair's Chemistry Too Solid For France
When the call came last April from Jared Palmer, Richey Reneberg was ready.
Palmer proposed that they play doubles together.
"I didn't have to think twice about it," Reneberg said today.
"I felt we'd make a strong team."


The Root Is the Problem
EVERY spring, as grass turns greener and the buds turn to leaves on the tree limbs, thousands of homeowners turn to their telephone books for the number of the nearest drain-cleaning contractor.
For outside their homes, beneath the lawn and at the other end of the budding branches, millions of thirsty roots are busy clogging up household sewer lines.


Reimagining Berlin
WHAT STRUCK ME FIRST IN BERLIN WAS not energy but emptiness.
This city that is supposed to be the capital of the new Europe begins with a void, with the startling discovery that its center is 17 acres of weeds and debris.
Where the streets lead you as you seek out its heart turns out to be . . . a sprawling vacant lot.
Some of it is surrounded by fences, but most of it is open, and since Berlin has few tall buildings, there is almost no skyline to frame this lunar landscape.
Berlin's two most famous landmarks, the Brandenburg Gate and the Reichstag, hover in the distance, while the foreground is all nothingness.
It is as if Times Square had been replaced by a chunk of the New Jersey Meadowlands.
This was once Potsdamer Platz, Berlin's commercial heart, so busy in the 1920's that it received the world's first traffic light.
For the last 50 years, it has been empty, damaged by Allied bombs and finished off by the East Germans, who rammed the Berlin wall right through its center and tore down what remained of the surrounding blocks.
This is all about to change: ground has already been broken for a vast office and retail complex sponsored by Daimler-Benz, and Sony plans to build its European headquarters here.
Today, though, five years after the wall fell, most of Potsdamer Platz is still a wind-swept, dreary wasteland, laughing in the face of Berlin's much-vaunted intentions to reclaim the glories of its past.


At Work; Women Seeking a Working Agenda
IT takes a certain je ne sais quoi to plan a political agenda these days without once muttering the imprecation "middle class tax cut." Yet seldom were heard those monotonous code words late last month when some three dozen representatives of business, government and scholarship gathered for a weekend meeting of the Women's Voices for the Economy Commission.
The task of the privately sponsored commission: to develop what its members are calling a new "women's economic agenda" and use it as an organizing tool, in the process lowering some of the partisan barriers among women's groups.
To cut costs, the group met not in Washington, but just outside, in Arlington, Va., an edge-city Oz that resembles late 20th century suburban America, where most voters live, more than does the company town across the river.


World Markets; A Headlong Crawl Toward Capitalism
"I HOPE we can avoid a Mexico-type collapse," Hungary's reformist-minded former Finance Minister, Laszlo Bekesi, said last week after being dismissed in a battle over plans to accelerate the privatization of state-owned companies and complete the country's transition to a market economy by 1998.
His warning, as well as his fall from grace, are the latest signs that five years after the countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union began their march toward capitalism, several of the most important are stumbling just as their economic prospects start to improve.


Weisman Is Joining Times Editorial Page
The appointment of Steven R. Weisman to the editorial board of The New York Times was announced yesterday by Howell Raines, editorial page editor.
Mr.
Weisman has been deputy foreign editor of The Times since 1992.
In his new position, he will write editorials on city, state and Federal budget issues and on foreign affairs.


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
I was enrolled in a master's program at City University in 1950, having graduated from Hunter College with a psychology major.
The Sheldon classification and its ramifications were beginning to appear in the literature.
I needed a thesis project and wrote to Professor Sheldon, who was then at Columbia.
Back came a reply (how I wish I had kept it!) stating that I was welcome to join the research -- if I could get him permission to photograph the entire Hunter freshman class.
I thought then that the notion was absurd; at any rate, I gave the project up very quickly.
LORA S. SIMON Amherst, Mass.


Barbara A. Butler, Reginald C. Foster
Barbara Allyn Butler, a Washington lawyer, was married yesterday to Reginald Candler Foster, a vice president of American Management Systems, a consulting company in Fairfax, Va.
The Rev.
Robert Thayer, a Unitarian-Universalist minister, officiated at the Memorial Church at Harvard University in Cambridge, Mass.
The bride, 40, graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and received a master's degree in zoology from the University of Washington, a master's degree in cell biology from Vanderbilt University and her law degree from Boston College.
She is a member of the United States Patent Bar and formerly was an assistant attorney general of Tennessee in Nashville.


Knicks Have Makeover, But Will It Be Enough?
With a 106-86 victory over the 76ers in hand, the Knicks mushed out of town Friday night in a snowstorm, heading for Orlando where the weather will be warmer but the reception will be even chillier.
The Magic holds a five-game lead over New York in the Atlantic Division and boasts the psychic edge of having bullied the Knicks by 25 points, 125-100, when these teams met in Florida in early December.
For the Knicks, Sunday's rematch is an urgent matter of catching up, in the standings, in their own minds.


The Divine Dog Syndrome and Other Rules of Film Making
"YOU GO TO ENOUGH different movies, you start to notice things," writes the film critic Roger Ebert in his new book, "Ebert's Little Movie Glossary." "Like how every time there's a chase scene in an exotic locale, a fruit cart gets overturned. Or how whenever the hero knocks out a Nazi sentry and puts on his uniform, the uniform is a perfect fit."
Observations like these, according to Mr.
Ebert, cry out to be organized.
Which is what he has done.
His book, subtitled "A Compendium of Movie Cliches, Stereotypes, Obligatory Scenes, Hackneyed Formulas, Shopworn Conventions and Outdated Archetypes," comprises Mr.
Ebert's observations and those sent to him by moviegoers around the country.
Here are samples from what might be considered a nontribute to the idiot plot.


On Implants
To the Sports Editor:
I am pleased to see that the effectiveness of cochlear implant surgery has advanced enough to be accepted by such a high-profile figure as Gil McDougald and that it has improved McDougald's life enough to be written about with such feelings by Ira Berkow ("The Sweetest Sound of All," The Times, Jan. 4).
As experts in the deaf community have known for many years, cochlear implants can dramatically improve a deaf person's life, by allowing him or her to experience sensations similar to sound.


Rules Are Made To Be . . .
To the Editor:
One of the executives Betsy Sharkey cites in her article about the new Universal Paramount Network  [ "Anxious Parents Await the Birth of a TV Network," Jan. 15 ]  is Valerie Cavanaugh, senior vice president for business and legal affairs.
Referring to internal rules about what UPN shows can do, show and say, Ms.
Cavanaugh is quoted as saying: "I hate it when characters who are supposed to be educated speakers of standard English have bad grammar and usage. . . . So I put in a rule that if the character was intended to speak standard English, they should speak standard English."
Oh, really?  EUGENIA ASKREN  New York


New City Policy Equates AIDS With Drug Addiction
To the Editor:
Deputy Mayor Fran Reiter has announced that the city is imposing a cap on the number of AIDS patients the city will house in S.R.O.'s within the district of Community Board 7 ("Pressured, City Quietly Cuts AIDS Patients in S.R.O.'s," Jan. 22).
That policy epitomizes a way of thinking that is at the very heart of prejudice: equating a morally neutral characteristic of a person with anti-social behavior.
In this case, having a disease (AIDS) has erroneously been equated with, among other things, buying and selling illegal drugs, prostitution and theft.


An Intimate Dinner For Valentine's Day
WHEN dinner for two for Valentine's Day is a homemade meal there has to be love in the preparation and serving.
This intimate feast starts with a rosy pasta dish followed by shrimp with artichokes and potatoes.
The dessert is chocolate, a warm baked pudding for two, which is best made about an hour in advance.
As for oysters, supposedly endowed with aphrodisiac qualities, some of these ordered on the half shell from a reliable fish market might be served with Champagne to start.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the influence of the philosopher Leo Strauss on conservatives included a name incorrectly in citing former students and other followers of Professor Strauss.
Robert Bork does not consider himself a Straussian, and says he has not read Professor Strauss's works.


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
I had my picture taken, at Smith, in 1940-41 and believe that the program was successful in improving posture, mine at least.
The picture taking was not an unpleasant experience.
When the private session for discussing the picture took place a few weeks later, I do not remember feeling uncomfortable.
I think I was fascinated.


Corrections
A music listing on page 41 of the Arts and Leisure section today includes an outdated reference to Anne-Marie Rodde's Thursday night performance at the Miller Theater.
It has been canceled because of illness.
In Ms.
Rodde's place, Bernard Levasseur will perform French songs.


Turning Things Inside Out
NOV. 23, 1993, REALLY WAS THE best of days and the worst for the sculptor Rachel Whiteread.
First, in a ceremony at the Tate Gallery, she was awarded the Turner Prize, along with $30,000, for being the best artist in England that year.
Then on the steps of the Tate she accepted twice that amount for being the worst artist from a couple of former rock stars who called themselves the K Foundation.
They threatened to burn the money unless she took it.
That wasn't all.
The same night, Ms.
White read learned that "Untitled (House)," her cast-concrete sculpture made of the inside of a real house, which had become one of the most talked-about works of public art in years, was to be demolished.


Boeing Discovers Cause of Sudden Losses of Pressure by 777's
Two new Boeing 777 jetliners suddenly depressurized during test flights on Thursday, but the company has found that the same part was responsible in both cases and has returned the planes to service.
Four crew members on one plane had to be rushed to a hospital hyperbaric chamber of the kind used for deep sea divers.


3 Down and 3 to Go in Campaign Against Sex-Related Businesses
The facade of Fool's Paradise at 4074 Boston Road, a squat, concrete structure that was once an auto body shop, still shows a crude painting of two suggestively clothed women.
The club billed itself as a topless club.
But inside, the police say, men picked out dancers to accompany them to local motels that rent rooms by the hour.
Two weeks ago, the police shut down Fool's Paradise -- a victory for area residents and officials who have fought the proliferation of sex-related businesses and prostitution in Baychester in recent years.


Playing Milk Caps For Keeps
Re: "Schools Ban Playing Milk Caps for Keeps," Jan. 22:
I recall the early 1940's, when virtually every day, weather permitting, there were several games of marbles in progress in the playground of Lafayette Elementary School in Bound Brook, where I grew up.
We played for keeps.
You won -- you kept all the marbles. (Hence the expression.)


Carter Library
To the Editor: Referring to "What's Doing in Atlanta" (Dec. 25): How could you make no mention of the Carter Presidential Center and Museum of the Jimmy Carter Library?
HOWARD MILLER  Bradenton, Fla.
Note to readers: The Travel section carried an article about the Jimmy Carter Library on May 30, 1993.


New York State Adds Navy Yard to List of Hazardous Waste Sites
Citing serious toxic contamination, the State Department of Environmental Conservation has added part of the Brooklyn Navy Yard to the state Superfund list of hazardous waste sites.
Officials with the environmental agency said the action underscored their resolve to conduct a comprehensive investigation of the entire Navy Yard complex.
State environmental officials said last week that testing at a half-acre section of the Navy Yard owned by the Department of Defense and closed off from the public had turned up high levels of PCB (polychlorinated biphenyl) contamination.


The World of Exteriors
"Have you never noticed the strange correspondence between the exterior dress of people and the exterior of buildings?" Adolf Loos, the architect and chief prosecutor of the modernist case against ornament, wrote in 1910.
Gottfried Semper, Loos's predecessor by some 50 years, had already noted the correlation between the Ephesians' richly decorated clothing and the Temple of Ephesus.
In 1871, Charles Garnier claimed that the silks and jewels worn by the women in the audience had figured in his design for the Paris Opera.
Still, the notion that buildings and clothes are interrelated has met with more acceptance among fashion designers than it has among architects, many of whom are suspicious of any attempt to link their work to a subject so readily debased by discussions of hemlines and trends.
The philosophical origins of these misgivings are examined in a recent collection of essays, "Architecture: In Fashion," published by the Princeton Architectural Press.


The Fashion World's Show of Shows
The Council of Fashion Designers of America Awards reception, dinner, ceremony and dance party at the New York State Theater, Jan. 30.


How to Keep PBS (and Satisfy Conservatives)
To the Editor:
Congressional debate over the Federal Government's contribution in support of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting appears to be nearing the decisive stage.


O. J. Simpson's 'Dream Team' of Lawyers: Are They Running Out of Gas?
Much was made when Robert L. Shapiro, a lawyer repeatedly faulted for being better at schmoozing than at litigating, yielded control of O. J. Simpson's defense to Johnnie L. Cochran Jr.
Mr.
Shapiro called Mr.
Cochran an experienced trial lawyer, "the best man on the planet" to defend Mr.
Simpson before this jury.
But if anything, many lawyers watching the case believe, Mr.
Simpson's trial defense has sputtered since Mr.
Shapiro literally moved to the side of the defense table and Mr.
Cochran took over Mr.
Simpson's "dream team." The first full week of the trial was a bad beginning for Mr.
Simpson's saviors.


Q and A
Passover in Hawaii
Q.
My 16-year-old granddaughter will be going to Maui, Hawaii, in the middle of April, a period that includes Passover.
As she is Jewish and keeps kosher, she needs to be supplied with meals.
Is there an agency or group there that can help? -- Ben Gaffi, South Dartmouth, Mass.


At Sundance, There's Life Beyond Artsiness
"I'M GOING TO MAKE THESE people crazy," Robert Redford murmured as he approached four diners at the Sundance Institute's cozy restaurant and asked if they'd mind letting him show off a framed photograph hanging behind their table.
Dating back to 1980, it was a picture of Sundance's first film-making fellows.
It looked as quaint as a shot of 19th-century miners.
So much has changed for Sundance in 15 years: it has come of age as a major training ground for new talent, and it has spawned a film festival that now transcends its former arty, sincere identity to generate real innovation and excitement.
Mr.
Redford, who said he used to think of film festivals as events "where they gave medallions to people who had already died," also proudly pointed out a couple of small buildings he had helped build on the grounds of this strikingly beautiful ski resort.


U.S. Allies Mute Discord Over Mexico
Financial leaders of seven leading industrial countries expressed "full satisfaction" today with American-led efforts to rescue the Mexican economy but said they wanted international organizations to improve their ability to forestall similar crises.
Finance ministers of the Group of Seven countries met in Toronto as the crisis of recent weeks over the fragile state of Mexico's finances appeared to ease.


Airlines Tighten East Asian Security
Because of recent bomb threats, airlines have tightened security measures at about three dozen airports in east Asia, resulting in delays of up to one to two hours or more for travelers flying to and from that region.
The heightened security for an indefinite period that was imposed by the Federal Aviation Administration on Jan. 10 includes searches of passengers and their baggage.
Airlines are also telling travelers that most containers they are carrying containing more than one ounce of liquid, aerosol or gel will be confiscated because bombs disguised in such containers are hard to detect.


Looking to a Name to Revive the Allure of Sugar Hill
In the 1930's, when affluent and prominent African-Americans populated the hill that rises to the west from Edgecombe Avenue in Harlem, residents of the humbler, more crowded valley below looked up longingly, imagining that life on the hill must be very sweet.
Thus, the story goes, the neighborhood formally called Hamilton Heights came to be known locally as Sugar Hill.


Tom Snyder
Q: Your ads say that you practically invented the art of conversation.
Did you?
A:People have been conversing since Adam and Eve.


Waking Up to Snow, for Better or Worse
Pamela Wax wore an enormous smile as she inched across Prospect Park's Long Meadow on her brand-new cross-country skis.
Last winter, she had gone to ski store after ski store but all the beginner's skis were sold out.
This year, she bought early, and then it didn't snow.
Ms.
Wax is a rabbi, and hastened to say she was headed for the synagogue as soon as she finished skiing.
"I'm so excited," she said.


IN SHORT: FICTION
CARRY ME HOME  By John M. Del Vecchio. Bantam, $22.95.


Pick-Me-Up for Plants Without Overkill
NEW approaches to growing things are becoming deeply rooted in the garden world.
Some of these developments make the tasks a little bit easier.
Many are driven by market demands or production requirements.
A few have been spawned as a result of consumer agitation.
To boost plant growth, there is the plethora of fertilizers and extensive claims.
Most recently, gardeners have witnessed extraordinary results with a fairly new product that utilizes the benefits of research.
These are the enzyme growth stimulants applied directly to the soil.
Plants respond by producing stronger and deeper root systems, which lead to stronger growth.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Toyota Avalon; Sired by Camry, Out of Kentucky
SOME Chevrolets are built in Canada.
A lot of Volkswagens come from Mexico.
And the parts and design of almost any automobile arrive from all over the globe, making it harder and harder to tell what constitutes a truly "American" car.
But Toyota is willing to give it a shot.
The new golden-tan Avalon in the driveway is the Japanese company's latest venture, and it has set nary a foot to water nor rolled across any foreign border.


Technology; Internet Server Takes a Big Step
IF John Sidgmore was certain of anything after 20-some years in the computer networking business, it was that success in the Internet game would require a series of alliances and marketing deals.
Never did he imagine it might come in a single stroke of the pen.
But last month, when Mr.
Sidgmore's tiny company, UUNet Technologies Inc., signed a deal with the mighty Microsoft Corporation, UUNet suddenly seemed to hold one of the top spots in the burgeoning Internet market.


Jan. 20-Feb.4: Young Adults at Risk; Deaths From AIDS Reach A Grim Benchmark
Few experts have questioned that AIDS would eventually become the leading cause of death among Americans between the ages of 25 and 44.
The only question was when.
Last week the grim prediction came true.
AIDS surpassed unintentional injury, which dropped to second place in this age group.
Cancer, heart disease, homicides and suicide followed.
The curve for deaths from AIDS in this group is expected to continue rising steeply, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said in releasing a preliminary analysis of data from 1993, the latest year available, at a scientific meeting in Washington.


To Stop a Dynasty Before It Starts; Knicks Trying to Keep Magic's Promise From Fruition
Just a few feet from Shaquille O'Neal's locker is a chart that tracks the Eastern Conference standings.
The Orlando Magic has topped that chart for over two months -- an exciting, explosive locomotive powered by Shaq diesel, the multidimensional talents of Anfernee Hardaway and the savvy of Horace Grant.


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
Students were photographed in the nude, from different angles, when I entered Harvard in the fall of 1946.
Because we were G.I.'s, returning from World War II, none of us gave it a second thought.
We had been living lives without privacy for several years in the armed services.
But I was disturbed to learn in your article that clear photos were taken.
I understood at the time that we were being photographed against a bright light in order to create only silhouette figures; that faces would not be defined.


POSTINGS: Will Snoopy Be There?; Child Care At Met Life
Children First, a Boston-based provider of "back-up" child care -- for days when home care arrangements collapse -- has signed a 10-year lease for its fourth Manhattan location.
The center will open this spring in a formerly unused space in the lobby of the Met Life Building at 200 Park Avenue, the former Pan Am Building.
The 4,500-square-foot center, for children ages 3 months to 12 years, is expected to accommodate up to 40 youngsters and have a full-time supervisory staff of seven.


ALSO INSIDE
URBAN VOICES 3  In terms of race, the present has not lived down the past, even for 10-year-olds.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  The travel industry is competing for gay dollars, so two small gay agencies have teamed up to fight back.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 12  A wedding-cake competition on the Upper East Side; photographs of the siege of Sarajevo in Little Italy.
MOVIE CLOCK 13  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 16  Northern lights, south of Central Park: Christer's Smorgasbord, North Indian at Darbar, North Italian at San Domenico.
SOAPBOX 17  A visit to a stranger with AIDS, and a scientific look at the losers of the Westinghouse awards.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE ZOO WHERE YOU'RE FED TO GOD  By Michael Ventura. Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.


Winter Storm Arrives, Making Up for Lost Time
After six weeks of languorous winter, the first big snowstorm of the season roared across the New York metropolitan area and the Northeast with a vengeance yesterday, obliterating the region under accumulations 6 to 16 inches deep and turning the day into a hardship for some and a magical adventure for others.
As if making up for lost time, the storm -- a comma-shaped Northeaster, 300 miles across -- barreled up the Atlantic Seaboard and transformed landscapes from Virginia to Massachusetts.
It disrupted air, rail and highway travel, knocked out power to thousands, closed businesses, flooded low-lying coastal areas and shut down all but emergency government services.
In New Jersey, two brothers were killed when their car crossed the center line of a snowy road in Monmouth County and hit a snow plow.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tues.
Nonfarm productivity, 4th qtr., pct. chg.
2.9
1.1
Consumer credit, Dec., chg., $ bils.
12.9
12.0
Wed.
Wholesale sales, Dec., pct. chg.
-0.1
0.5
Thur.
Weekly jobless claims, thous.
326
325
Fri.
Producer prices, Jan., pct. chg.
0.2
0.3
This Weeks Developments
Mon.
Clinton to submit budget proposal
Tues.
3-year Treasury note auction
Wed.
10-year Treasury note auction
Thur.
30-year bond auction


Thomas Hayward, Leading Met Tenor In 40's, Dies at 77
Thomas Hayward, a leading tenor at the Metropolitan Opera during the 1940's and 1950's, died on Thursday at his home in Las Vegas, Nev.
He was 77.
He had suffered from kidney and heart failure, said a daughter, Carol Anne Klusak.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
LETHAL PASSAGE: The Story of a Gun By Erik Larson.
Vintage, $12.
In 1988, a troubled 16-year-old boy brought a 9-millimeter semiautomatic handgun into his high school and went on a shooting spree, killing one teacher and seriously wounding another.
The author "provides a readable account" of the case in "a book that gun control advocates will hail," Clifford Krauss said here last year.
MERCY OF A RUDE STREAM.
Volume 1: A Star Shines Over Mt.
Morris Park


In Defeating Islanders, Canadiens Show Their Old Fire
Until the Islanders arrived in Montreal tonight, the Ottawa Senators seemed to be the only National Hockey League team that made the Canadiens feel a little better about themselves.
But Montreal (3-2-2), which has had trouble scoring this season and would be in last place in the Northeast Division if not for the Senators, looked like the Canadiens of old tonight in defeating the Islanders, 4-2, on the strength of solid two-way play, a pair of goals by Mike Keane and strong goaltending by Patrick Roy, who had 32 saves.


Jan. 29-Feb.4; Rabin Meets With His Neighbors
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel met with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, King Hussein of Jordan and the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat in Cairo last week to try and jump start the stalled peace agreement, but the meeting failed to produce much.
The men condemned political violence, promised to keep their focus on peace, and committed themselves to a series of meetings in the next few days, including one between Mr.
Arafat and Mr.
Rabin in Israel, and another, next week, of foreign ministers in Washington.


Skagway Will Replace Ruined Wooden Dock
A new dock to replace the old wooden one in Skagway, Alaska, that was swept into the ocean during a landslide last November, is scheduled to be built next summer.
Construction of the dock should not interfere with most of the estimated 250 cruise ships that call there annually, according to tourist officials.
Skagway, a town of about 740 people some 80 miles north of Juneau, was the destination of dozens of stampeders in 1898 on their journey inland to seek their fortunes.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
HARLEM Changing the Image Even Among the Locals
"So many New Yorkers have the same feelings that out-of-towners have about Harlem -- they're afraid to go," said Lynn Brooks, executive director of the Big Apple Greeter.
"They think it's a terrifying den of iniquity." The nonprofit agency, which uses more than 600 volunteers to show visitors New York and its neighborhoods, is working to change this image.


In Caucasus, Separatist Struggle Is Pursued as a Pogrom
The floor and mattresses are thick with blood, barely dry, in the bedroom of a green wood-frame house, with apple trees in the front yard.
It was here that Ivan Antilava and members of his family were executed a few days ago.
Mr.
Antilava was shot in the temple, his wife in the heart, their son-in-law in the stomach and head.


At Security Meeting, West May Entice Better Muslim-Croat Ties
A senior American official said today that diplomats would try to strengthen the fragile Muslim-Croat federation in Bosnia in meetings here on Sunday to prevent a new outbreak of fighting there.
But he said they had little hope of getting Croatia to go back on its decision to have the 15,000 United Nations troops there withdraw by the end of March.


Mary E. Murphy, John E. Conlin
Mary Elizabeth Murphy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas S. Murphy of Rye, N.Y., was married on Jan. 21 to John Edward Conlin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Conlin of Hudson, Ohio.
The Rev.
J.
Francis Stroud performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Conlin, 30, is the director of worldwide promotions at Warner Brothers in Burbank, Calif.
She graduated from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Capital Cities/ABC in New York.


Entitlement Mind-Set Slows Our Progress
To the Editor:
"Governor Whitman's Trade-Offs" (editorial, Jan. 27) is a first-rate piece of backward liberal thinking.
You suggest that the elimination of New Jersey state jobs to cut taxes is "a brutal transference of state salaries into the pockets of taxpayers." Where do you suppose the money for these jobs originates?


Training for Ice Rescues With 1990's Know-How
NO tragedy occurred.
Richard Hooker was not even actively involved.
Yet it touched off a mission that borders on an obsession.
"Some years ago my cousins were snowmobiling," said Mr.
Hooker, a volunteer firefighter with the Mount Kisco Fire Department.
"I believe it was on Lake George. Their snowmobile went through the ice. Thankfully, a man with a snowmobile and a rope came along. But there were not a whole lot of people, there or anywhere, who knew what to do."


The Telltale Chiasmus
To the Editor:
On Jan. 3, the Chronicle column of The New York Times carried a report about eight lines of verse, supposedly inscribed by Edgar Allan Poe on a blank page in the first volume of his "Tales of the Grotesque and Arabesque," published in 1839.
Don Stine, a New Jersey rare-book dealer, having bought this valuable first edition at Christie's for a client, was said to be "stunned" by his discovery -- made appropriately at midnight "under the glow of a small reading lamp."


U.S.-Canadian Flights Expected to Increase
A GIANT surge in air traffic between Canada and the United States and cheaper fares should result when the two countries open their skies under a pact likely to be signed during a visit to Ottawa by President Clinton on Feb. 23 and 24.
After many tries, the two countries are about ready to phase out a restrictive treaty that has governed air service for nearly three decades.
The new accord enables airlines to operate freely to and from any points between the two countries.
But it would take up to three years for American carriers to gain full access to the three Canadian hubs -- Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver.


Curses! Caught in a Lie by a Telephone
IT was on a Sunday not so long ago that Julia Van Vliet was humiliated by a telephone.
She had just arrived at her friend Perry's apartment, quiche in hand, to pick him up for brunch at another friend's house.
Tired and cranky and in no mood to chat about Star Wars, the theme of this particular brunch, Perry convinced her that they should just stay in his apartment and eat the quiche together.


Homeless Sue Over Wages
Forty homeless people are suing the Grand Central Partnership, charging that one of its programs exploits them by paying sub-minimum wages.
The suit, prepared by the Coaltion for the Homeless and filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, challenges the "Pathways to Employment" program, which puts homeless people to work in several jobs, including as guards who oversee automated teller machines in bank lobbies.
Their wage is $1.16 an hour.


Sports of The Times; The Babe, Even at 100, Is Still a Major Draw
ON the tombstone, Jesus is standing with a little boy in a baseball uniform.
To one side are chiseled these words:
"May the Divine Spirit that animated Babe Ruth to win the crucial game of life inspire the youth of America! -- Cardinal Spellman."


317 Horses Nominated for Triple Crown Races
A total of 317 horses were nominated for the Triple Crown races, 37 fewer than last year.
Ten came from Britain and, for the first time, two were nominated from Japan.
"The drop in nominations," said Edward Seigenfeld, executive director of Triple Crown Productions, "reflects the recent decline in the foal crop in North America. But the list includes all the runners from last year's Breeders' Cup Juvenile as well as all the top 3-year-olds in the country."


Long-Term Needs For Commuting
The article ("Commuters on Alternate Routes," Jan. 8) described how some companies and their employees are complying with Federal mandates to control air pollution by reducing the number of cars used to commute.
While we applaud the car-pooling and individual efforts of the companies and people described in the article, the current Federal requirements still focus on a Band-Aid approach.


Pick-Me-Up for Plants Without Overkill
NEW approaches to growing things are becoming deeply rooted in the garden world.
Some of these developments make the tasks a little bit easier.
Many are driven by market demands or production requirements.
A few have been spawned as a result of consumer agitation.
To boost plant growth, there is the plethora of fertilizers and extensive claims.
Most recently, gardeners have witnessed extraordinary results with a fairly new product that utilizes the benefits of research.
These are the enzyme growth stimulants applied directly to the soil.
Plants respond by producing stronger and deeper root systems, which lead to stronger growth.


Gay Dollars on the Road
FRED KOHN remembers a time not so long ago when he could not say "gay" at Eastern Airlines to describe the tours he discreetly booked for groups of homosexual travelers.
"We would push those packages through the airlines quietly," said Mr.
Kohn, a former sales representative.
"We would call the annual trip of gay lawyers going to Puerto Rico the 'San Juan' group, and only those who needed to know, knew."


Correction
A front-page article on Jan. 22 about high-definition television referred incorrectly to efforts by the National Association of Broadcasters to gain the use of channels set aside for high-definition TV.
The association made its position public in testimony before House and Senate subcommittees; it was not proposed without public discussion.


The Devils Again Revert to Their Low, No-Scoring Ways
The Devils' scoring woes returned after only one game.
It was reason enough for skeptics to argue that the five goals they scored two days ago against the Nordiques at the Meadowlands were a fluke.
The Devils played Quebec again this afternoon, and this time they failed to score even once, losing, 2-0, at the Colisee.


Meggett Gives the Giants His Own Signing Deadline
Negotiations between the Giants and running back David Meggett could soon take a drastic turn.
According to people familiar with the situation, the running back has given the team an ultimatum: sign him by Feb. 14 or his chances of coming back are slim.
It is a bold move by Meggett but one he apparently views as necessary.
Meggett, 28, doesn't want to be put on hold by the Giants throughout the unrestricted free agency period, which begins on Feb. 17.
Not to mention that the running back doesn't want teams to think he is a lock with the Giants.
Meanwhile, several general managers in both the American and National Football Conferences said anonymously that they were prepared to make major offers for him.


EXPRESSIVE JUSTICE IS ALL THE RAGE
In David Anderson's article "Expressive Justice Is All the Rage" (Jan. 15), rage against criminals seems to be a crime!
Why shouldn't people be angry about homicide, rape or bloody assault?


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
I couldn't believe it -- an expose of the exposure we submitted to in those posture pictures at Smith College, when I was a freshman in 1949-50!
Sylvia Plath, who, a year later, became a fellow resident of Lawrence House, has a pungent little paragraph about the pictures in "The Bell Jar":


Ship Ahoy


Has Success Spoiled Green Day?
AND GOD SAID, LET THERE BE PUNK ROCK: and there was punk rock.
And God saw the punk rock, that it was good, and God divided the punk from the mainstream.
And God said, let us make Green Day in punk's image, and let its song "Basket Case" have dominion over radio and MTV, over amphitheater and club, over bedroom and car stereo.
And God saw all he had done and said, "This is punk?"
Here are a few things you should know about Green Day: Its first album on a major label, "Dookie," was the fifth top-selling album in the country last year.
The record has now sold some four million copies altogether, making it likely that punk rock will be to 1995 what grunge was to 1992.
The band is made up of three 22-year-olds from Berkeley, Calif., whose hair colors change on a regular basis.
The two most frequent adjectives used to describe them are: snotty and bratty.
The band likes to say that it knows three chords and roughly the same number of melodies.
When it performs, its members look as if they're on the Magic Mountain roller coaster at Disneyland, a ride shrouded in darkness that might take a turn uphill or downhill at any moment.
Green Day was nominated for four Grammys.
This is a problem for today's punk rockers for whom the Grammy symbolizes the establishment that they are reacting against.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 5, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
TOM CLANCY'S OP-CENTER, created by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik. (Berkley, $6.99.) The operations of a secret Government agency.
2
2
ICEBOUND, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The world's future is threatened by a tidal wave, storms and a psychopathic killer.
3
2
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Warner, $6.99.) A doctor stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
4
2
PRINCE CHARMING, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $6.50.) A lady in Victorian London discovers the man of her dreams, a Montanan.
5*
2
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $6.99.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a Vermont town.
6
21
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
7
3
LOVERS, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $6.99.) Romance, rivalry and fun as experienced by half a dozen couples.
8
34
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
9
11
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young student's mysterious drowning in Victorian England.
10
2
LITTLE WOMEN, by Louisa May Alcott. (Pocket, $5.50.) The 1868 novel about four sisters in New England.
11
23
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's death.
12
1
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $6.50.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her late son creates familial tension.
13
1
DESIRED, by Virginia Henley. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) In the 14th century, a Knight Templar pursues a young lady who is already betrothed.
14
15
THE QUEEN OF THE DAMNED, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Continuing the author's chronicle of 6,000 years of vampirism.
15
1
RAMA REVEALED, by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume in a series about a starship's voyage.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
20
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
7
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of "Seinfeld."
3
4
CONTRACT WITH AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich, Dick Armey, et al. (Times Books/Random House, $10.) The Republican program.
4
19
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters reflect on their lives.
5
56
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
6
8
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
7
587
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
8
15
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
9
23
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
10
29
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
11*
13
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.
12
38
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
13*
101
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
14
2
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Vintage, $13.) A surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
15*
15
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great Plains.
16*
54
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
19
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
2
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Pocket, $6.99.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
3
197
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
5
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1995. (World Almanac/Funk &amp; Wagnalls, $8.95.) The latest edition of the reference work.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 21, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Dial 1-800 LAWYERS . . . Later
You'd think that when the "busiest personal injury lawyer in New York City" (self-described) was hit by a car that he'd be in court within the week, right?
Not Bruce Davis, who operates the widely advertised 1-800-LAWYERS.
Last summer, Davis was hit by a car as he walked his dog on Route 114 near Sag Harbor, L.I.
As of late January, he had not yet sued.
He says he's waiting to see how well his left leg and foot heal. (In New York State, victims have three years to file a negligence suit.) If the foot doesn't improve, Davis says, he'll sue for more than a million dollars, because "not a day goes by that I don't have pain. I can't jog; I can't play ball."


Consciousness Raising Dept.
To the Editor:
If Sarah Bryan Miller were writing about the Metropolitan Opera's production of "Turandot," would she feel compelled to point out that Gwyneth Jones was cast in the title role despite the fact that she is not Asian and hasn't beheaded any of her suitors?  [ "There's Room in the Middle, a Singer Finds to His Delight," Jan. 15 ] .
Would she be surprised that Placido Domingo plays Otello even though he's not African and, as far as anyone knows, hasn't killed a wife?
Ms.
Miller's eagerness to emphasize the heterosexuality of both Robert Orth and Bradley Williams is insulting to all Times readers, not just people who are gay.


The Two-War Fantasy
The Pentagon has become a master of illusion, holding Congress spellbound with the proposition that U.S. armed forces must be capable of waging and winning two major regional wars simultaneously.
The corollary follows easily: If Congress approves a defense budget short of the two-war mark, it will jeopardize the country's security.
Gauging America's security needs at a time of diminishing threats and declining budgets requires a more realistic assessment of dangers and the forces needed to meet them.
Peace has not settled over the world and Washington should not give up its military superiority.
But before Congress is finished trying to balance the budget by the year 2002, it will have to take a second look at defense spending.
When it does, it needs an honest picture of the threats facing the U.S. after the disintegration of the Soviet Union.


A Software Fix May Revitalize the Supercomputer
FOR seven years, Burton Smith has been leading a lonely crusade to reinvent the supercomputer.
Now, Mr.
Smith's moment of truth is nearly at hand -- a moment that promises not only to help determine the future of the Lamborghinis and Ferraris of the computer world but also to affect the Government's role in developing new technology.
To many people in the computer industry, Mr.
Smith and his tiny Seattle-based Tera Computer Company have been on a quixotic mission.
Custom-made supercomputers have been flirting with a dinosaur's fate.
By definition the fastest machines around, increasingly they have not been efficient enough to earn their keep in the face of ever-speedier, far less expensive off-the-shelf computers.
At the same time, basic research has suffered as budgets at the country's weapons laboratories have shrunk with the end of the cold war.


'A Moralist Possessed by Humor': A Conversation With Robertson Davies
ROBERTSON DAVIES, unceasing in his creativity at the age of 81, fervently makes a case for the place of melodrama in our lives.
"Very few people live in a mode of tragedy," he says, "and when they do, we pity them deeply. Very few people live in a mode of real comedy; they laugh a lot but their lives are not comic. Comedy is almost as cruel and exclusive as tragedy. Most of us live in a world of melodrama, a world of mingled laughter and tears, gain and deprivation and excitement -- the hurly-burly of normal life."
Taking off from a poem by Henrik Ibsen, he believes that "a man's self-judgment" is "the conscience of a writer." Through a process of self-analysis that has been both painful and joyous, his life has provided him with the raw material for what he writes.
Interwoven, with overlapping characters, his 11 novels can be regarded as a kind of masked autobiography.
The books often begin in Canadian villages as small as his birthplace of Thamesville in southwest Ontario, but they soon open up to reveal allegorical allusions and magical transformations.
Accidental incidents can have endless effects, and behind everything is the immutability of the human heart.
A misaimed snowball in his 1970 novel "Fifth Business," for example, sets off a chain of events.
It becomes a defining moment, touching scores of lives and a trilogy of novels.
In the case of his new novel, "The Cunning Man," there are medical and spiritual mysteries.
Skeptics need not enter Mr.
Davies's bewitching world.


Jo or Amy: Who Would You Rather Be?
To the Editor:
It seems to me that Virginia Strong's reading of Caryn James's essay "Amy Had Golden Curls; Jo Had a Rat. Who Would You Rather Be?" lacks something in irony and humor (Letters, Jan. 15).
Although I have no personal knowledge of Ms.
James, her achievement as a respected film critic suggests she is not a dumb blonde (with curls) irresponsibly advocating the shallow virtues that Ms.
Strong takes her to be championing.
I was one of those self-consciously serious young women who, in eager response to the bias of "Little Women," donned too quickly the imagined, morally superior clothes that were Jo's -- only to mature and acquire the fuller understanding that moral vanity was perhaps more dangerous than personal vanity.
After all, it didn't require Nietzsche to discover that the moral advantage is often claimed by those resentful of the beautiful and rich; any young woman's first serious stirrings of envy, and her attendant honest reflections, would lead to the same discovery.


Jan. 29-Feb.4; A Flood Tide in Paris


Nightbeat: The Meatpacking District


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SEASONED JUDGMENTS  Constitutional Rights and American History.
By Leonard W. Levy.
Transaction, $39.95.


An End to Camping Out?
Southern California's sleepy Santa Catalina island is known for fishing and water sports but not accommodations.
But plans are under way for a 178-room all-suite resort hotel, with tennis courts, restaurants, health club and 18-hole golf course.
Set to open in autumn of 1996, the $187 million Pointe on Catalina Island will overlook the Pacific, with rooms from $300.
TERRY TRUCCO


On Sunday; In Hard Times, E.M.S. Fears The Big One
FOR a decade, Tony Bernardo roamed the meanest streets of Brooklyn as a paramedic in the city's Emergency Medical Service, too often treating gunshot victims and some of the dozens of New Yorkers a day whose hearts give out in public situations.
"They'd have this feeling of impending doom: This is it, here comes the Big One," he said of the fear of sidewalk demise as he faced wild-eyed people with his portable equipment.
"You'd start by telling them: 'Don't worry, I'm here. This isn't the Big One.' "


Mutual Funds; A Standout in a Wallflower Year
BE it stocks or bonds, Robert L. Rodriguez plays both with uncommon skill.
Witness 1994, a tough year for mutual funds.
His FPA Capital, a small to midsize growth stock fund, gained more than 10 percent while stock funds had a small loss on average.


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
Your article took me back to 1940 and Bill Sheldon's seminar on "constitutional psychology" at Harvard, when he was about at the zenith of his academic career.
He gave us graduate students a slightly uneasy feeling that he might be as much a psychopath as a serious scientist, but he had won the respect and championship of S. Smith Stevens, the department's redoubtably hard-nosed champion of tough-minded science and apostle of what he called "the science of science," which turned out to be logical positivism.
I suspect that it was Sheldon's reactionary social views that appealed to Smitty as much as it was his efforts to make constitutional research scientific.
I recognized a number of the photos accompanying the article as having appeared in Sheldon's second book, "The Varieties of Physique," written in collaboration with Stevens.


Newton Still in a Heel Period
H ELMUT NEWTON has prided himself on being the bad boy of American fashion photography since the 70's, when he spread androgyny, lesbianism and sexually voracious women across the pages of Vogue.
He has had plenty of company in the interval and this month has finally met his match on the score of outrageousness and misogyny -- not another photographer but designers of shoes.
His pictures in the current Vogue of shoes with heels high enough to alarm an orthopedist show a model in a wheelchair, then on steel crutches with two men assisting her, then in teensy shorts and a leg brace that looks like a high-tech scaffold to straighten the Leaning Tower of Pisa.
In other pictures she appears to be uninjured, but considering the difficulty of maneuvering in such shoes, she probably won't stay that way for long.


The Nation: Intestinal Fortitude; To Campaign (v): To Beg, to Borrow, to Endure
THE master plan was laid out months ago.
Jack Kemp would give 200 rubber-chicken dinners (sometimes it's meatballs or just cocktails) between Jan. 1, 1995, and Jan. 1, 1996.
What the plan did not say was that he would be expected to deliver the same lines, ingratiate himself to political hangers-on and, most humiliating of all, beg them for money.
That's not counting the hundreds, probably thousands, of phone calls Mr.
Kemp would have to make to more prospective supporters.
Sandwiched between would be the other duties of a Presidential candidate: smiling through interminable tours of coffee shops in outposts like Laconia, N.H., being polite to badgering reporters, pretending to enjoy hanging around plant gates at 5 o'clock in the morning.


Indian Spice
DARBAR *** (212) 432-7227; 44 West 56th Street, between Fifth Avenue and Avenue of the Americas; $$; all major credit cards


Renaissance Models At National Gallery
Fourteen wooden architectural models from the Italian Renaissance are on view with more than 70 related paintings, drawings, prints and medals at the National Gallery of Art in Washington.
"Italian Renaissance Architecture: Brunelleschi, Sangallo, Michelangelo -- The Cathedrals of Florence and Pavia, and St. Peter's, Rome" illuminates the design process behind these buildings.
The exhibition's centerpiece is a large, recently restored model of St.
Peter's in Rome, built between 1539 and 1546 to the specifications of the architect Antonio da Sangallo.
The largest surviving model from the Renaissance, it measures nearly 15 feet high and 24 feet long and weighs more than six tons.


Corrections
The "If You're Thinking" column last Sunday, about living in Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, misstated the given name of a real estate executive at the William B. May Company.
He is Christopher Thomas, not Charles.


A Love Story, Not a Courtroom Drama
SERVING IN SILENCE IS WHAT Col.
Margarethe Cammermeyer did for most of her career, leaving her lesbianism unacknowledged and unspoken as she rose through Army ranks, winning a Bronze Star in Vietnam and later becoming chief nurse of the Washington State National Guard.
But neither service nor silent acquiescence is at the heart of "Serving in Silence: The Margarethe Cammermeyer Story," a 90-minute drama on NBC tomorrow night at 9, with Glenn Close in the title role.
Instead, the script by Alison Cross highlights the love affair that awakened Colonel Cammermeyer's explicit awareness of her homosexuality and -- as the movie tells it -- emboldened her to declare herself a lesbian during a security-clearance interview in 1989, a declaration that led to her discharge three years later. (She was reinstated last June by a Federal judge.)


Getting A Board to Respond
Q For several months, the senior property manager of our condominium building has failed to answer our letters regarding the issues we have raised concerning the proper operation of the building and the damage done to our apartment by building workers.
We have written to the president of our managing company twice and to the condominium board once, advising them that we have not received a reply.
To date, all parties remain nonresponsive.


Why Not Couture By Women?
I N the Chanel studio, five pairs of eyes are trained on the hem of a black chiffon mermaid dress.
"Just a fraction -- less than half a millimeter," instructs Karl Lagerfeld.
And down to her knees, pins in hand, drops Madame Christiane, to make the minuscule adjustment.


Jenny Brookreson, Anthony Baumer
WHILE many women these days postpone marriage until they make a six-figure salary, turn 30, travel the world, read all of Proust, write a screenplay or finish a Ph.D., Jenny Brookreson, 21, didn't want to wait to be a bride and raise a family.
She met Joseph Anthony Baumer, 27, a securities trader at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York, six years ago when they both visited their grandparents, who are neighbors on John's Island, Fla.
When he proposed in June, she decided to leave college and spend the next six months planning her wedding.


Quandary in Mexico
To the Editor:
Would people who think Mexican workers are being selfish, as implied in "Mexico Will Prosper, but Not Very Soon" (Market Watch, Jan. 8) consider those workers' standard of living too high for themselves?
If not, why should they expect those workers to accept a "prosperity" that would make them even poorer?
ALAN R. BROWN  Manhattan, Jan. 9


Sound Reasoning
To the Editor:
When will performers realize that it's more important to make people want to listen than to drown them in sound?
HAROLD IMBER  Mount Kisco, N.Y.


Pictures With Punch
Arlene Schulman's photographs are all distinctive, and they are all of a piece.
No other photographer currently working in sports creates images that are so instantly recognizable: whether it is Riddick Bowe staring at you from across his training table or an unnamed club fighter from the Dominican Republic in tattered headgear, Ms.
Schulman seems to have caught everyone in the world of boxing a split second before he realized he was being photographed.
Even the posed shots in THE PRIZEFIGHTER: An Intimate Look at Champions and Contenders (Lyons &amp; Burford, $27.95) have the look of informality.
You blink at the pictures, as if you expected their subjects to resume movement after you finishing looking.
Ms.
Schulman knows this world from the inside, and each photograph is a window into a world that most of us will never see.
The portraits of the great fighters -- Sugar Ray Robinson, Jersey Joe Walcott, Joe Frazier, Roberto Duran, Jake LaMotta -- startle the viewer with their nonfamiliarity.
Look fast -- in another moment they will have retreated to their own peculiar world.
ALLEN BARRA


F.Y.I.
The Broad Trail Q.  Why is it that Broadway runs diagonally across the rest of the parallel avenues?
Was it designed this way, and if so, what was the thinking behind the design?


Gen. Marshall Saw Dropping of Bomb on Japan as Necessary; Heroism and Hindsight
To the Editor:
Re "Hiroshima, Rewritten" (Op-Ed, Jan. 31): One of the reasons to do historical research is to inspect the decisions of the past in order that the bad ones might be understood before they are made again.


Alexandria Before the Fall
OUT OF EGYPT  A Memoir.
By Andre Aciman. 340 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $20.


Hard Choices, Troubled Voices; Pataki's Budget Plans Leave Some Aid Recipients Anxious
Joseph Hennesey is a United States Navy veteran who once ran his own business.
Now, as a double amputee as a result of diabetes, he is confined to his home in the Bronx, and a home-care attendant is key to his independence.
But he may lose his aide to proposed state budget cuts.
To keep her, he would have to show that without such care, he would wind up in a nursing home.


POSTINGS: New Sanctuary to Hold 1,200 Worshipers;
Since 1936, the United House of Prayer for All People has made one of its homes in a second-floor space of a two-story office building in Harlem.
All that will change this summer, when the Washington-based church plans to finish a $4.5 million overhaul of the building at Frederick Douglass Boulevard between 124th and 125th Streets.
A 20,000-square-foot sanctuary with a 30-foot peaked ceiling, a 20-foot-high stained-glass window and a balcony will occupy an expanded second floor and a new third floor and accommodate 1,200 people and two choirs.
Also on the second level will be offices, meeting rooms and choir robing rooms.
Media and control rooms will be on the floor above.
The building will be topped with a 30-foot fiberglass steeple above the 124th Street church entrance.


Struggling Rangers Slip Past Senators
At the skate-around before tonight's game against the winless Ottawa Senators, Rangers President Neil Smith tried to put a positive spin on his team's early season woes.
"We haven't hit an unexplainable loss yet," Smith said.
"There's still time. But if we lose here tonight, we obviously won't be looking at it like that anymore."


U.S. Supplied Arms to Iraq, Ex-Aide Says
A former official of the National Security Council has asserted that the C.I.A. secretly helped a Chilean arms dealer sell sophisticated bombs to Iraq in the mid-1980's.
The sales took place while the Reagan Administration was professing neutrality in the war between Iraq and Iran, according to a court affidavit by Howard Teicher, who worked for the National Security Council from 1982 to 1987 as a main adviser on the Middle East.


Poland's Leaders: Old Communists, but With a Difference
After nearly 18 months in power, Poland's coalition Government, with roots in the Communist past, has stalled on economic reforms, raised doubts about its commitment to joining the West and tried to clamp down on the press.
In a country where the President has threatened to dissolve Parliament on the grounds that the Government's budget was not reform minded enough, the question is: how "ex-" are Poland's ex-Communists, the first of a series of former Communists elected to lead Eastern European countries?


Lady Killer


The Case of the Mysterious Greeting Cards
WHO WOULD HAVE thought that the industrious Pennsylvania Germans spent their time 200 years ago producing something as seemingly trivial as greeting cards?
That indeed appears to be what happened between 1750 and 1850, a period when they painted an abundance of small charming watercolor cards of birds, flowers, hearts, angels and churches.
The thousands that survive have long puzzled folk-art buffs who had no idea what they were or why they were made.
One of the most baffled collectors was the Rev.
Frederick S. Weiser, a 60-year-old retired Lutheran minister and Pennsylvania-German historian.
He had bought and studied these miniature paintings for 30 years, but it was only last year that he solved the mystery.
The proof is on view in "The Gift Is Small, the Love Is Great," an exhibition of 100 such cards at the Museum of American Folk Art in Manhattan, through April 2.


An Intimate Dinner For Valentine's Day
WHEN dinner for two for Valentine's Day is a homemade meal there has to be love in the preparation and serving.
This intimate feast starts with a rosy pasta dish followed by shrimp with artichokes and potatoes.
The dessert is chocolate, a warm baked pudding for two, which is best made about an hour in advance.
As for oysters, supposedly endowed with aphrodisiac qualities, some of these ordered on the half shell from a reliable fish market might be served with Champagne to start.


A Strong Leash for Currencies on a Rampage
HONG KONG did it in 1984.
Argentina in 1991.
Estonia in 1992 and Lithuania last year.
Soon, El Salvador and Jamaica might do it.
Brazil is studying it.
And even Mexico -- grappling with a wobbly peso and its attendant woes -- sees it as a possible path to financial stability.
"It" is the adoption of the currency board, an idea making the rounds in countries struggling with the addictive quick fix (print more money), investor nervousness, flight capital and chronic inflation.


Counsel Seeks Penalty Delay In Whitewater
Citing his cooperation in their investigation, Whitewater special prosecutors are seeking to delay the sentencing of Webster L. Hubbell, the former Associate Attorney General who has admitted defrauding his former law firm of almost $400,000.
Mr.
Hubbell, a close friend of President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, pleaded guilty in December to mail fraud and tax evasion stemming from inflated expense accounts and billings to clients while a partner at the Rose Law Firm of Little Rock, where Mrs.
Clinton was also a partner.
Mr.
Hubbell agreed to cooperate with the independent counsel, Kenneth W. Starr, and his staff in their inquiry into the Clintons' 1978 investment in the Whitewater Development Corporation, a real estate development project in Arkansas, and related matters.


The 10 Best Books About New York
"THE present in New York is so powerful that the past is lost," the essayist John Jay Chapman wrote when the 20th century was still young, when the past was decidedly less remote and not long after he suffered a mental breakdown and left the city.
No single book can capture the essence of New York, past and present.
Ten books, collectively, can.
But which 10 constitute a secular, literary New York Canon?


What's Keeping Those Couriers?
Ron Melichar's most recent bad experience with the Hamilton Grange post office occurred last month, when he tried to pick up a package and found the branch inexplicably closed.
When he returned a week later, the office was open, but he was told that his package had been returned because he had not picked it up in time.
He called for the supervisor, who found the parcel.
Joy Wellington has grown so frustrated with the Hamilton Grange branch that she does all her postal business elsewhere.


Stephanie Sinn and Ira Lakritz
Stephanie Sinn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven L. Sinn of Englewood, N.J., was married last evening to Ira Lakritz, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Herman L. Lakritz of Wyckoff, N.J.
Rabbi David H. Lincoln officiated at the Mark Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Lakritz, 25, is a project director at Mediamark Research, a New York concern.
She graduated from Emory University.
Her father is the chairman of Page America Group, a radio paging company in Hackensack, N.J.
Her mother, Elizabeth M. Sinn, is a garden designer in Englewood.


Fleeing for Sanity: How Far Is Far Enough?
EVERYONE wants to know where I went on my vacation, so I might as well tell it once and get it over with.
I went around the corner and one block north and up a stoop and into the Inn at Irving Place.
For one night.
One night might not seem enough, even in a bedroom that has a wet bar and a TV, which my everynight bedroom does not, but I am still smiling because that one-night bedroom exists.
You have to know you can get away.
My English gardener is pulling up stakes because she feels trapped in the city.
She says if there is no surcease from sirens, jackhammers, screams, one will eventually go mad or south.
She chose to go south.


Shifting Shadows and the Multiple Personality of the Meatpacking District
Awad Al-Said is sitting in his silver gypsy cab on Ninth Avenue above 14th Street outside the Old Homestead Steak House.
A transvestite prostitute in a black leather jacket and pink chiffon bell-bottoms is standing just down the block under the buzz of the restaurant's neon signs.
Both are hoping for work.
Inside, where a 16-ounce Japanese Kobe steak goes for $115, the regular crowd of Wall Street bankers and Greenwich Village professionals has thinned.


The Aura of Pebble Beach Revives Nicklaus, Watson
Haunted old Pebble Beach came back to life today.
The sun went away, the cold mist crept in and some of the ghosts of Crosbys past walked the peninsula again, animating the third round of the AT&amp;T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am.
First came Jack Nicklaus, whose most recent hibernation has actually been more like some cryogenic suspended animation.
He was the first to show a pulse, shooting a round of 67 that was his first such round in regular tour competition since the second round of the 1993 Doral-Ryder Open.
He got it to eight under par and was startled to see his name on the leader board.


A New Mall For White Plains
To the Editor:
I enjoyed reading your "A New Mall for the City of 1,000 Stores" on Jan. 8 about the Westchester Pavilion in White Plains.
I was pleased that your reporter recognized a possible downside to the new mall: additional competitive pressure on the mom-and-pop downtown stores that have existed in White Plains for decades.


Wall Street; According to the Seat Index, It's a Bear Market
MOST equity markets in this country have long since recovered fully from the 1987 stock market crash.
The Dow Jones industrial average is more than 1,000 points above its precrash high.
But an important value for those who work in the markets -- the cost of a "seat" on an exchange -- has been much slower to recover.
Last week, however, the Chicago Board Options Exchange reported that a seat, really a license to be on the floor and trade, sold for $495,000, breaking the record of $465,000 set on Oct. 1, 1987, less than three weeks before disaster hit.


Homeless Children Gain an Advocate for Their Education
LAST YEAR, after a young mother had lost her job and was evicted from her apartment in Brentwood for not paying rent, she moved with her two children to a church basement.
While they lived there, the children did not attend school.
When an administrator in the Brentwood School District learned that the children had not attended school for an extended period of time, she called Kate Ventura, director of the Equity Support Services Program.
Eastern Suffolk Boces runs the program in cooperation with the County Social Services Department.


A Savory Slope
In the backwoods of Val Morin, a tiny village in the Laurentian Mountains, the ski trails don't distinguish between cross country and downhill.
You won't find smooth rolling tracks in Quebec's snow-heavy forests.
But rather, the slopes are steep and still, riveted with abrupt turns.
And silent.
We were there to learn -- ostensibly about technique, practically, about each other.
I was learning to trust my skis.
He was learning the perils of endurance.
I feigned courage, he timidity.
Fortunately, we are both persistent and take pleasure in satisfying a well-earned hunger, which is difficult if not impossible to do in ski country.


Sound Bytes; A Unifying Force at Novell
WHEN Christine G. Hughes joined Novell Inc. earlier this month as senior vice president for corporate marketing, she inherited the task of presenting a unified theme for the welter of software products that Novell's former chief executive, Raymond J. Noorda, had assembled in a multiyear acquisition binge.
The purchases included the Wordperfect Corporation; all the rights to the version of the Unix operating system developed by AT&amp;T and Borland International's Quattro Pro spreadsheet.
The big challenge is to coordinate this diverse lineup with Novell's flagship product, the Netware network operating system.


'The First Woman In the Republic'
To the Editor:
As a historian and biographer, I wish to express my outrage at the scope and tone of Drew Gilpin Faust's review of Carolyn L. Karcher's "cultural biography" of Lydia Maria Child, "The First Woman in the Republic" (Jan. 8).


To the Mountaintop and Back
WHEN THE performance artist Laurie Anderson set out on a hiking trip through the Himalayas two summers ago, she had no inkling how profoundly the experience would affect her work.
"I hadn't been in a crazy place for a while and wanted to go on an adventure," she says, explaining her journey.
A self-confessed workaholic, she had just completed "Stories From the Nerve Bible," a retrospective in book form of her 20-year career told in fables, pictures and diagrams.
At an arts festival in Munich, Germany, she had also recently met Lou Reed, the rock singer who would change her life in other significant ways.


Rhodes Should Strike a Chord With Jets Fans
Listening to Ray Rhodes, the Eagles' new head coach, talk about his vision for Philadelphia, one is struck with this thought: Where has this guy been while the National Football League coaching carousel has been spinning around the last couple of years?
The Jets are working on their third coach in three seasons, dismissing Bruce Coslet and Pete Carroll in back-to-back years and hiring Rich Kotite in January.
Kotite was dismissed by the Eagles' owner, Jeffrey Lurie, because their vision of the Eagles didn't mesh.


Jo or Amy: Who Would You Rather Be?
To the Editor:
It seems to me that Virginia Strong's reading of Caryn James's essay "Amy Had Golden Curls; Jo Had a Rat. Who Would You Rather Be?" lacks something in irony and humor (Letters, Jan. 15).
Although I have no personal knowledge of Ms.
James, her achievement as a respected film critic suggests she is not a dumb blonde (with curls) irresponsibly advocating the shallow virtues that Ms.
Strong takes her to be championing.
I was one of those self-consciously serious young women who, in eager response to the bias of "Little Women," donned too quickly the imagined, morally superior clothes that were Jo's -- only to mature and acquire the fuller understanding that moral vanity was perhaps more dangerous than personal vanity.
After all, it didn't require Nietzsche to discover that the moral advantage is often claimed by those resentful of the beautiful and rich; any young woman's first serious stirrings of envy, and her attendant honest reflections, would lead to the same discovery.


Don't Forget About American Coat Makers
To the Editor:
It's somewhat unfair to view the layoff of 300 Ukrainian workers -- a result of curbs on Ukrainian coat exports -- as a way "to shield a relative handful" of coat makers in Maine and elsewhere ("In Ukraine, a Free-Market Lesson Learned Too Well," Jan. 1).
American coat makers employ workers, too, and laid-off American workers can buy fewer products and may have to be supported by unemployment insurance or welfare.
The country loses their contribution to our gross domestic product and has to support them.
Sending American jobs abroad is one reason that real wages in America have fallen.
MARVIN H. SCILKEN  Manhattan, Jan. 2  The writer is a retired public librarian.


Jan. 29-Feb.4; New Doctor, Same Fever
President Clinton nominated a new Surgeon General last week, and the stage was set for yet another fight over sexuality and abortion in America when Dr.
Henry W. Foster, Jr., a prominent Tennessee obstetrician, , accepted the President's charge to begin a national drive against teen-age pregnancy.
Within days, some Republicans were bitterly questioning his, and the White House's, judgment after Dr.
Foster said that during nearly 30 years of practice he had performed "fewer than a dozen abortions." He also said he had delivered more than 10,000 babies.


Touched by War, A Legacy Laden With Melancholy
HE WAS DETACHED, distracted, easily bored; he was in it for the money.
Richard Strauss's laid-back approach to conducting is a familiar bit of musical lore, and it shows up again in the recently released Teldec video "The Art of Conducting," a mesmerizing although occasionally misleading audiovisual history of great conductors from Arthur Nikisch to Leonard Bernstein.
In a filmed appearance with the Vienna Philharmonic in 1944, Strauss traces idle curlicues in the air, exuding diffidence from every pore.
He casts a couple of mordant glances at the horn section but otherwise seems completely disengaged from the performance of "Till Eulenspiegel" unfolding before him.
This footage is used to illustrate a sardonic commentary by George Szell, Strauss's former assistant in Berlin, who tells that the maestro glanced at his watch during performances and hurried tempos in anticipation of the postconcert card game.
True to form, Strauss is shown imposing a sneaky accelerando.
The trouble with this picture is the sound; the orchestra plays with frantic intensity, pouncing on every phrase.
Between the saturnine old man and the raging orchestra, something is communicated that the camera cannot hope to capture.


Further Thoughts On Amtrak
Your article ("As Deadline Nears, Amtrak Project Raises Questions," Jan. 22) needs further exploration.
The proposed shoreline route needs major, costly reconstruction to accommodate the proposed high-speed electric equipment.
Even with our present outdated equipment, there are numerous curves that now require trains to slow to a crawl.


You Can Be in Fashion, In the Light, or in the Pool
UPTOWN -- "Very creative," Karl Lagerfeld, the designer who has done all kinds of strange things to the Chanel suit, said to Patty Adams, a fashion student wearing two baby bottles on her head at the New York State Theater on Jan 30.
"I like it when people make an effort."
Of course, when you're attending the Council of Fashion Designers of America Awards with the Princess of Wales, Anna Wintour, Calvin Klein and so many others who seem to believe that the outfit is the window to the soul, how could you not make an effort?


Metro-North Buys A Line for Future
THERE is only one problem with getting around Westchester by train: you can't get there from here.
The three Metro-North passenger lines that serve different parts of the county -- the Harlem, Hudson and New Haven Lines -- all run north to south.
So if you have a desire to go across the county -- from Tarrytown to Port Chester, for instance -- you need to take the train south from Tarrytown on the Hudson Line to Grand Central Terminal, change lines and then return north on the New Haven Line, covering 51 track miles to travel the 12 miles between the two villages.
All this may change if Metro-North's plans for the future come to fruition.
Two major east-to-west linkages are being considered, all with the intention of changing commuting patterns in and out of the county.
Metro-North recently announced the purchase of a rarely used freight line in Dutchess and Putnam Counties, which for the first time would connect all three passenger lines.
Further, Metro-North is engaged in a long-term study of the feasibility of offering service to Rockland County on the west side of the Hudson River, and one plan would put that rail service alongside Interstate 287.
That 12-mile route would save a traveler 39 miles on the train trip between Port Chester and Tarrytown by eliminating the trip to Grand Central.


Aide Says F.A.A. Destroyed Documents to Shield Senator
A Federal Aviation Administration official says documents sought in connection with a fatal plane crash have been improperly withheld and, in some cases, destroyed by his agency in an apparent effort to conceal interventions by the Senate minority leader, Tom Daschle, on behalf of a friend.
The official, Gary M. Baxter, also said the documents could have proved embarrassing to the F.A.A., whose second in command is Mr.
Daschle's wife, Linda.


Is the Mayor Ready to Back A Security Zone?
Mayor Giuliani went against the majority of local legislators on the Upper East Side last week when he said he would be "supportive" of a proposal to establish a huge private security district, similar to a business improvement district.
Although details have not been determined, proponents on the Upper East Side hope to raise $10 million to $20 million a year to pay for a force of 350 to 100 security guards to be deployed in a district that would include every East Side building from 59th Street to 96th Street.


Confrontation in the Bronx Illuminates Discord in a Troubled Precinct
Practically everybody at Bathgate Avenue and 183d Street in the Bronx sensed that the 48th Precinct was coming down harder than it had in years on the corner's drug dealers, even before someone -- no one would say who -- threw a brick from an apartment rooftop on Jan. 12, narrowly missing a parked patrol car.
But people said they were stunned the next night when a blue-and-white helicopter, patrol cars, vans and a jail wagon roared in and a few dozen police officers started handcuffing street peddlers and, by some accounts, shaking down pedestrians and people in the Jeannette Restaurant.
Even some parents who praised the precinct's effort to eradicate the crack and heroin trade said that some officers went too far, beating people and stealing money.


An Intimate Dinner For Valentine's Day
WHEN dinner for two for Valentine's Day is a homemade meal there has to be love in the preparation and serving.
This intimate feast starts with a rosy pasta dish followed by shrimp with artichokes and potatoes.
The dessert is chocolate, a warm baked pudding for two, which is best made about an hour in advance.
As for oysters, supposedly endowed with aphrodisiac qualities, some of these ordered on the half shell from a reliable fish market might be served with Champagne to start.


What Hollywood Doesn't Know About Money
"SHOW BUSINESS," AN OLD Hollywood saw has it, "is high school with money." In an industry motored by equal parts ego, envy and status lust, a Hollywood player's coffer has always been of interest to voyeurs of excess.
But now wages for stars and studio bosses have spiraled toward the gross national products of several small underdeveloped countries, and fiscal unreality has percolated down to the screen itself.
Story lines feature sums of money that have no more connection to life as most people know it than do space aliens or fairy godmothers.
In "Shallow Grave," a thriller set in Scotland that will open on Friday, three young professionals sharing an apartment in Edinburgh find a suitcase gorged with $:50 notes in the room of a new flatmate who has died.
The remaining roommates, who are best friends, decide to dispose of the body and keep the cash.
But friendships perish under the weight of the apparently huge amount of money.


Zing Went the G-String of My Heart
BORDER MUSIC By Robert James Waller. 248 pp. New York: Warner Books. $17.95.


Investors Drop Mexico and Woo Peru; Voices of Women
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 30 news article about the brewing border conflict between Equador and Peru noted that 18 women's groups in both countries issued a joint statement warning their peoples against falling into "the war trap."


After Years of Rising Vacancies, Malls at Co-op City Bounce Back
Last spring, Giulio Divito looked around the Dreiser Loop mall in Co-op City and saw five vacant stores.
Undeterred, Mr.
Divito, who owns a pizzeria and deli inside the mall, decided to get into a third business in the mall, a chicken rotisserie outlet.
After spending $310,000 to renovate a store once occupied by a kosher deli, he recently opened N.Y.
BBQ.
Mr.
Divito did not foresee that Co-op City would rebound rapidly from years of rising vacancies and that its three shopping malls would be fully occupied.
"When that happened," he said, "I felt, boy, I was a smart guy. But I was just a lucky guy."


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  House
1.
Mandates: Vote on passage of legislation making it harder for Congress to impose new requirements on the states and cities without providing Federal money to pay for them.
Approved 360 to 74, Feb. 1.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . . Yea
2. Gejdenson (D) . . . Nay
3. DeLauro (D) . . . Yea
4. Shays (R) . . . Yea
5. Franks (R) . . . Yea
6. Johnson (R) . . . Yea  New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . . Yea
2. LoBiondo (R) . . . Yea
3. Saxton (R) . . . Yea
4. Smith (R) . . . Yea
5. Roukema (R) . . . Yea
6. Pallone (D) . . . Yea
7. Franks (R) . . . Yea
8. Martini (R) . . . Yea
9. Torricelli (D) . . . Yea
10. Payne (D) . . . Nay
11. Frelinghuysen (R) . . . Yea
12. Zimmer (R) . . . Yea
13. Menendez (D) . . . Yea  New York
1. Forbes (R) . . . Yea
2. Lazio (R) . . . Yea
3. King (R) . . . Yea
4. Frisa (R) . . . Yea
5. Ackerman (D) . . . Yea
6. Flake (D) . . . Yea
7. Manton (D) . . . Yea
8. Nadler (D) . . . Nay
9. Schumer (D) . . . Yea
10. Towns (D) . . . Nay
11. Owens (D) . . . Nay
12. Velazquez (D) . . . Nay
13. Molinari (R) . . . Yea
14. Maloney (D) . . . Nay
15. Rangel (D) . . . Nay
16. Serrano (D) . . . Nay
17. Engel (D) . . . Nay
18. Lowey (D) . . . Yea
19. Kelly (R) . . . Yea
20. Gilman (R) . . . Yea
21. McNulty (D) . . . Yea
22. Solomon (R) . . . Yea
23. Boehlert (R) . . . Yea
24. McHugh (R) . . . Yea
25. Walsh (R) . . . Yea
26. Hinchey (D) . . . Nay
27. Paxon (R) . . . Yea
28. Slaughter (D) . . . Nay
29. LaFalce (D) . . . Nay
30. Quinn (R) . . . Yea
31. Houghton (R) . . . Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Channel Tunnel
To the Editor: Engaged by your Dec. 4 article on the Channel Tunnel train, my daughter and I decided on second-class 14-day advance purchase London-to-Paris seats.
When I called the Eurostar reservations number, however, I was told that these tickets were available only in very limited numbers and were long gone for the day on which we would be traveling.
I grudgingly reserved two unrestricted second-class seats at $123 each, as opposed to $75.
I had assumed I could wait until the 14-day deadline loomed to purchase the less-expensive tickets, since, as your article clearly stated, they are nonrefundable and cannot be exchanged.
After all, the article did not indicate that their availability is limited, nor did other articles I have seen.
The automated message one hears on Eurostar's 800 number does not indicate limited availability.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about efforts to put more power in the hands of states, rather than the Federal Government, rendered the 10th Amendment to the Constitution incorrectly.
It states: "The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the states, are reserved to the states respectively, or to the people." The article also misstated the date of the passage of the Voting Rights Act.
It was 1965, not 1964.


Venomous Prose
To the Sports Editor:
In a social and political environment saturated with constant and at times irritating standards of political correctness, I hesitated to write this letter.
However, three days of reflection of the characterization of Mary Pierce's hitting style in the report on her Australian Open victory ("At 20, Pierce Captures Title and a Dream," The Times, Jan. 28), combined with an informal survey taken in the interim, has led me to conclude that Robin Finn's description of Pierce's "hitting with a man's power and a woman's venom" is at best silly, and at worst, misogynistic.


When Loss Yields To Magic and Hope
Highlander: The Final Dimension  Christopher Lambert, Mario Van Peebles, Deborah Unger, Mako Directed by Andy Morahan PG-13 94 minutes


Compiling A Child's Safety Kit
SGT.
PAUL CARIFI of the Morris County Sheriff's office has two ways of explaining why he wants to photograph every child in the county for Project Kid Care.
He recites statistics about violent crimes against children.
And then he talks about a little girl in a pink dress lying in the morgue.
As a crime lab officer, Sergeant Carifi, 52 years old, has not been active in the initial stages of missing-children cases.
"Unfortunately, I've only been involved in the endings," he said in a recent interview.
One case ended a few years ago in the Passaic County Morgue, whose officials had asked for help from


Italian With Hominess in Old Greenwich
WITH the arrival of Applausi (meaning applause) in Old Greenwich, a mini restaurant empire expands again.
Others in the family group include Maria's Trattoria in Norwalk, Apulia in South Norwalk, Columbus Park Trattoria in Stamford and the new Osteria in Westport.
Applausi seems to be top of the line, both in price and decor, though the food bears the family stamp of old-fashioned Italian hominess.
The dining space is trifocal: elegant in its two-tone wood wall paneling, casual in the rush-bottom chairs and whimsical in the multicolor chandeliers.


Corrections
A map on Jan. 22 with an article about Boca Raton, Fla., located the Boca Raton Resort and Club incorrectly.
It is south of Palmetto Road, near the Boca Raton Inlet, not farther north off Interstate 95.


A Triangle Yields 'Couplets'
RACHEL and Ken were lovers.
Ken wasn't good enough for Rachel, though, and dropped out of her life.
Now Rachel has another lover, Carl.
Carl recited Yeats, Keats and Shakespeare to woo her and she succumbed.
But Carl and Rachel are both strong willed.
Will their relationship last?
Victoria Wyndham, who plays Rachel Cory on the NBC soap opera "Another World," knows something about long-term relationships; she has been connected with the program for 23 years.
Now Ms.
Wyndham, a 20-year Katonah resident, is involved in an artistic triangle with two of the men who have been in and out of her character's life since 1971: Charles Keating, who plays Carl Hutchins, her present love interest, and Lewis Arlt, who took his leave as the adventurer Ken Jordan several seasons ago.


Progress and Setbacks for a Downtown in Search of a Vision
As the focus of a sweeping vision of economic revival, Downtown Brooklyn has never quite reached the goals set for it in the 1980's when planners and developers saw a hotel, two office towers, a $1 billion high-technology office and academic complex and a 24-acre office, retail and housing center in its future.
To be sure, progress has been made.
Metrotech, the 10-block office and academic center -- a downtown unto itself -- is nearing completion and full occupancy.
The Pierrepont Plaza and Livingston Plaza office towers are built and fully occupied, and construction has begun on the first phases of Atlantic Center, the retail and housing complex.


THE GREAT IVY LEAGUE NUDE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
You write that "scientists coaxed the best and brightest" college freshmen "out of their clothes." But they were not "coaxed"; they were coerced -- required by college administrators to be photographed naked.
I know of at least one case where a student who refused was not allowed to matriculate.
ELAINE STAINTON Brooklyn


G.O.P. MANEUVERS TO TOP PRESIDENT IN PARING SPENDING
As President Clinton lays his five-year budget on the table on Monday with a bid to shave $144 billion from Federal spending as its centerpiece, the Republican Congress is preparing to meet that -- and trim several hundred billion dollars more as well.
The prospects of negotiating such a maneuver are loaded with political as well as fiscal implications.
And they will become clearer in the weeks ahead, when House Republicans unveil the first of two installments of their budget: a five-year package of $200 billion in tax cuts and another $200 billion in spending cutbacks to pay for them.


Letters Emotional and Philosophical
BETWEEN FRIENDS The Correspondence of Hannah Arendt and Mary McCarthy 1949-1975  Edited and With an Introduction by Carol Brightman  412 pages.
Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $34.95
Mary McCarthy, the iconoclastic novelist from Seattle, and Hannah Arendt, the emigree political philosopher from Germany, "first met at the Murray Hill Bar in Manhattan in 1944," writes Carol Brightman in her introduction to "Between Friends: The Correspondence of Hannah Arendt and Mary McCarthy 1949-1975." They had in common sharp minds and friends.
Ms.
Brightman continues, "Mary McCarthy, then married to Edmund Wilson, was accompanied by the critic Clement Greenberg, whose brother Martin was a co-worker of Hannah Arendt's at Schocken Books."


Slowdown Is Raising Questions
After 15 months of robust growth, the American economy is beginning to slow.
But no one can know yet from the scant emerging evidence whether the slowdown will turn out to be only a lull -- followed by another stretch of strong growth -- or the beginning of a slide toward much slower economic growth, if not recession.
Auto sales and home construction, the two pillars of growth, remain mostly intact.
But once built, the new homes now sell less quickly.
Many retailers find they must offer bigger discounts to keep people buying.
Manufacturers say that while they are still very busy, new orders are not as numerous.
And last month, for the first time since 1992, the unemployment rate rose.


Is China Stumbling?; Some See Mishandling of Ties With U.S., Raising Questions About Deng's Successor
After a series of policy miscalculations by China's Communist Party leadership, Chinese and Western officials are beginning to ask whether President Jiang Zemin is mishandling the nation's relations with the United States.
Despite an initial success last May -- President Clinton's decision to determine China's trade privileges independent of its human rights record -- Mr.
Jiang, 68, has made one stumble after another in dealing with Washington, these officials say.


CKE Restaurants Picks Mendelsohn
CKE Restaurants Inc. in Anaheim, Calif., has selected Mendelsohn/Zien Advertising in Los Angeles to handle the account of its Carl's Jr. chain of fast-food restaurants, which had been at the Los Angeles office of Grey Advertising since December 1993.
Billings for 1995 were estimated at $25 million.


New Consultant At Elizabeth Arden
Neil Kraft, a well-known creative executive in fashion and retail advertising, has joined Elizabeth Arden Inc., the cosmetics and fragrance company, as a consultant.
Susan Arnot, a spokeswoman for Arden in New York, said Friday that Mr.
Kraft was consulting on a "very open-ended basis" on creative elements like "the visual image of Arden," working with executives like Paulette Dufault, senior vice president for advertising and creative services, and Joseph X. Spellman, executive vice president for marketing development and creative services.


Rockets Unload 3-Pointers To Sink the Suns at Home
Rockets 124, Suns 100
The 3-point sniping of Vernon Maxwell and Sam Cassell and Hakeem Olajuwon's strength inside led the Houston Rockets to a 124-100 rout of the Suns in Phoenix yesterday.


Manhattan Runs Streak To 9 Games
Manhattan 81, Niagara 53
Streaking Manhattan, paced by a balanced scoring attack, routed slumping Niagara, 81-53, today in a Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference game in Buffalo.
It was the Jaspers' ninth consecutive victory; the Purple Eagles have lost 11 in a row.


Public Relations Acquisition
In an acquisition of one New York-based public relations agency by another, Ruder-Finn has bought the Kahn Communications Group.
The terms were not disclosed.
Kahn, which has billings estimated at $2 million from clients including AT&amp;T and Liz Claiborne, will keep its name and move into Ruder-Finn's office at 301 East 57th Street at Second Avenue.
Jeff Kahn, 36, chairman and creative director at Kahn, was named to the additional new position of president at Ruder-Finn Technology.


Knicks' Experience Is No Magic Edge
The entire 53 minutes had the unmistakable feel of a playoff game, and the final 5 of those 53 had the feel of one memorable playoff game in particular.
The site and opponent were different, the time of season far less crucial.
There was, however, a Houston Game 7 method to the Knicks' overtime madness here yesterday, and in their post-game expressions of regret and stress, which told you something meaningful had slipped away.


G.O.P. Senate Leaders Say Surgeon General Choice Is in Trouble
President Clinton's choice for Surgeon General came under more intense scrutiny today, with the top two Republican leaders in the Senate saying the appointment was in trouble because the nominee had performed some abortions and the White House had failed to alert the Senate to that fact in advance.
"I think the Administration, maybe they should have known, they surely asked the question," Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, said on the NBC News program "Meet the Press." "That troubles me almost as much as knowing they sent up this nomination. Will it be in some difficulty? Yes."


In Performance; CABARET
Four Decades of Songs That Touched America's Heart  'You Keep Coming Back Like a Song' Michael's Pub
"You Keep Coming Back Like a Song," a breezy, low-key revue of Irving Berlin's songs at Michael's Pub (211 East 55th Street, Manhattan) for an open-ended run, points up one of the reasons Berlin, more than George Gershwin, Cole Porter or Richard Rodgers, is widely regarded as the quintessential American songwriter.


Washington Talk; Signs of Life From Foes Of Balanced Budget Bill
The constitutional amendment to require a balanced budget rolled through the House of Representatives with all the power of a political idea showing 80 percent support in the polls.
It was an almost irresistible symbol of the new conservative ascendancy, all the more so because whatever countervailing pressure might have come from the left seemed so utterly overwhelmed.
But now, with more time and more tactical possibilities in the Senate, the opposition may be showing a few signs of life.


Capote's 'In Cold Blood' as Basis of a Quasi Opera
Calling "Failing Kansas" a multimedia opera, as its composer and lyricist, Mikel Rouse, does, is pushing things a bit.
It certainly displays some operatic characteristics.
It is inspired by Truman Capote's "In Cold Blood" and is scored for voice, film and multitrack tape.
But an opera is usually a public event, a narrative meant to communicate something out of the ordinary.
On Friday night at the Kitchen, this new 75-minute piece actually seemed private, constructed for those who already know what is to be communicated and why.
It is full of codes, signals and inside allusions.
This impression does not really come from the music; it is not an esoteric or difficult score.
It contains a Protestant hymn, folk-rock-style accompaniments, some tender motifs, sounds of harmonicas, guitars and strings and much Minimalist patter.
It also contains something that Mr.
Rouse, who is the sole performer, calls counterpoetry, in which he recites lines in strict meter that are accompanied by other taped lines in strict meter; a phrase might be heard overlapping itself in a sort of metrical fugue, resembling what Glenn Gould accomplished in his radio documentaries.


A Suspect Is Stopped Cold
Yesterday was a day Jose Lopez will surely remember, if not fondly.
The police said his misadventures began shortly before noon, when he was spotted breaking a car window with a brick and removing a cellular phone.
Chased by three officers and cornered at the Hudson River's edge, he climbed down a piling and into the water, where he tried to pull himself across an inlet using a cable strung just above the surface.
He didn't get far before the cold stopped him. (No surprise here; the temperature was 20.)


Reminder Of Rogues
In an attempt to reassure the public and protect precinct morale, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton has repeatedly said that nothing nearly as serious as the drug-related corruption scandal that engulfed the 30th Precinct in Harlem last year was being investigated in any other precinct.
Mr.
Bratton's observation had a soothing affect on a city that became alarmed about reports that nearly one out of five officers in the Harlem precinct lied in court, shook down drug dealers, and drove wildly up and down Broadway in their radio cars.
But the revelations of the last two weeks about widespread abuses in the 109th Precinct in Flushing, Queens and the 48th Precinct in the East Tremont section of the Bronx suggest now that that corruption is far more widespread throughout the city, even if in smaller doses, than police officials have acknowledged.


Turning the Tables on Race Relations
The film crew of "White Man's Burden," working in a deserted factory in downtown Los Angeles, wears surgical masks to deflect the thick dust and acrid smell.
John Travolta keeps nodding off, the result of three nights of filming until dawn.
Harry Belafonte's raspy voice is even raspier, and he keeps coughing.
And the first-time director, Desmond Nakano, who also wrote the screenplay, sips coffee, rubs his hands to keep warm and struggles to cope with his two exhausted stars.
Mr.
Travolta smiled.
"Like 'Pulp Fiction,' this film will probably cost me money because I won't make a dime out of it," he said, "but I read this script standing up in my kitchen and I thought, I've got to do this."


A Suspect Is Stopped Cold
Yesterday was a day Jose Lopez will surely remember, if not fondly.
The police said his misadventures began shortly before noon, when he was spotted breaking a car window with a brick and removing a cellular phone.
Chased by three officers and cornered at the Hudson River's edge, he climbed down a piling and into the water, where he tried to pull himself across an inlet using a cable strung just above the surface.
He didn't get far before the cold stopped him. (No surprise here; the temperature was 20.)


Making Names in Flashing Lights at Pinball's Pinnacle
Alysa Parks needs a nickname.
But not to worry; after this weekend's PAPA 5 World Pinball Championships, her celebrity in the tight world of flippers and silver balls is fixed, and a suitable handle is sure to follow.
With apologies to the Who, Ms.
Parks, a 26-year-old graduate student in Judaic studies and business at the University of Denver, "sure plays a mean pinball." In this, her first appearance in the Professional and Amateur Pinball Association, or PAPA, tournament, she racked up the highest score in the opening round of the women's division and earned the glances, gestures and whispers of reverent opponents.


HOCKEY: Sports of the Times; Cup Heavier For Rangers
WHEN the Rangers, one by one, were holding the Stanley Cup high in that surreal scene in Madison Square Garden last June and again when the championship banner recently was raised into the rafters there, it didn't seem that heavy.
It weighs only about 30 pounds.
But like anything else, the longer you hold it, the heavier it gets.
To the Rangers now, the Stanley Cup must feel as if it weighs 300 pounds.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Again Youth Is Served, This Time by Beethoven  Helen Huang, pianist Avery Fisher Hall
The New York Philharmonic's season has been rich (if that is the word) with child prodigies.
The latest is Helen Huang, a 12-year-old pianist who played the Beethoven Concerto No. 1 on Thursday night.
Ms.
Huang has a precocious technique, an unusually resonant sound for one so young and a capacity to absorb and comprehend lessons taught her about Classical style.


In Performance; POP
The Sound of Jungle, A New Dance Import  General Levy Limelight
Jungle, the newest dance music to come from England, continued its attempt to break into American culture on Thursday night when General Levy performed.
Mr.
Levy is England's best-known jungle musician, or junglist, mainly because last September his single with a producer known as M-Beat became the first jungle song to enter the English top 10.
Jungle (a term taken from the nickname for a neighborhood in Kingston, Jamaica) is an inner-city dance music identifiable by its high-velocity, cut-up, out-of-control drumbeats and deep, heavy bass line.
It is often accompanied by the patter of a Jamaican M.C., which is where Mr.
Levy, a reggae musician and disk jockey, fits in.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Productivity . . . 4th Qtr.
Consumer Borrowing . . .
Dec.
Wednesday  None  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Producer Price Index . . .
Jan.


Muslim Cleric's Words Bode Ill for Mideast Peace Prospects
To the Editor:
"Muslims Argue Theology of Peace With Israel" (news article, Jan. 31) sheds light on an important dimension of the peace effort in the Middle East.
Readiness of Arab states to recognize the legitimacy and permanence of Israel has long been seen as a pillar of enduring peace.


Racial Tensions in Los Angeles Jails Ignite Inmate Violence
For days and weeks and months, prisoners in the tiny six-man cells of the high-security floor in Men's Central Jail lie passively on their double-decker bunks.
They have dimmed the ceiling light with a mask of newspaper.
They have stashed their sneakers in a row along the bars.
Their torsos are covered with extravagant gang tattoos and their heads are shaved, not in punishment but in the fashion of the Hispanic gangs that dominate the jail population of Los Angeles County.


Publishing
IT used to be that a literary agent first sold a book to a publisher and then tried to sell it to the movies.
But increasingly the rules of the game are changing.
Hollywood is hungrier than ever these days, and studios, unabashedly competitive in their hunt for new movie material, have become even more zealous in their efforts to snatch up book manuscripts, sometimes even before a publishing contract is in place.


Magazines Follow Baby Boomers Into the Garden
A few years ago, in the course of his travels around the country, Douglas Jimerson, the garden editor of Better Homes and Gardens, became puzzled as to why people were beginning to refer to their lawns and backyards as rooms.
"Rooms?" he wondered. Then the light went on.


Treatment, Not Jail, Saves Lives and Money; Let Rehabilitated Go
To the Editor:
I want to applaud the expected overhaul of the Rockefeller drug laws of New York State.
It's about time State Senate leaders and Gov.
George E. Pataki realize that long sentences for nonviolent drug crimes do nothing more than cost taxpayers a lot of money.


CHRONICLE
In the better-late-than-never category: In 1955, HARVEY PHILLIPS , a tubist, was asked to play a concerto for tuba by Ralph Vaughan Williams with the Little Orchestra Society in New York.
But he was in the Army, stationed at Fort Meade in Maryland, so he recommended that his teacher, William Bell, then the principal tubist in the New York Philharmonic, do it instead.
On Thursday night, 40 years to the day of that concert, Mr.
Phillips finally played the concerto with the Little Orchestra Society at Alice Tully Hall.


Cuomo After the Fall
In his first public comment on the Pataki budget, former Governor Mario M. Cuomo accused his successor of cutting taxes at the expense of the disadvantaged.
He said he would have balanced the budget by refinancing debt and cutting some jobs.
Metro Matters, page B3.


Abidjan Journal; Migrants' Sad Cries Now Echo Through Africa
When a Gabonese rustbucket named the Buffalo finally limped into this city's port the other day, unloading its cargo of wearied refugees down a rickety gangplank, the landing might have been just another in a score of repatriations that have long been the lot of migrants in this region.
Instead, the fortunes of thousands of West Africans who had been given until the end of January to quit the Central African nation of Gabon have opened a bitter debate about regional cooperation and the meaning of nationality in a continent whose borders were drawn up over 100 years ago by outside powers.


A Leak May Alter Discovery's Plans
A leaky jet thruster on the space shuttle Discovery yesterday forced ground controllers in Houston and in Kaliningrad, Russia, to race to revise plans for a historic rendezvous today between the winged spaceship and Russia's orbiting Mir space station.
The original plan was for Discovery slowly to come within 33 feet of the Russian outpost in a rehearsal for the first shuttle-station linkup, which is scheduled for June.


Deciphering Shylock Yet Again For Contemporary Sensibilities
In this age of occasional enlightenment, there have been two principal ways of dealing with the villainies that Shakespeare attributed to Shylock and that make "The Merchant of Venice" such a problematic play.
Venetian society can be shown to be so frivolous and self-absorbed that Shylock, by comparison, is a figure of heroic proportions.
Or the play can be presented as a portrait of a world so grotesquely bigoted that Shylock's desire for revenge on his gentile oppressors is even more politically acceptable than Rambo's on the Vietcong.


Martin And U.S.  Gain in Cup
When Todd Martin awoke today, he felt the gravity of the task ahead.
His Davis Cup teammate Jim Courier took him aside in the morning simply to remind him "to do what you do best."
"It was just a nice gesture," said the 24-year-old Martin.
"I was pretty nervous and pretty anxious to get going."


METRO DIGEST
DESPITE MANY RULES, SWEATSHOPS THRIVE
Sweatshops still exist all over New York City 104 years after Jacob Riis chronicled dangerous physical conditions and exploitative labor practices in apparel factories on the Lower East Side.
In fact they are flourishing, despite a host of laws that have accumulated since Riis's days -- rules on labor, health, safety and immigration designed to flush them out and, if necessary, shut them down.
The shops continue to thrive because of dramatic changes in the apparel industry, which in New York has shifted from the large factories that once replaced sweatshops back to the small shops themselves.
A1.
BRONX ZOO AVIARY COLLAPSES UNDER SNOW
The gracefully arched 19th-century aviary at the Bronx Zoo -- home to a colony of 100 South American sea birds and a landmark to generations of New Yorkers and visitors -- collapsed in a gust of wind under the weight of a foot of snow during Saturday's storm, and dozens of exotic gulls and terns flew away, zoo officials said.
But no birds were killed, and only one was known to have been injured.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  SHOVELING OUT OF DIRE STRAITS
The ice, snow and frigid temperatures that made yesterday a mess in the New York metropolitan region after the winter's first big snowstorm was nothing but a blessing for Betty Smith.
An unemployed mother of four children, Ms.
Smith bundled up and found work yesterday helping shovel the city out of its misery.
But the consequences of the storm were not the same for everyone.
B3.
OFFICER HELD IN ATTACK ON PROSTITUTE
It may be unusual that a prostitute calls the police for help.
And it is not every day that a police officer is arrested after the prostitute calls him her "john." But that is apparently what happened early yesterday in the Chelsea section of Manhattan.
The officer was charged with attempted murder after the prostitute said he fired his gun at her.
B2.
WOMAN MAKES NAME AT PINBALL PINNACLE
In her first appearance in the Professional and Amateur Pinball Association tournament, at the Park Central Hotel in midtown Manhattan, a 26-year-old graduate student in Judaic studies and business racked up the highest score in the opening round of the women's division.
The performance by Alysa Parks earned the glances, gestures and whispers of reverent opponents.
B2.
YOUTHS WAGE ANTI-VIOLENCE CAMPAIGN
The violence that is a part of New York City life came to the front steps of the Hudson Guild Settlement House late one evening last June, when a shootout erupted outside.
The gunfire gave added immediacy to an anti-violence project that kept youths at the guild busy last spring and summer.
As members of a program called Students Against Violence, they produced three public-service announcements that were shown on local cable television channels and distributed to other youth organizations.
B2.
BUILDING'S PROPERTY TAXES TO BE REPAID
A State Supreme Court justice has ordered New York City to repay millions in property taxes on a once-proud 1920's office tower in lower Manhattan that has had virtually no tenants since 1991 and, in the depressed state of the downtown real estate market, no prospect of attracting any soon.
B6.
REGION  CUOMO ASSAILS PATAKI TAX CUTS
The last Governor of New York sounds outraged.
Disgusted.
Cut services to the poor so everyone else can get a small tax cut?
Risk hurting the homeless and the elderly?
Let the sickly fend for themselves?
Not if Mario M. Cuomo were still in charge.
Those who wonder what Mr.
Cuomo would have done if he had won in November need wonder no more.
He claims he would have denied New Yorkers an income tax cut as proudly as Governor Pataki offers it.
Metro Matters, B3.
WHERE THE DEAD CHRISTMAS TREES GO
Valentine's Day, Shmalentine's Day.
It's still Christmas in the suburbs.
Here and there, trees linger on long past their due, testaments to spirit or inertia.
"I just keep procrastinating," said Jim Rice, a solid-waste consultant who works in Scarsdale, N.Y., and lives in Mount Vernon.
Putting up a tree is "fun and festive," he said; taking it down is a "sad, dull job." B5.
Chronicle B5


Contrasts And Risks From Mutter
Anne-Sophie Mutter's program with Lambert Orkis at Carnegie Hall on Saturday night made little attempt to seduce the faint of heart.
Indeed, this slightly strange and sometimes satisfying collection of pieces for violin and piano pointed to an artist so secure in her career that she can play just about anything she wants and attract an audience.
One does not build a following, for example, on reductions of Stravinsky's "Pulcinella" Suite.
The contrast of elegant piano texture with rough double-stops and weird-sounding harmonics on the violin were further complicated by Miss Mutter's yearning portamento and other Romantic flourishes.
One could only wonder what Stravinsky would have thought.


Jacobsen Back in Swing at Pebble Beach
Here at the place where careers are revived, where the cold, misty air and rocky cliffs work as some sort of mystical elixir, another lost golfer returned to the Garden today.
Peter Jacobsen, 40, who has not won a golf tournament in five years, whose career briefly took a turn toward the television booth, planted both feet firmly on the ground and won the AT&amp;T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am.
In a performance as close to flawless as the old golf course has seen, Jacobsen did not bogey a hole, did not miss a green and did not give any of his pursuers a chance to catch him.
His round of 65 gave him a total of 271, 17 under par, a 72-hole tournament record, and a two-stroke victory over David Duval, who closed with a 67.


Accounts
*
Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas, New York, resigned the domestic portion of the Lexmark International account, with billings estimated at less than $5 million, as part of an effort to concentrate on larger accounts.
The account was originally assigned to Lintas New York, a predecessor shop, in 1988.
Ken Bissell, a spokesman for Lexmark in Lexington, Ky., said a review had begun. *
Miles Inc., Elkhart, Ind., has assigned the accounts of two brands recently acquired from Sterling Health U.S.A., New York.
McCann-Erickson New York was awarded Phillips' Milk of Magnesia, and Tatham Euro RSCG, Chicago, was awarded Midol pain reliever.
Under Sterling, both accounts had been at Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas, New York, until that agency resigned them because of a conflict.


Five Finalists For Volkswagen
Volkswagen of America Inc. has narrowed to five finalists the review on its account with estimated billings of $ 90 million.
Berlin Cameron Doyle in New York, which was dismissed in December, had handled the account since August 1993.


It's Been Too Long on Deck for O'Neill
Paul O'Neill wanted to take a different route back to Westchester County from Manhattan Friday after seeing "Beauty and the Beast" with his wife, Nevalee, and two sons.
Visiting from Ohio, he wanted to drive his scenic route past a monument in the South Bronx.
He wanted to see Yankee Stadium, his old office.
It had been six months since O'Neill stared up at the bright lights that frame casual summer nights as they sometimes turn into magical baseball evenings.
Six miserable months since he trotted onto the field or rocketed a ball into the bleachers or even verified the job description on his 1040 tax form as a professional baseball player.
So his vehicle turned into a tour bus with one stop.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  REBELS STILL TORMENT CAMBODIA
Two decades after they set in motion a peasant revolution that may have killed more than one million Cambodians, the Khmer Rouge and their leader, Pol Pot, continue to torment Cambodia.
A1


MTV's Sister Channel Alters Its Pitch
At 9 o'clock, Eastern time, on a recent Friday night, the cable-television music channel VH1 pre-empted its regular programming to sell concert tickets.
By arrangement with the rock star Tom Petty, VH1 offered its viewers first crack at 19,200 prime seats -- 400 tickets, at $25 to $45 apiece, for concerts in each of the 48 cities on Mr.
Petty's coming tour.
In the first 15 minutes of this experiment, viewers tried more than 500,000 times to call an "800" number that the channel flashed on the screen.
Only a tiny fraction of calls got through to the 500 operators fielding them, but the flood indicated that many more people than usual were tuned in.
The event had been heavily promoted on the channel and been written about in numerous newspaper articles.


Patents; Three Professors Have Found a New Way to Help Buildings Withstand the Shock of an Earthquake
AFTER the great earthquake of 1923 struck Tokyo, virtually the only significant downtown building left standing was Frank Lloyd Wright's Imperial Hotel.
Because Wright had built the hotel essentially on a foundation of floating pads, its base acted as a shock absorber, soaking up seismic motion without transmitting it to the rest of the building.
Since then structural engineers have used the Imperial Hotel as a model for earthquake-resistant structures, inventing different ways to make buildings that are flexible as well as strong.


Israel Eases Palestinian Entry Ban, but Refuses to Scrap It
Although slightly loosening its restrictions, Israel reaffirmed an entry ban today that has kept tens of thousands of Palestinians from work since Islamic suicide bombers killed 21 Israelis two weeks ago.
At its weekly meeting, the Government agreed to a list of exceptions to a territorial closing that has prevented Palestinians from crossing from the West Bank and Gaza Strip into Israel, even to reach Arab neighborhoods in Jerusalem that they regard as their cultural and business centers.


INSIDE
Three Troublesome Words
The president of Rutgers University weighs his future on a tottering scale: 35 years of deeds versus a three-word blunder.
Page B1.
A Lull, or Downturn?
The economy is slowing, but it's not clear whether it is pausing or starting a slide toward much slower growth, if not recession.
Page D1.
Baseball Deadline Today
A mediator's settlement proposal is expected to go to President Clinton today.
SportsMonday, page C1.
Doubts on Alexander's Tomb
Archeologists challenge a claim that the tomb of Alexander the Great has been found in Egypt.
Page A8.
A2 Arts


A New Chief For National Blue Cross
Patrick G. Hays takes over today as president and chief executive of the national Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association at a time of great stress and uncertainty in the nation's health system.
He will guide the 68 loosely affiliated medical and hospital plans through uncharted waters as Americans increasingly switch to health maintenance organizations and other managed-care alternatives to traditional insurance.
Although the largely nonprofit Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans lost 10 million enrollees in the 1990's, they still provide health care coverage for 65 million Americans, about one in four.


Treatment, Not Jail, Saves Lives and Money; Addict to Taxpayer
To the Editor:
Gov.
George E. Pataki is tough and sensible on crime when he proposes a revision of the Rockefeller drug laws (news article, Jan. 30) giving judges the option to consider residential drug-treatment programs, instead of prison sentences, for some nonviolent drug offenders.


Lingering Shadow -- A special report.; Rebels Still Torment Cambodia 20 Years After Their Rampage
It is said by Cambodians that anyone who doubts the truth of what happened here in 1975 must make the pilgrimage to this tiny village.
Because in what was once a fertile rice paddy on the outskirts of Phnom Penh, the capital, there is today a grisly and convincing memorial to the frenzied slaughter that erupted across Cambodia 20 years ago this spring.
One visitor needed no convincing at all.


Peru and Ecuador Wage Guerrilla War as Talks Break Off
With peace talks collapsing in Brazil today, Peruvian and Ecuadorean soldiers tried to settle on a rugged Amazon battlefield what diplomats failed to settle at a negotiating table.
After six days of talks in Rio de Janeiro, diplomats from South America and the United States broke off talks in frustration today after Ecuador announced that it needed "further time" to study a cease-fire plan.


Treatment, Not Jail, Saves Lives and Money; History of Reform
To the Editor:
Gov.
George E. Pataki's powerful stand for sentencing reform, seeking alternatives to incarceration for nonviolent, low-level drug offenders (news article, Jan. 30), should hit New York's consciousness with the force of Nixon's opening to China.


Our Forked Tongue
In these last years, and notably in these past months, we have heard much of the burden imposed by government on the citizen.
Nothing has been more emphasized in speech and possibly also in thought.
This comment is not meant to regret this concern, as some might suppose: rather, it is to clarify the way the word "burden" is now employed.
It has a very special connotation, of which all who cherish good or anyhow accepted English usage should be aware.
As now used, "burden" applies only to a very specific range of government activities.
Many are not a burden and are not to be so described.
Defense expenditure is definitely not a burden; indeed, increases therein are now being proposed.
That there is now no wholly plausible enemy does not affect the situation.
Similarly, in recent years large sums, in a range upward from $50 billion, have been appropriated to bail out failed financial institutions, specifically the savings and loan associations.
This was not a burden.
A clear distinction must be made between a burden and an admittedly unfortunate and costly financial misadventure.


Affirmative Action Will Be Examined In Senate, Dole Says
Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, said today that Senate Republicans planned to study whether affirmative action hiring requirements in Federal laws should be dropped.
Speaking on NBC's "Meet the Press," Mr.
Dole said he had asked the Congressional Research Service for copies of all Federal legislation that promoted affirmative action or involved the use of racial preferences in hiring and contracts.


Knicks Go Extra Mile But Earn No Bonus
The Knicks ruined a terrific comeback today with a terrible overtime.
This was a game the Knicks needed badly, a chance to take another bite out of the Orlando Magic's division lead.
And after trailing by 15 points late in the third quarter, New York showed character and determination, storming back to tie the game and starting the extra period with momentum.


In Performance; DANCE
A Blend of Bold Movement And Fluttery Costumes  The Stephen Petronio Company Joyce Theater
Anyone hoping to enjoy Stephen Petronio's dances must separate the essential from the extraneous in them.
What distinguishes them all is their bold movement.
But lately Mr.
Petronio has been adorning his creations with fripperies.
That was made clear on Thursday night when the Stephen Petronio Company offered the second of its programs at the Joyce Theater.
Four works were presented, the earliest first, the most recent last.
Although each had choreographic strengths, they became inexplicably odder visually.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Sports of The Times; Big East Celebrates A Haunting Legacy
WHO can blame Jim Calhoun for being a little testy. I'd be testy, too.
Calhoun's Connecticut Huskies had just routed St.
John's, 99-82, at Madison Square Garden on Saturday for the team's 17th victory against only one loss.
With eight games left, the victory tightened Connecticut's hold on first place in the Big East; with one month remaining before the conference tournament, Connecticut was in the driver's seat.
The Huskies continue to be the tristate area's dream team, a cross between Cinderella and Snow White.


For Nets, Setbacks Seem to Be Game Plan
If the Nets were on the cusp of a weathered basketball team before, they may have reached the precipice on Saturday night.
All that you need to know about their problems is that the Boston Celtics beat them convincingly; neither Derrick Coleman nor Kenny Anderson will be ready to play by the All-Star Game break, and the plausible notion of making a playoff run is beginning to fade to black and blue.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Some Unexpected Instruments Take the Spotlight  Little Orchestra Society Alice Tully Hall
On the face of it, the Little Orchestra Society had a charming idea for its concert on Thursday night: concertos for exotic instruments seldom given the solo spotlight.
Concertos exist for every conceivable instrument, from ocarina to contrabassoon.
A few have been written in the spirit of enlightened curiosity; many others are produced on demand, by composers desperate for performances on behalf of soloists desperate for something to play.


Muslim Cleric's Words Bode Ill for Mideast Peace Prospects; Building on the Dream
To the Editor:
The declaration by several in the Government of Israel that a wall should be built separating the areas occupied by Palestinians from those of Jews is going in the wrong direction.
The decent, moderate people on both sides must join to fight extremists and terrorists.
Apartheid must end in Israel.
Otherwise there will never be peace.


Friends of Bill
Former Gov.
Jim Florio is one of many state residents to give to President Clinton's legal defense fund.
It was established to defray the President's legal expenses, including those connected to the Whitewater investigation and accusations of sexual harassment made by Paula Jones.
Mr.
Florio gave $1,000.


Where Do Dead Christmas Trees Go?
Valentine's Day, Shmalentine's Day.
It's still Christmas in the suburbs.
Here and there, trees linger on long past their due, testaments to spirit or inertia.
"I just keep procrastinating," said Jim Rice, a solid-waste consultant who works in Scarsdale, N.Y., and lives in Mount Vernon.
Putting up a tree is "fun and festive," he says, but taking it down is a "sad, dull job."


Arbitrating an Arbitrator
You would think a state with a legislature controlled by Republicans -- all quite determined to cut taxes -- would be able to pass a bill aimed at curbing the salaries of police and fire departments.
But an Assembly bill that would change how arbitrations between municipalities and police and fire departments are handled, is a commentary on how powerful the police and fire union lobbyists remain.
Under current law, the arbitrator must choose the final offer of either the union or the municipality.
Only the salaries in nearby departments are considered, and municipal officials say that this drives police and fire department salaries in a continuing upward spiral.


Hard Labor -- A special report.; Despite Tough Laws, Sweatshops Flourish
A 4-year-old girl plays with a cloth doll in an aisle of a small, dingy garment factory in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, while her mother sews thin cotton sweaters nearby.
A 44-year-old immigrant from China works 12 hours a day, seven days a week, in a windowless garment shop in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, earning $200 on a good week -- or less than $2.50 an hour.


Astronaut Takes City Where She Was Raised to the Stars
Harris Hill rises steeply from the Chemung River Valley just north of this striving industrial city, tucked in the palm of rolling farmlands along New York State's Southern Tier.
On balmy days, when the white carpets of winter are distant memories, gliders sling-shot off that ridge, soaring on the lift of warm northwesterly winds.


India Now Winning U.S. Investment
Until recently, anybody planning to invest $100 million in an industrial complex in the Indian state of West Bengal would have been considered a gambler or worse.
West Bengal, with its capital, Calcutta, has been ruled for nearly two decades by a Communist government, with an economic record many Indians compare to the one compiled by the Calcutta government's old mentors in Moscow.
But when India's economic-overhaul program began picking up pace last year, George Soros, the New York-based financier, looked first to West Bengal, which has abandoned its Marxist scruples and begun to bid eagerly for foreign investment.
Last month, Soros Fund Management, Mr.
Soros's investment company, announced that its flagship investment in India would be a partnership in a $1.25 billion petrochemical complex at Haldia, south of Calcutta.


Serbian Helicopter Flights Are One More Sign of Bosnia's Woes
More than 15 Serbian helicopters, apparently on a resupply mission, crossed from Serbia into Bosnia and Herzegovina just before dusk on Friday, a report from Dutch United Nations military observers says.
The mission of the helicopters suggested once again that the Serb-dominated Yugoslav Army is still heavily involved in the Bosnian war, that President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia is less than sincere in saying he has cut off the Bosnian Serbs, and that NATO's enforcement of a no-flight zone over Bosnia is patchy.


Abroad at Home; The Lost Leader
Under the leadership of Newt Gingrich, radical legislation is moving through the House of Representatives at an extraordinary pace.
Bills that would profoundly change the structure of government and its functions follow one upon the other.
Equally striking is the failure of leadership on the other side.
The man who should be telling the American people what is at stake here -- explaining what the real impact of the Gingrich revolution would be -- has been almost completely silent.
That is President Clinton.


Knicks Go Extra Mile But Earn No Bonus
The Knicks ruined a terrific comeback today with a terrible overtime.
This was a game the Knicks needed badly, a chance to take another bite out of the Orlando Magic's division lead.
And after trailing by 15 points late in the third quarter, New York showed character and determination, storming back to tie the game and starting the extra period with momentum.


Market Place; Mutual and Pension Funds Take a Big Hit in Peso Crisis
Nearly seven weeks after the Mexican peso began its sharp slide, mutual and pension funds, as opposed to commercial and investment banks, appear to be the biggest losers among American investors.
But economists and analysts warn that the pain could spread if Mexico's financial markets decline further.
The rescue plan announced last week by President Clinton caused Mexican stocks to rebound from their lows by more than 10 percent in a single day, but that gain only erased a small part of the losses suffered by investors who held Mexican stocks and bonds when the peso was first devalued on Dec. 20.
Since then, the average total return of 16 Latin American mutual funds, with assets of $ 3.3 billion, declined by 26.7 percent, according to Morningstar Inc.
Pension funds, which generally publish their results quarterly, presumably took similar hits.


Senate Wants History Panel to Proceed
To the Editor:
Neither Lynne V. Cheney (letter, Jan. 30) nor Eric Foner (letter, Jan. 31) provides a full description of the Senate resolution on the National History Standards.


When Family and Coaching Collide
In 1991, Liz Mueller of Waterford, Conn., was the brightest young female middle-distance runner in the United States.
She was the national high school cross-country champion at 5,000 meters and the national Junior Olympic track and field champion in the 800 meters.
Few developing runners had shown her precocious combination of speed and stamina.
Today, instead of advancing toward her Olympic dreams, Mueller is a struggling small-college runner embroiled in an intensifying dispute between her parents and her long-time personal coach that threatens her athletic future.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Czechoslovak Tradition Is Alive and Well  Prazak Quartet Weill Recital Hall
Since the emergence of the legendary Bohemian Quartet at the turn of the century, Czechoslovak string quartets have played a leading role in European chamber music.
The Talich, Smetana and Panocha quartets, among others, have carried this lustrous tradition into the present day.
The 23-year-old Prazak Quartet also deserves international notice.
In tonal quality and ensemble precision it may not equal the most polished American groups, but the largely Czechoslovak program it performed on Friday night had an unmistakably authentic stamp.


Achievement Award for Arthur Mitchell
Arthur Mitchell, founder and director of Dance Theater of Harlem, is to be presented with a lifetime achievement award by the School of American Ballet today at the school's annual "Backstage with S.A.B." awards dinner at the New York State Theater.


Thomas Hayward, Leading Met Tenor In 40's, Dies at 77
Thomas Hayward, a leading tenor at the Metropolitan Opera in the 1940's and 1950's, died on Thursday at his home in Las Vegas, Nev.
He was 77.
He had suffered from kidney and heart failure, said a daughter, Carol Anne Klusak.


Hold That Line-Item
The House of Representatives, which has promised to convert itself into a citadel of fiscal prudence, is about to sign away a huge swath of its budget-making authority.
Its Republican masters maintain that giving the President a line-item veto would thwart pork-barrel projects and wasteful tax giveaways.
The idea is popular, but the principle is misguided and the political side-effects are dangerous.
The current line-item legislation, No. 2 in the Republicans' Contract With America, is set for a vote today.
President Clinton would welcome this power.
Indeed, a long line of Presidents have wanted it, including Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan.
But Congress has wisely withheld it, and there is a strong possibility the Senate will stand in the way this time.


In a Comedy of Errors, Pupil Outlasts Teacher
The good news is that James Naismith is still dead.
That way he could be spared the display created today by Kentucky and Syracuse, two universities that have transformed the good doctor's modest recreational invention into cash machines housed in massive buildings that are not big enough.
Neither school's tradition of success, deeply devoted following and current top-10 status was built upon days like this.
This made-for-television match, squeezed into intense conference schedules that will ultimately determine the direction of two high-profile seasons, was reduced to who would make the most frequent mistakes at the most costly times.


Pensioners Don't Gain From Mexico Bailout
To the Editor:
"Rescuing the Rescue Plan" (editorial, Feb. 1) states that the beneficiaries of a Mexico bailout would be "American workers with pension funds and mutual funds invested in Mexico."


Arbitrating an Arbitrator
You would think a state with a legislature controlled by Republicans -- all quite determined to cut taxes -- would be able to pass a bill aimed at curbing the salaries of police and fire departments.
But an Assembly bill that would change how arbitrations between municipalities and police and fire departments are handled, is a commentary on how powerful the police and fire union lobbyists remain.
Under current law, the arbitrator must choose the final offer of either the union or the municipality.
Only the salaries in nearby departments are considered, and municipal officials say that this drives police and fire department salaries in a continuing upward spiral.


Jet Makes Emergency Landing at Kennedy
A Trans World Airlines jet made an emergency landing at Kennedy International Airport yesterday minutes after pilots noticed vibrations in an engine on takeoff from La Guardia Airport, officials said.
The jet, a Lockheed L1011 carrying 237 passengers and 12 crew members from New York to West Palm Beach, Fla., left La Guardia just after 8:30 A.M., and the pilots noticed the problem with engine No. 3 as the plane climbed steeply away from the runway, said Holly Baker, a spokeswoman for the Federal Aviation Administration.


Friends of Bill
Former Gov.
Jim Florio is one of many state residents to give to President Clinton's legal defense fund.
It was established to defray the President's legal expenses, including those connected to the Whitewater investigation and accusations of sexual harassment made by Paula Jones.
Mr.
Florio gave $1,000.


Ruling Orders Refunding of Millions in Property Taxes on Once-Proud Office Building
A State Supreme Court justice has ordered New York City to repay millions in property taxes on a once-proud 1920's office tower in lower Manhattan that has had virtually no tenants since 1991 and, in the depressed state of the downtown real estate market, no prospect of attracting any in the foreseeable future.
In a ruling reflecting the sharp economic decline of lower Manhattan, where the recession and changes in the financial industry have left many buildings with vast amounts of vacant office space, Justice Stanley Parness said the city had been "disingenuous" and "ludicrous" in assessing the value of the building, 67 Broad Street, at $34.5 million for 1991-92 and $29 million for 1992-93 for tax purposes.


Snow Offers Opportunity To Shovel Out Of Dire Straits
The ice, snow and frigid temperatures that made yesterday a mess in the New York metropolitan region after the winter's first big snowstorm was nothing but a blessing for Betty Smith.
An unemployed mother of four, Ms.
Smith bundled up and found work yesterday helping shovel the city out of its misery.
She was one of 672 people hired temporarily by the New York City Department of Sanitation to shovel snow and ice off sidewalks, at bus shelters and at curbs in anticipation of the morning rush hour.
The extra help was needed in the wake of the Northeaster that trounced the area on Saturday, leaving 6- to 16-inch accumulations of snow, disrupting air, rail and highway travel, and causing some power outages and flooding.


The Good Soldier Who Was Also Honest
The standard television movie has built-in limitations, not least the internal rhythms required to crest at commercial breaks.
But these same movies frequently provide smashing showcases for performers, especially actresses, who may find their opportunities dwindling elsewhere in a Hollywood dominated by Arnold Schwarzeneggers and Macauley Culkins.
This is the strength of the television movie, and it is positively formidable in tonight's presentation of Glenn Close and Judy Davis in "Serving in Silence: The Margarethe Cammermeyer Story."
In 1989 Colonel Cammermeyer revealed in a security-clearance interview that she was a lesbian.
Why?
As a good soldier, decorated with the Bronze Star, she also wanted to be an honest soldier.
But rules are rules, no matter how benighted, and Colonel Cammermeyer was discharged from the Army in 1992.
Her reinstatement last year is now being challenged by the Justice Department of President Clinton, who backed away from his election promise to support homosexuals in the military.
Mr.
Clinton's current policy rests on the wobbly premise of "don't ask; don't tell."


'Mother Teresa of Houston' Fights Hunger and Government Aid
Horn blaring, the van came barreling into a run-down north Houston apartment complex, incongruously named Versailles.
Streams of small children and their mothers surrounded the vehicle.
Once again, Carol Doe Porter was handing out free meals to the poor.
Mrs.
Porter and Kidcare Inc., the group she and her husband founded, deliver 18,000 meals a month, each one prepared in their small home's pantry, which used to be the family room.
She has recruited an army of volunteers and twisted the arms of countless individuals and corporations for donations.
Kidcare will take help from almost anybody, but not a dime from the government.


The Speaker's Party Favors
Representative Marge Roukema, a Republican from this Bergen County suburb, has been asked by Speaker Newt Gingrich to be a party leader on issues of child support.
She is to testify on the subject today before a House panel.
And Representative James Saxton of Vincentown, vice chairman of the Joint Economic Committee, will lead the Republican fight against President Clinton's proposal to increase the minimum wage.


Corrections
The Quotation of the Day yesterday misidentified the speaker, a toy-store worker, in some copies.
She was Linda Arnold, not Mary.


Mexico's President Warns Rebels as Talks Lag
In a sign of growing impatience with peasant rebels in the southern state of Chiapas, President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon warned today that he would pursue other strategies to end the conflict if peace talks with the insurgents did not produce results soon.
Mr.
Zedillo did not specify what new measures he might take.
But he said he would call a special session of the Mexican Congress to deal with the Chiapas problem if progress was not made toward a settlement, and other officials said such a step could come within weeks.


Welfare
The number of people receiving public assistance in the New York region has begun to level off in recent years.
Welfare experts say that the number of people qualifying for assistance under the two largest welfare programs - Aid to Families With Dependant Children, and General Assistance (Home Relief) -- has fallen as the economy has recovered.
Benefit amounts per case have held relatively steady since early in the decade.
To help save the $5 billion needed to balance the state's budget and pay for an income tax cut, Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York last week proposed the deepest cuts in the history of state welfare programs.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
A day after the United States imposed trade sanctions against China, some American companies said that they were preparing to switch production from China to sites in other Asian nations, while others waited and said that they expected a resolution of the dispute.  [ Page A1. ]


Treatment, Not Jail, Saves Lives and Money
To the Editor:
We applaud Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposal for the long-overdue overhaul of New York's mandatory sentencing laws for drug offenders (news article, Jan. 30), but the dramatic statistics he relies on generally pale in comparison with those showing the specific effect these laws have had on women.


Well, Mr. President, Baseball Hasn't Caved
Bill Clinton, the well-meaning, part-time baseball fan and full-time President, should know this: Be careful what you wish for.
You may get it.
The President last week wished himself into the position of being the last line of defense between a sane resolution to the six-month-old baseball strike and the repugnancy known as replacement baseball.
Clinton felt that the force of his public pressure would drive baseball's Hatfields and McCoys out of their well-fortified bunkers and into a new, desperately needed relationship.
So he told them to make a deal.
Or else.


A Career in the Balance; Rutgers's President Starts a Firestorm With Three Words
Francis L. Lawrence weighs the future of his embattled presidency at Rutgers University on a tottering scale: 35 years of deeds versus a three-word blunder.
In the last frenzied week, Mr.
Lawrence, a 17th-century French classics scholar, has been campaigning hard among hundreds of students and faculty members to salvage his reputation and his future.
His plea is to be judged not by a "slip" that has been particularly offensive to blacks, but by his lifetime effort to open campuses to more minority students, faculty and administrators.


Louvre's New Director Shifts Gaze From Poussin to Security Problems
Having spent 32 years at the Louvre, Pierre Rosenberg was so widely identified with the museum that his appointment as the director last October went almost unnoticed here.
But for Mr.
Rosenberg, a 58-year-old art historian, it has meant a wrenching change from the world of painting to the world of administration.
Last fall, these two worlds briefly overlapped.
Almost his last act as the Louvre's chief curator of painting was to organize a huge exhibition observing the 400th anniversary of the birth of Nicolas Poussin, one of his favorite painters.
And in the weeks that followed, he was in the spotlight more as a recognized expert on Poussin than as the new head of the Louvre.


Bridge
In 1988, Sam Hirschman of Southfield, Mich., became the youngest life master at the age of 11 years, 9 months and 5 days.
The attention he received provoked Dan Hirschman, his 4 1/2-year-old brother, to announce that he would break the record, too.
During the Fall Nationals in Minneapolis, at Thanksgiving, Dan fulfilled his commitment, becoming a life master at 10 years, 2 months and 20 days, breaking the record by more than a year.
This regained the record for the Hirschman family, displacing Joel Wooldridge of Snyder, N.Y., who earned the title in 1990 at 11 years, 4 months and 13 days.


Newsprint Costs Trouble Newspapers
The price of newsprint, a commodity that is usually uninteresting even to newspaper publishers, has climbed faster in recent weeks than ever before -- and faster than newspaper executives had predicted.
A metric ton of newsprint that cost $469 in 1994 was up to $552 in January.
If announced price rises hold up, the price will jump to $600 in March and $675 in May, for a total increase of 37 percent this year.
Newsprint often accounts for 20 percent or more of a newspaper's costs.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Omnicom's planned acquisition of Chiat/Day is another example of a consolidating industry.
WILL the last independent agency on Madison Avenue please turn out the lights?
Perhaps that overstates the situation, but the surprising announcement last week that the Omnicom Group would acquire Chiat/Day, one of the last independent creative forces in advertising, is a significant indication that the industry's consolidation continues unabated.


Farmers Brace for Stormy Debate Over Subsidies
This wind-bullied land, the center of America's wheat empire since the late 19th century, is bracing for a political fight over farm subsidies like none before.
Of the 73 new Republicans in the House, 33 are from rural agricultural districts and have been at the vanguard of the movement to cut the Federal budget, curb regulations, and limit the Government's authority to interfere in business.


It's Clinton At the Bat In Labor Negotiations
Taking on an assignment slightly more serious and more perilous than tossing out the ceremonial first ball on opening day, President Clinton formally threw himself into the six-month-old baseball strike today.
Clinton, as concerned as any fan about the strike but in a position to do something about it, met for 35 minutes late this afternoon in the Oval Office with Bill Usery Jr., the mediator, and Labor Secretary Robert Reich.


With Sanctions Set, Companies Rethink Their China Plans
A day after the United States and China imposed trade sanctions on each other, some American companies said yesterday that they were preparing to switch production from China to other Asian nations, while others waited and said they expected a last-minute resolution of the dispute.
Many American executives expressed support for Washington's decision to impose 100 percent punitive tariffs, to take effect in three weeks, on more than $1 billion of Chinese goods ranging from silk blouses to cellular telephones.
But they also said they were fearful that their investments in China would prove disastrous if a trade war broke out and their competitors in Europe and Asia were to receive favorable treatment from the Chinese.


Jerry Zimmerman, Ballet Pianist, 52
Jerry Zimmerman, a pianist with the New York City Ballet who appeared onstage in many of the company's productions, died on Saturday at his home in Pittstown, N.Y.
He was 52.
The cause was AIDS, said Deborah Koolish, a spokeswoman for the City Ballet.


When Violence Came Calling On Anti-Violence Campaign
The violence that is a part of New York City life came to the front steps of the Hudson Guild Settlement House late one evening last June.
Aradanys Vargas was in the lobby of the Hudson Guild, on West 26th Street in Chelsea, when she heard gunfire outside.
"Somebody said 'watch out!' and it was a shootout," she said.
"Everybody was shooting. I was so scared. We were scared to go outside."


A Smart Move on China
The Clinton Administration's announcement of 100 percent punitive tariffs on more than $1 billion of Chinese exports signals a consistent, well-targeted and well-executed policy for combating Chinese piracy of American software, movies and music.
With careful diplomacy, the Administration can build on this move to toughen its stand on human rights and other issues.
The trade sanctions announced Saturday were carefully designed to win maximum support from U.S. business.
They may not force an agreement before actually coming into effect, along with Chinese countermeasures, on Feb. 26.
Although both sides would like to avoid a trade war, the Chinese leadership now seems paralyzed by the imminent succession of Deng Xiaoping and afraid to make any compromises with foreigners.
But the "intellectual property rights" that are at the heart of this dispute are the right place for Washington to make a stand.
They represent the future of America's economy and global commerce.


Muslim Cleric's Words Bode Ill for Mideast Peace Prospects; Building on the Dream
To the Editor:
The declaration by several in the Government of Israel that a wall should be built separating the areas occupied by Palestinians from those of Jews is going in the wrong direction.
The decent, moderate people on both sides must join to fight extremists and terrorists.
Apartheid must end in Israel.
Otherwise there will never be peace.


Officer Held for Firing Gun
It may be unusual that a prostitute calls the police for help.
And it's not every day that a police officer is arrested after the prostitute calls him her customer. .
But that is what happened early yesterday in the Chelsea section of Manhattan, the police said.
A prostitute stopped a police car about 4:30 A.M. yesterday and said a male customer had fired a gun at her after she refused to finish a sex act in his vehicle, a black Chevrolet Blazer, on West 28th Street between Ninth and 10th Avenues.


New Charter for Legal Aid
After months of negotiations following last year's bitter and futile strike, New York City has reached important new agreements with the Legal Aid Society, its staff attorneys and labor unions.
The deal, which cuts city spending on criminal defense by 16 percent and demands more work by Legal Aid, is a victory for Mayor Rudolph Giuliani as he scours the budget for crucial savings.
City Hall extracted a reduction from $79 million to $66.4 million in city expenses for defense services over the next 18 months, with the expectation of more future savings.
Legal Aid has trimmed half its supervisors and guaranteed prompt handling of virtually all petty-offense arrestees, as demanded by Mr.
Giuliani.


Dividend Meetings


Wekiva Springs Soundly Beaten In Prelude to Facing Holy Bull
Gray 4-year-old colts bred in Florida with six-race winning streaks are all the rage these days, but anyone believing Wekiva Springs could be compared to Holy Bull got a dose of reality today at Santa Anita.
Wekiva Springs could not catch the long shot Dare and Go and Dramatic Gold in the $500,000 Strub Stakes.
Dare and Go shot to the front and never was headed, leading every step of the mile and one-quarter.
Dramatic Gold got within a head of Dare and Go at midstretch, but Dare and Go fought back along the rail and drew away in the final strides to beat Dramatic Gold by a 1 1/4 lengths.
Wekiva Springs, favored at 11-10, was four lengths farther back in third and was followed, in order, by Strodes Creek and College Town.
Alex Solis rode Dare and Go, who paid $13 for $2 to win after covering 10 furlongs on the fast main track in 2:00.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Medium in a Nutshell With a Dose of Humor  'Opera Senza Rancor' Dicapo Opera Theater
"Opera Senza Rancor" is a fast-moving parody of a medium's history and culture.
On Friday, it sometimes tried too hard and did too much, but there were truly amusing moments.


Touching All the Bases
Even in the post-cold-war era, politicians know where their guns are buttered.
Bracing for the next round of military base closings from the Federal Base Closure and Realignment Commission, the state's lawmakers are visiting installations today to hear the pleas of military people and civilians.


CHRONICLE
JOY SILVERMAN is hitting the lecture circuit.
Ms.
Silverman, who was stalked by her former lover, SOL WACHTLER, the former Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals, has become a spokeswoman for the National Victim Center, which is based in Arlington, Va., and seeks to help crime victims.
Mr.
Wachtler, who pleaded guilty to charges that he intimidated Ms.
Silverman and threatened to kidnap her daughter, served 11 months in Federal prison.


Bosnian Muslims and Croats Reaffirm Their Federation
Bosnian Croat and Muslim leaders reaffirmed support today for the federation they created last year, and agreed to submit any disputes between them to an arbitrator.
"Though there have been several delays in the implementation of the federation and the constitution, this has not led to any conflicts between our two peoples," said the federation's President, Kresimir Zubak, a Croat.
"This is proof that our two peoples do intend to live peacefully together."


India-Pakistan Voting
To the Editor:
Sumit Ganguly (letter, Jan. 29) overlooks an important legacy of British colonialism that is true of India and Pakistan: a plurality voting system in single-member districts.
Nearly all other democracies established in the 20th century have rejected this model in favor of systems in which voters elect candidates of choice.
In divided societies like Pakistan and India, plurality voting can promote disastrous divisions and abuse of minority rights.


Essay; . . . And They're Off!
The best line so far of the '96 Presidential campaign was Bob Dole's, when asked why he was running: "Every country needs a president."
Seemingly offhand and self-mocking; but on second thought, the remark tapped a growing feeling that this country is presidentially bereft.
The Oval Office seems somehow vacant; the job is open.


Greek Team Doubts Site Holds Alexander's Tomb
A high-level archeological team from the Greek Government, investigating claims that the tomb of Alexander the Great had been discovered in Egypt's western desert, visited the site today and said that they saw no evidence that the tomb had been found.
But Liana Souvaltzi, the archeologist who announced last week that she had found the tomb outside the oasis of Siwa, said on Saturday: "I have no reservations. This is Alexander's tomb. There is no doubt."


John Fresco, 54, Saks Vice President
John Fresco, a vice president and divisional merchandise manager for men's apparel at Saks Fifth Avenue, died Friday at his home in Clark, N.J.
He was 54.
Jaqui Lividini, a spokeswoman for Saks, where Mr.
Fresco worked for nearly 35 years, said he died of cancer.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible-debt offerings are expected this week:
Adco Technologies Inc., Michigan Center, Mich., an initial public offering of two million shares.
Janney Montgomery Scott.


No Headline
"The fertile soil for sweatshops is an immigrant community living in fear." -- THOMAS GLUBIAK, New York labor official.  [ B4:1. ]


Exotic Birds Flee Collapse of Bronx Aviary
The gracefully arched, 19th-century aviary at the Bronx Zoo -- home to a colony of 100 South American sea birds and a landmark to generations of New Yorkers and visitors -- collapsed in a gust of wind under the weight of a foot of snow during Saturday's storm, and dozens of rare, exotic gulls and terns flew away, zoo officials said yesterday.
No people were in the aviary at the north end of the zoo near Fordham Road when the huge cage of torn, twisted wire mesh crashed down on a coastal habitat of rock outcroppings, murky pools, pebble beaches and island nesting nooks at 10:45 A.M.
No birds were killed and only one was known to have been injured.


Bitter Cold, and Some Good Fortune
The fierce winter storm that dumped more than a foot of snow on parts of the New York City region has actually left some people better off: the hundreds of people hired by the city to shovel snow from the five boroughs.


Now Clubs Impose a Freeze
Just as President Clinton tried to shove the players and owners toward an agreement, the two sides erupted in a new fight tonight.
The union lifted its six-week-old signing freeze, and the clubs immediately countered by imposing one of their own.
The clubs took that action by delegating individual signing authority to the Player Relations Committee, their labor arm.


Devils Make Penguins Settle for Not Losing
The Devils finally got not one but two goals from their defensemen for the first time this season.
Both goals came from Bruce Driver and helped the Devils salvage a 3-3 tie with the Pittsburgh Penguins tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Devils played one of their better games in the young season.
They skated with vigor, took the body and dominated territorially.
Their effort ended Pittsburgh's winning streak at seven games, but they Penguins still remain the only undefeated team in the National Hockey League (7-0-1)


Auctions Set By Treasury
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week consists of auctions in the bill, note and bond markets, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
The Government will sell 3-year notes tomorrow and 10-year notes on Wednesday.
On Thursday, the Treasury will sell 30-year bonds and 64-day cash management bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding 3-month bill was 5.78 percent; on a 6-month bill, 6.05 percent; on a 3-year note, 7.28 percent; a 10-year note, 7.48 percent, and on a 30-year bond, 7.62 percent.


RESULTS PLUS
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  Lobo Paces Unbeaten Connecticut  Rebecca Lobo scored a career-high 33 points as No. 1 Connecticut defeated Georgetown, 94-72, yesterday in Storrs, Conn.
The senior hit 15 of 21 shots from the floor and added 14 rebounds, 6 blocks and 5 assists.
The Huskies (19-0, 11-0 Big East) led by as many as 20 in the first half and led by 45-28 at halftime.
Georgetown (8-12, 4-8) cut the lead to 13 on Tricia Penderghast's 3-pointer with 10 minutes 33 seconds left, but Lobo responded with two baskets.
Jamelle Elliott added 19 points and 13 rebounds for UConn. (AP)


Joan R. Cook, 73, Reporter for Times
Joan R. Cook, a former reporter and union leader at The New York Times who was a principal organizer of a successful 1974 sex-discrimination lawsuit against the newspaper, died Sunday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 73 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was breast cancer, said her daughter, Jezebel, of Manhattan.


Ups and Downs at the F.B.I., Clean-Cut Looks and All
An F.B.I. agent's life is not a tedious one, insist the special agents heard from during the first hour of "Inside the F.B.I." And the producers make much of their unprecedented admittance into undercover and SWAT team operations, especially the convergence on a drug dealer and suspected murderer.
But watching agents equipping themselves, driving, peering and making uncontested arrests is like being shot with a tranquilizer gun.
I guess you have to be there.
So begins the first of four hours about the F.B.I.'s ups and downs.
The downs are pinned largely on J. Edgar Hoover, who created the clean-cut, white-shirt, dark-suit, fedora-sporting image for his special agents. (Are there any unspecial agents at the F.B.I.? And if so, where are they concealed? And if not, why the honorific?)


Patricia Highsmith, a Writer Of Crime Tales, Is Dead at 74
Patricia Highsmith, the American writer whose tales of gentlemen murderers and psychological intrigue were often explorations of her own obsessions, died yesterday at Carita hospital in Locarno, Switzerland, near where she had lived since 1982.
She was 74.
No cause of death was given by hospital officials, The Associated Press reported.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about an international conference on argricultural technology referred incorrectly in some editions to the group that called the meeting.
It is the World Bank's Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research, not the United Nations.


Profit Levels Stagnating At Hospitals
Profit margins at most hospitals across the country declined or stagnated last year, reflecting the growing pressure on them to reduce costs.
And health care executives said many hospitals would be under even greater pressure in 1995 if Congress enacted proposals that would slash spending for medical care for the elderly and the poor.
At investor-owned hospitals, the outlook is brighter, because many of them have moved aggressively to merge and cut costs.
Profit at these hospitals has risen in the 1990's.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Announced that Jon Gruden, wide receivers coach, is resigning to become the offensive coordinator of the Philadelphia Eagles.


Mourning in Sarajevo's Marketplace, a Year Later


It Just Didn't Look Like Frosty
With winter's first big storm, the police here expected calls about crashes and downed power lines.
They didn't expect to get a complaint from a woman on Lake Valley Road about a neighbor building a snow sculpture in his yard.
She felt it was, well . . . quite phallic.
What's more, the sculpture was illuminated by a spotlight.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Gov.
George E. Pataki's selection to head the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey misspelled the first name of one commissioner in some editions.
He is Tonio Burgos.


Islamic Rebels Admit Setting Off Bomb In Algerian Capital
One of the most radical Islamic groups fighting the Algerian Government took responsibility today for a suicide bombing of a police headquarters in downtown Algiers last Monday that killed 42 people and wounded 256.
The bombing was the largest single attack in the three years since the Islamic insurrection began, after the Government canceled elections that the Islamic movement was expected to win.
The conflict is believed to have killed 30,000 people.


An Outraged Cuomo Says Small Income Tax Cut Is Not Worth Hurting the Poor
THE former Governor of New York sounds outraged.
Disgusted.
Cut services to the poor so everyone else can get a small tax cut?
Risk hurting the homeless and the elderly?
Let the sickly fend for themselves?
Not if Mario M. Cuomo were still in charge.
Those who wonder what Mr.
Cuomo would have done if he had won in November need wonder no more.
He claims he would have denied New Yorkers an income tax cut as proudly as Gov.
George E. Pataki offers it.


Ohlsson Steps In for Kissin
Garrick Ohlsson is to replace Yevgeny Kissin, who has the flu, as the piano soloist in tonight's Carnegie Hall concert by the Philadelphia Orchestra under the direction of Wolfgang Sawallisch.
The program will remain as scheduled: the Schumann Piano Concerto, Victor Ullmann's Symphony No. 1, Wagner's "Wesendonck" Lieder (Marjana Lipovsek, mezzo-soprano) and Bach's Toccata and Fugue in D minor.
Information: (212)247-7800.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday, about the effects of the Mexican peso's decline on American investors, referred incorrectly to the responsibilities of a mutual funds manager who recently resigned from Fidelity Investments to join another investment firm.
He managed three Fidelity funds specializing in bond investments in emerging overseas markets, not Fidelity's main Latin American fund.


Warhol Museum Head Announces Resignation
Thomas N. Armstrong 3d, the founding director of the Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh, announced his resignation yesterday, effective March 1.
The news came as a surprise to many in the art world, because the museum has been open for only nine months.
The announcement was issued jointly by Mr.
Armstrong and the Carnegie Institute, which manages the museum as an independent entity affiliated with the Carnegie Museum of Art.
Mr.
Armstrong's office said he did not want to comment on his resignation.
Ellsworth Brown, president of the Carnegie Institute, said yesterday: "It was a mutual decision. Tom did the first phase and he did it beautifully. Now it's time to move on. It's a natural evolution for a new place."


Sanchez Vicario No. 1 With Graf Still Idled
ARANTXA SANCHEZ VICARIO replaced STEFFI GRAF as the top-ranked player in the world.
The Spaniard assumed the No. 1 ranking for the first time in her career when Graf, who has a calf injury, lost points for failing to defend her title at Tokyo last week.
Sanchez Vicario has 307.9131 points, and Graf has 289.1963.


Showing Off at the Super Show
Seeking an audience with Don King at Everlast's Super Show booth, I made a wrong turn and found Richard Simmons instead, clad in a red tank top and red shorts.
Standing on a platform, he tossed cellophane packages of his fat-free cookies to frantic fans as if he were throwing out wedding bouquets.
"Open the cookies and taste them!" he shrieked as if he were Bob Barker exhorting people to "come on down." Behind Simmons, a giant screen showed one of his kitschy low-impact tapes.
He sat and crossed his legs.
An overweight aide handed him photographs to sign.
Obese and slim ladies swooned.
None seemed interested in the frizzy-haired fitness maven's Step &amp; Sweat aerobic gear.
Frizzy-haired Don King is nowhere in sight.


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


Isles Activate Dalgarno
BRAD DALGARNO, the Islander right wing who had a hernia operation just before the season opened on Jan. 20, will make his 1995 debut tonight against the Tampa Bay Lightning at St.
Petersburg, Fla.
"He worked out on his own for part of this trip, then he joined us in Montreal," Coach Lorne Henning said today after practice.
"He's ready now and we've got to work him in there."


PBS Show And F.B.I. Complaints
Did former F.B.I. agents, using the unspoken threat of a conservative Congress's hostility to public television, manage to suppress the television promotion of a companion book to "Inside the F.B.I.," the two-part PBS series being televised this week?
The book's author, who is also a co-producer of the series, says they did, and accuses PBS of cowardice in succumbing to the alleged pressure.


Chess
The admonition of the younger generation, "You can't trust anyone over 30," was taken seriously by the Russia 1 team during the Olympiad, Nov. 30 to Dec. 17 in Moscow.
While the team's only over-30 Board 1 player, the world champion, Gary Kasparov, was struggling to overcome a bad start, the young lions carried the team.
Their inspiration finally ignited Kasparov and he finished with a flurry of victories in the vital Rounds 11, 13 and 14.


Remnants of Empire: A special report.; Russians in Central Asia, Once Welcome, Now Flee
Vyacheslav and Tatyana Shapkin, Russians born in Kazakhstan, have had enough.
The state collective farm where they live, 62 miles north of here, has not paid them in six months.
They are selling everything they own.
They are doing what 300,000 other ethnic Russians in Kazakhstan did in 1994; they are moving back to a Russia they barely know.


Upon a Blanket of Snow


Salta Journal; In Backwoods Argentina, the Money Tree Withers
Nestled in the Andean foothills a thousand miles northwest of Buenos Aires, this tranquil provincial city seems to have more in common with nearby Bolivia, Chile and Paraguay than it does with Argentina's cosmopolitan capital.
The residents of Buenos Aires are largely of European descent and like to think of their city as the Paris of South America.
But Saltenos, many of whom are Indians, take pride in their own legacy.


Cooperation in a Murder Trial
The Morris County Prosecutor, W. Michael Murphy Jr., said yesterday that Khalid Darwish, a prosecutor from Jordan, will visit him soon to prepare for a trial against Muhammad Abequa, a naturalized American citizen who confessed to killing his wife in her Parsippany apartment last summer.
Mr.
Abequa went to Jordan with his two children after the July 4 killing of his wife, Nihal, and is being held there.
In August, King Hussein allowed the children, Lisa, 6, and Sami, 3, to return to New Jersey to live with their mother's sister, Nesime Dokur.


Rise in Killings Of Journalists Hit Peak in '94
More journalists were killed worldwide because of their work last year than at any time in recent years, according to a report issued in New York by the Committee to Protect Journalists.
The committee, an independent group of American journalists, said 72 reporters, photographers and editors died in the line of duty in 1994, more than in any year since the organization began keeping records of journalists' deaths in 1981.
In 1993, the committee said, 64 journalists were killed because of their work.


Administration Resists Pressures to Cut Foreign Aid for 1996
Despite Congressional pressures to cut foreign aid, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today that the Clinton Administration planned to keep next year's aid budget at current levels to help the United States maintain its commitments overseas.
In unveiling the $21.21 billion budget for international affairs, down $81 million from the budget approved for the previous year, Mr.
Christopher said that aid to countries of the former Soviet bloc would increase modestly while spending on international peacekeeping would fall sharply.


Escaped Bronx Seabirds Are Seen Everywhere (Even at the Zoo)
They crept up on the escapee from two sides and snagged it with nets not far from the Bronx Zoo cafeteria.
The slate-gray gull was nervous but unharmed.
A few other birds were spotted yesterday on the roof of the McDonald's across the street.
Rangers saw two gulls in Queens.
Another was sighted floating out in the middle of the Jerome Park Reservoir in the Bronx, and still another on The Pond in Central Park.
Fish were set out to try to coax the skittish birds to shore.


Mozart Through a Freudian Filter
MOZART A Life  By Maynard Solomon  640 pages. Illustrated. HarperCollins. $35.
It has often been observed that biographies not only provide a portrait of a single individual and a single era, but also serve as uncanny mirrors of the age in which they were written.
Nowhere is this more true than with biographies of famous artists, artists whose lives and works are reinterpreted, in some cases even reinvented, by successive generations of scholars and critics.


By Design; Piling On the Extras
Accessories are making a comeback.
For several seasons, the only accessories designers showed with their clothes were shoes, or perhaps a pencil-thin belt.
All of that changed in the recent haute couture shows in Paris.
"There were more accessories than we've seen in a long time," said Kalman Ruttenstein, the vice president for fashion direction at Bloomingdale's.
"There was much more jewelry -- chokers and earrings and bracelets, even ankle bracelets, and lots of pearls."


Backlash Against Affirmative Action Troubles Advocates
For supporters of affirmative action, these are nervous days.
A proposed ballot initiative in California that would ban racial preferences in employment and education enjoys widespread support.
Two Federal courts have struck down a University of Maryland scholarship program exclusively for blacks.
The Supreme Court will rule this term on the constitutionality of a Federal set-aside program.
And leaders of the Republican-controlled Congress are talking about taking a hard look at Federal affirmative-action policies.


Counterpoint By Pianist And Cellist
The cellist Lynn Harrell and the pianist Yefim Bronfman saved the most affecting playing of their Sunday afternoon concert at Avery Fisher Hall until the very end.
Having given efficient performances of the Debussy Sonata and a set of Beethoven Variations, and more winning readings of Mendelssohn and Beethoven Sonatas, they offered the Adagio from Rachmaninoff's Cello Sonata as an encore.
They stepped thoroughly into the work's spirit, Mr.
Harrell supplying a melting tone and shapely phrasing and Mr.
Bronfman matching his performance closely in both gesture and warmth.
It was a long way from the Debussy to this.
Mr.
Bronfman had started the Sonata with a hard-eged reading that deprived the work of some of its mystery.
Mr.
Harrell softened those edges somewhat, but even so, a listener was primarily taken with his technical resources -- his speed, precision and coloration -- rather than with his ability to evoke the magic and exoticism of Debussy's world.


Corrections
A News Summary entry on Saturday describing an article about Barbra Streisand's speech at Harvard University on the role of artists in politics misrepresented her use of the term "bubbleheads." She quoted others who had called Hollywood friends of President Clinton "bubbleheads." She did not use the term to describe Mr.
Clinton's critics.


What Prosecutors Won't Tell You
People concerned about the escalating fear of violence, as I am, may believe that capital punishment is a good way to combat that trend.
Take it from someone who has spent a career in Federal and state law enforcement, enacting the death penalty in New York State would be a grave mistake.
Prosecutors must reveal the dirty little secret they too often share only among themselves: The death penalty actually hinders the fight against crime.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $50 million of notes due in 2000 through First Tennessee Bank.
The issue is callable in one year and priced at par to yield 8.23 percent.


Market Place; Deckers makes a hot-selling sandal, but Wall St. remains cool.
ONE of the footwear industry's hottest sellers is the rubber-soled Teva sports sandal, invented by a Colorado river rafter and made by the Deckers Outdoor Corporation.
So why has Deckers stock hit rough water?
Some analysts suggest the company's stock is being bruised by the competition from marketing powerhouses like Nike Inc., which introduced its own sports sandal last summer.
Nike executives vowed to "squash" Deckers.


Whitman Tax-Cut Plan Faces Problem
In calling for the swift enactment of the remainder of her proposed 30 percent income tax cut, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman said a new round of cuts were possible because her tax reductions had helped accelerate the state's economic growth.
But New Jersey's recovery, like that of most of the Northeast, remains a sluggish, uphill grind.
That fact was underscored on Friday, less than two weeks after Mrs.
Whitman announced her tax cut proposal, with a Federal employment report that showed New Jersey had lost 40,000 jobs in January and that its unemployment rate had jumped by a full percentage point, to 7.2 percent.


Helping Teen-Agers to Tobacco
Anyone who has ever smoked for very long knows it is far easier to buy cigarettes than to quit using them.
Teen-agers can buy them in Atlantic County -- not legally, but certainly easily.
Four teen-agers were recently recruited by health officials to visit randomly selected stores.
Of 21 visited, only one store observed the law against selling tobacco products to minors.
The merchants were given warnings.
On follow-up visits, only about one-third of the stores refused to sell to the teen-agers.
County officials promised a smoking-prevention campaign.


On My Mind; History Is Today
"My name is Hongda Harry Wu and I am the executive director of the Laogai Research Foundation."
Mr.
Wu was speaking in Washington on Jan. 26 at a briefing on China.
The briefing was for new members of Congress.
So of course President Clinton and his principal advisers did not attend.


Kenneth Koch Wins The Bollingen Prize
Kenneth Koch, a New York poet who is also known for his books on teaching creative writing, was awarded the Bollingen Prize in American Poetry yesterday.
The prize, which now carries a purse of $25,000, is given every two years to one or more living American poets for lifetime achievement in poetry or for the best collection published during the previous two years.
In announcing the prize, the judges said yesterday that Mr.
Koch, whose poetry collection "One Train" was published by Alfred A. Knopf last year, "qualifies on both counts."


Ex-Invesco Official Faces Fraud Suit
The Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday accused John J. Kaweske, a former star mutual-fund manager, of committing fraud.
In the long-awaited civil lawsuit, the agency disclosed new details of the way Mr.
Kaweske used his position at Invesco Funds Group for the benefit of himself and his family, including the generation of about $180,000 for his son.
The suit, filed in United States District Court for Colorado, "is a message case from the commission, showing its continued concern with the activities of portfolio managers who are responsible to funds and funds' shareholders," said Robert H. Davenport, director of the agency's regional office in Denver.


Despite Route Cuts, Amtrak's Deep Financial Woes Continue
Amtrak is in deep financial trouble despite the decision by its management in December to slash many long-distance routes, the General Accounting Office said yesterday, adding that the railroad would continue to deteriorate unless there were even bigger cuts or much bigger subsidies.
Congress should reconsider "whether Amtrak's original mission of providing nationwide intercity passenger rail service at the present level is still appropriate," the auditors said.


54 Years of Love End in Death
For 54 years, Michael Hriczov and his wife, Vera, had shared love and laughter, tears and sorrow.
Recently, relatives said, Mr.
Hriczov had grown despondent over his wife's failing health.
Early yesterday the police were summoned to the couple's home by concerned relatives.
They found Mrs.
Hriczov, 75, dead of multiple stab wounds, sprawled in the bed to which she had been largely confined for months.


Taking Aim at Whitman Budget
Assembly leaders said yesterday that they would delete two unpopular components of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's proposed $16 billion budget.
Speaker Chuck Haytaian said the Assembly would not support the Governor's plans to fully tax purchases made with store coupons and to charge a higher co-payment for older and disabled residents in a state prescription drug program.
"Fine with me," the Governor said, inviting lawmakers to find the $34 million those measures would save.


Players' Union Goes Back to Labor Board
Hit with a management shutdown on signing individual players, the baseball players' union went back to the National Labor Relations Board today, filing an amended unfair-labor- practice charge.
The union acted after the clubs delegated individual-signing authority to the Players Relations Committee, the clubs' labor arm, in response to the union's lifting of its own six-week-old signing freeze.
The clubs, which are intent on not playing another season under the old work rules, had said the freeze would remain in effect until the two sides have a new labor agreement.


Changes at New Yorker Among Its Top Editors
The New Yorker announced changes among its top editors yesterday.
The changes come at the end of Tina Brown's second year as editor and at a time when the magazine's ad pages are down, even as circulation has risen.
Pam McCarthy, senior vice president and managing editor, will succeed Charles McGrath as deputy editor, and Dorothy Wickenden, national affairs editor of Newsweek, will succeed Ms.
McCarthy as managing editor.
Mr.
McGrath is leaving to become editor of The New York Times Book Review.


To Be Young, Black and Gifted on Ice
When it comes to "major firsts" for minority-group athletes, there is one such feat that Mike Grier of Boston University is still pursuing.
This 20-year-old sophomore, who has already been drafted by the St.
Louis Blues, stands a good chance to become the first black American to play in the National Hockey League.
Grier, who was a contributor tonight at Boston Garden where Boston University defeated Northeastern, 6-2, in the opening game of the annual Beanpot Tournament, already has two distinctions.
He is the first American-born black player to play hockey at the Division I level, and at 6 feet and 232 pounds, he is college hockey's biggest athlete.
Furthermore, he can skate and score.


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday and in some copies on Wednesday about the director and producer George Abbott referred incompletely to the creators of the Broadway musical "The Pajama Game." The music and lyrics were written by Richard Adler and Jerry Ross, not by Mr.
Adler alone.


Group Efforts Help New Yorkers in Need
Even if they spend a lifetime in New York, where affluence and indigence contrast like fire and ice, some residents harden themselves against the city's misery.
They walk a straight path between home and work, never glimpsing the most desolate neighborhoods.
This season, the staff of an Upper East Side art gallery decided not only to acknowledge urban poverty, but to address it.
Pooling their resources, 18 workers at the Hirschl &amp; Adler Galleries donated $550 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Nets Are Hurting, But Pistons Hurt More
Never mind the four free throws Sleepy Floyd missed in six attempts in the final minute tonight, misfires that nearly let the Detroit Pistons slink out of Byrne Meadowlands Arena with a victory.
Those missed shots were overshadowed by the veteran guard's outburst from the bench with 6 minutes 44 seconds left in the game, when the Nets called timeout.


Jurors Find Shared Blame In '84 Death
A Manhattan jury absolved New York Hospital in the 1984 death of Libby Zion yesterday, saying that its system of training and supervision for young doctors was not to blame.
The jury found that the young woman herself was partly at fault because she did not tell doctors that she had taken cocaine and a host of prescription drugs.
And it found that three of her four doctors contributed to her death by giving her the wrong drug, and so must pay a total of $375,000 to Ms.
Zion's family for her pain and suffering.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE -- Suspended Darryl Strawberry, San Francisco Giants outfielder, for 60 days for violating the terms of his aftercare program.
National League


One-Stop Shopping in the Mini-Bar
Hotel mini-bars, long a solace for weary business travelers looking for a quiet drink after a hard day on the road, are now becoming veritable self-service bazaars where almost anything that fits inside is available -- for a price.
The usual array of snacks, sodas and spirits is still offered, of course, but nowadays the highly profitable guest-room refreshment centers also dispense vitamins, disposable cameras, condoms and more.
And no longer the province of luxury hotels and resorts, mini-bars are increasingly showing up in midpriced hotel rooms -- and even finding their way into economy lodgings.


Two Tell of Agitated Simpson A Few Hours Before Killings
Two witnesses testified today that just hours before Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend Ronald L. Goldman were found slain on June 13, O. J. Simpson seemed agitated and preoccupied and sat alone during his daughter's dance recital.
One of the witnesses described him as staring resentfully at his former wife.
"It was almost like he was simmering," said Candace Garvey, the wife of the former baseball player Steve Garvey and a friend of the Simpsons who attended the dance recital that included Sydney Simpson, then 8.
"When he stared at me, I felt he was looking right through me, and it scared me a little bit."


Plumbing the Depths of Two Sad, Vacuous Lives
The title character of Austin Pendleton's "Uncle Bob" is a familiar type in 20th-century American fiction, from John O'Hara to Joseph Heller.
An embittered, middle-aged man who never found his calling, he has made a religion of failure and a science of introspection.
Bob's situation has, sadly, become familiar in recent years.
He is dying of AIDS.
But the combination of character and context is sure to unsettle audiences accustomed to more heroic portraits of people with the disease.


Former Space Rivals Are Now Partners in Orbit
The space shuttle Discovery, its leaky thruster turned off, flew to a close rendezvous with the Russian space station Mir yesterday as both craft hurtled above Earth at more than 17,000 miles an hour.
Their tense meeting was the first significant step in a multibillion-dollar venture to turn former foes into partners in the biggest collaborative science project ever.
With nine astronauts chattering away in English and Russian, six on the Discovery and three on Mir, the 122-foot-long shuttle slowly came within about 40 feet of the 108-foot Russian outpost at 2:20 P.M. and held that position for a few minutes in a rehearsal for the first shuttle-station linkup, scheduled for June.


More AIDS Education Needed, Findings Show
To the Editor:
"AIDS Is Now the Leading Killer of Americans from 25 to 44" (Science Times, Jan. 31) notes that studies in several cities show a high number of new human immunodeficiency virus infections in gay men.
You overlook a recent study from New York City.
Here, 9 percent of young gay men (18 to 24) tested H.I.V. positive, with 2 percent of uninfected men infected one year later.


European Bridges To America
Carnival made an early appearance in New York last week when Gianfranco Ferre arrived from Italy to entertain 600 guests with a fall fashion show complete with acrobats, dancers, mimes and bellinis.
The show was not of Ferre's high-fashion signature line or of the couture collection he designs for Christian Dior but of the lower-priced Studio 000.1 by Ferre.
All the hoopla was in aid of reinvigorating a line of fairly classic tailored clothing that has never managed to capture the fancy of the American woman.


Police Try New Strategy In Fight Against Car Theft
Not satisfied with the rapid decline in auto theft since 1990, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani disclosed a new strategy yesterday to increase the Police Department's technological abilities to track stolen cars.
Under the strategy, investigators will conduct sting operations to close down repair shops that traffic in stolen parts, and the department will be better able to track stolen cars with sophisticated signaling devices.
Mr.
Giuliani made the announcement on Staten Island, where 40 percent of felony crimes are auto thefts.
The strategy, most of which had already been quietly instituted by the Police Department in recent months, represents the greatest concerted effort the city has made to combat auto theft in more than a generation.


New Conductor Appointed for Boston Pops Orchestra
Keith Lockhart has been appointed conductor of the Boston Pops Orchestra, it was announced yesterday by Kenneth Haas, managing director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra.
Mr.
Lockhart is to assume the position beginning with the Pops's 1995 season, making his official debut at the opening-night concert on May 10.
He succeeds John Williams, who is to continue with the Pops as conductor laureate.
"We believe he is going to be a very effective conductor of the Boston Pops for some time to come," Mr Haas said in his announcement.


Singapore Rejects the Rights Messenger
To the Editor:
A brief comment on William Safire's "Singapoverty" (column, Feb. 2), on the lack of human rights in East Asian nations, like Singapore.


Art Taylor, 65, Jazz Drummer Who Inspired Young Musicians
Art Taylor, a leading jazz drummer and bandleader who taught or inspired many young musicians, died yesterday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 65.
Mr.
Taylor was a marvel on the bandstand.
He swung like a strong breeze and tried to make every performance conversational, pushing and prodding soloists into exchanges, elevating jazz into a fully improvisational art.
He was a complete drummer: his brush work was extraordinary in its quiet drive, and he was a master of changing dynamics.
In his later years he assimilated the expansiveness of post-be-bop drumming, but he never forgot how to swing a band with his ride cymbal or how to use his intensity and power in a quietly effective way.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International  China asked to resume talks on American charges of piracy of music, movies and software two days after Beijing was slapped with tariffs against more than $1 billion in goods.  [ Page A1. ]


INSIDE
New Challenge to Nominee
An anti-abortion group attacked the nomination of Dr.
Henry Foster as Surgeon General with a transcript that suggests he performed more abortions than he said.
Page A22.
Zion Jury Clears Hospital
A jury absolved New York Hospital in the 1984 death of Libby Zion, saying that she was partly at fault because of her drug use.
Page B1.
President Waits for Pitch
President Clinton agreed to wait one more day for a mediator to recommend a solution to end baseball's labor dispute.
Page B13.
A New Password: Casual
I.B.M. has let the word out to its employees: the legendary dress code is no more.
Page B1.
James Merrill Is Dead
The lyrical poet of love and loss, who won every major poetry award available, was 68.
Page B10.


Bowe Side Pushing Bout With Tyson
Two former heavyweight champions have been commiserating with each other since suffering major setbacks.
But boxing, especially in the heavyweight division, has an odd way of coming full circle.
Riddick Bowe and Mike Tyson will meet in the ring "sometime between late fall of this year and the summer of '96," Rock Newman, Bowe's manager said yesterday.


Cruising the Web With a Browser
AS with all truly great communications tools, including the printing press, the television, the telephone and the personal computer, the Internet's World Wide Web is both a dynamic information source and a prodigious productivity waster.
As an information engine, the Web has the potential to transform business, education and other aspects of daily life.
As an entertainment source, it also has the potential to be a time-sucking black hole.
It is a speed trap on the data superhighway, a Bermuda Triangle in the information ocean, the junk food aisle in cyberspace's digital supermarket.


Too Many People, Too Little Support, Polar Scientists Say
DR.
NIKOLAI A. MAKAROV, a Russian scientist working at the United States South Pole Station, switched on his powerful radar apparatus last month, hoping to study the upper atmosphere.
Instead, he evoked cries of anguish from American scientists, engineers and pilots, and fears of an international crisis.
Dr.
Makarov's quadrupole radar equipment, built in Russia for an experiment supervised by the University of Colorado in Boulder, was to probe wind patterns at very high altitudes over the South Pole during the winter.
The Russian radar points up and its beam is reflected back to earth from fine meteor particles suspended in the atmosphere at high altitudes.


Mr. Pataki's Port Authority Problem
The commissioners of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey are growing uneasy about Gov.
George Pataki's choice of George Marlin, a Conservative Party leader with no significant managerial experience, to be the agency's executive director.
Their doubts are not misplaced.
The commissioners should resist whatever pressure Mr.
Pataki brings to bear and insist on a more obviously qualified nominee.
Of the 12 commissioners, 6 from each state, only 2 -- both appointed by former Gov.
Mario Cuomo -- have said they will vote for Mr.
Marlin.
The others remain publicly uncommitted, though several have told The Times privately that they are troubled by Mr.
Marlin's inexperience and by his narrow political focus.


Less Weight Is More
Nine years ago, the first time LOU CHISARI threw a 35-pound weight, he reached 35 feet.
In the last 10 days, he has thrown the weight 77 feet 1 inch at the 168th Street Armory and 77- 1/2 in the Chemical Bank Millrose Games, making him the third-best American ever.
And that's only part of it, Chisari said at yesterday's luncheon meeting of the New York Track Writers Association.
He got taller and lost a hundred pounds.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL REPORT
Manhattan
Fran Fraschilla thought he had seen almost everything in sports, but the Jaspers coach was still rubbing his eyes yesterday after watching an incident between two of his players Friday night during Manhattan's 72-60 victory over Canisius.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page yesterday misidentified one of the five advertising agencies that are finalists in an account review by Volkswagen of America.
The agency is Martin/Williams of Minneapolis, not the Martin Agency of Richmond.


Skating Life Begins Anew at 23; After a String of Disappointments, Eldredge Is Revitalized
Todd Eldredge grew up in Chatham, Mass., the son of a commercial fisherman, but his career plans queasily changed one day when the boy of 8 or 9 went out with the fleet, only to lose sight of the land, lose his bearings and nearly lose his lunch.
Preferring water in its frozen state, Eldredge stuck with figure skating, and by the age of 19, he had already won two national championships.
Among figure-skating royalty, he was crowned as successor to Brian Boitano's throne and expected to add gold, silver or bronze riches to the United States medal haul at the 1992 Winter Olympics.


Pataki Won't Bar Pacts on Benefits
Gov.
George E. Pataki said today that he would not attempt to renegotiate state labor contracts that allow unmarried employees to apply for health insurance benefits for their domestic partners.
The Governor also plans to extend those benefits to gubernatorial appointees who do not automatically qualify for them because they are not members of public employee unions, said his spokeswoman, Zenia Mucha.


All Is Quiet on the White House Front
To become the savior of America's pastime is an undeniably heady prospect.
But in letting his own deadline lapse tonight for a settlement in the baseball labor dispute, President Clinton may have had his eye on the inverse: the perils of trying and falling short.
It has been 10 days since Clinton issued a veiled threat to baseball's warring players and owners.
But he cannot force a settlement on them; his only real weapon is the bully pulpit.
And with Congress sounding unenthusiastic about joining him in the fight, the President's silence tonight showed his uneasiness about drawing from so slim a quiver.


Reports Tell Parents How Schools Perform
Schoolchildren throughout New York City are taking home report cards this month -- not their own, but those of their schools.
The reports were ordered by Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, who has said that schools can be improved through more involvement by parents.
The three-page annual reports, similar to those issued in New Jersey and other states, compare various aspects of a school's performance against the school system's.
For example, the parent of a child at Public School 87 at 160 West 78th Street in Manhattan would learn facts like these:


Proposal From Mediator Is Put Off Until Today
Faced with a task so difficult that the striking baseball players and owners have been unable to solve it in eight months, President Clinton and the mediator he has asked to settle the dispute took a step back today.
Bill Usery Jr., the mediator, was supposed to present Clinton with a proposal that was to be his best effort to produce an agreement, or one that possibly could serve as the basis for legislation by which Congress could impose a settlement.


Japan's Builders: Quake Beneficiaries
As a penalty for bribing public officials, one of Japan's largest construction companies, the Taisei Corporation, was prohibited last month from seeking new business for 18 days.
Then on Jan. 17, the great earthquake struck.
Within hours, the suspension was lifted in the emergency and Taisei dispatched 1,100 workers to Kobe to help clear the city's rubble and restore public services.


Corrections
A review on Saturday about the play "Grandma Sylvia's Funeral," at the Playhouse on Vandam in SoHo, misstated the given name of the play's director, who is also in the cast.
He is Glenn Wein, not Gary Wein.


Rangers Struggling to Get Their Points Across
The Rangers are having trouble scoring goals.
The Rangers are really having trouble scoring power-play goals.
The Rangers are 3-5-1.
Look no further for why the defending Stanley Cup champions are not off to a quick start this season.
"I think that defensively, we've been good," Coach Colin Campbell said after the team's workout today.
"Our penalty-killing has been good. If there's any concern, it's the offensive output. Then you look to your offensive people."


Time Warner's Plan for Revamping Is Said to Be Stalled
Despite Wall Street's expectations that Time Warner Inc. would announce its long-awaited restructuring at a meeting today with analysts, several executives close to the company said yesterday that no final deal had been worked out and that the company was still in talks with three companies holding stakes in its cable and studio operations.
Time Warner stock has risen $3 in the past week, to $37.75 yesterday on hopes of an announcement.


No Headline
"It's the theater of the bizarre. It keeps pulling me in. What am I doing watching the O. J. Simpson trial instead of my work? I wish it would go off the air." -- MITCH RILEY, a Manhattan film director.  [ A16:1. ]


A Bit Reluctantly, a Nation Succumbs to a Trial's Spell
"I'm sick of it," Barbara Thornton said, referring to the O. J. Simpson trial.
Mrs.
Thornton, a 45-year-old child-care worker in Richmond, then talked knowledgeably about the case for 10 minutes, hardly pausing for breath as she moved from a discussion of Johnnie L. Cochran Jr.'s legal skills to Marcia Clark's hair to Nicole Brown Simpson's merits as a mother to "that old greasy-haired guy -- what's his name -- Kato Kaelin," a sometime actor with longish blond hair who was staying at Mr.
Simpson's house in Los Angeles on the night of the killings.


The President's Sensible Budget
The budget President Clinton released yesterday might seem tame by comparison with the government-gutting promises of Republicans.
The President would wipe out no department or major program.
He would not balance the budget, but instead projects $200 billion deficits as far as his budget officials can see.
He barely nicks entitlement programs and achieves savings through hundreds of reasonable, though unexciting, spending reductions.
But the Administration's plan exudes common sense.
The deficit would fall as a percentage of economic activity -- the best gauge of the Government's tug on private capital.
By avoiding a mindless rush to balance, the President preserves valuable investments in education, training and research.
His budget provides a worthy alternative to an expected Republican onslaught on government.


The Times Names New Book Critic
The appointment of Richard Bernstein as a book critic of The New York Times was announced yesterday by Joseph Lelyveld, the executive editor.
Mr.
Bernstein succeeds Margo Jefferson, who was recently named the Sunday theater critic of The Times.
Mr.
Bernstein, 50, has been with The Times since 1982 and is the author of three books, including "Dictatorship of Virtue: Multiculturalism and the Battle for America's Future," published last year.
He has been chief of the paper's Paris bureau, United Nations correspondent and a national correspondent covering ideas and intellectual trends.
More recently he has been the primary reporter covering the terrorist conspiracy trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and others.


Stocks Advance for Fifth Straight Session
Wall Street yesterday continued its rally of last Friday, closing the session with a fifth consecutive advance.
But the day's gains were curbed by profit taking in the last hour of trading.
Despite facing a week with relatively few economic reports that move markets, stock prices may rise even further, analysts said.
The market had some wildly volatile sessions in January, but finished the month virtually unchanged, so it may be poised for a sustained rally, they said.


Town Takes a Hard Line On Street Gangs' Symbols
On the streets of this small farm town, about 60 miles north of Chicago and its big-city troubles, a person can be arrested for wearing a Star of David in public.
Walking outside in a Dallas Cowboys jacket or a Georgetown baseball cap might also draw some heat from Harvard's 13 police officers.


New Jersey Tax Cut Doesn't Help Homeowners
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert, in his Feb. 1 column, "The Shell Game,"rightly takes aim at Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey, whose blatant shell game of reducing income taxes has made her a national figure, but has cost Bergen County taxpayers approximately $5.3 million.


Unknowns Are Winners Of Juvenile Book Awards
Children's book publishing was jolted yesterday with the announcement that the two most prestigious awards in children's literature, the Newbery and Caldecott Medals, were going to unknowns, the author Sharon Creech and the illustrator David Diaz.
The awards, presented annually by the American Library Association, typically go to established writers and artists.
Ms.
Creech, the author of "Walk Two Moons," was awarded the John Newbery Medal for the most distinguished contribution to American literature for children published in 1994.
The book, published by HarperCollins, tells the story of a 13-year-old girl of American Indian ancestry who sets out with her grandparents to visit her mother.
Ms.
Creech, an American citizen, has published three books in Britain, where she lives and teaches for most of the year.
"Walk Two Moons" is the first of her books to be published in this country.


Logo Complaints At Simpson Trial
Responding to complaints from viewers of the televised coverage of the O. J. Simpson trial, the Sony Corporation of America has replaced a computer monitor being used by Judge Lance A. Ito that prominently displayed a Sony logo.
Thirty to 40 people a day have been calling the Los Angeles court where Mr.
Simpson is being tried to complain about the visibility of the Sony logo, The Associated Press reported, as well as an oversized logo for I.B.M. on a Thinkpad portable computer the judge uses.


Wallace Douglas, 80, Expert on Romantic Poets
Prof.
Wallace W. Douglas, an innovator in the teaching of English and an authority on the Romantic poets, died last Tuesday at a nursing home in Park Ridge, Ill.
He was 80 and lived in Evanston, Ill.
The cause was complications from Parkinson's disease, said Arlene Napolilli, a cousin.


Bomb Plot Defendant Shifts Plea To Guilty and Implicates Others
The defense suffered a major blow in the terrorism trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 11 other men yesterday when one of the primary defendants changed his plea to guilty and told the court that he and the others had worked together to plan a campaign of bombings and assassinations.
In an early-morning court appearance, the defendant, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, made a detailed statement in which he seemed to substantiate much of the Government's case against the other defendants, including Mr.
Abdel Rahman, the blind Egyptian-born cleric whom the Government has named as the ideological leader of the group.


54 Years of Love End in Death
For 54 years, Michael Hriczov and his wife, Vera, had shared love and laughter, tears and sorrow.
Recently, relatives said, Mr.
Hriczov had grown despondent over his wife's failing health.
Early yesterday the police were summoned to the couple's home by concerned relatives.
They found Mrs.
Hriczov, 75, dead of multiple stab wounds, sprawled in the bed to which she had been largely confined for months.


Koss Finds New Challenge
"If a plane crashed with 100 children every day, and they died," a fellow was saying in New York yesterday, "that would be on the front pages every day. But today, 35,000 children die every day all over the world and nobody writes a word about them."
Not, at least, unless Johann Olav Koss happens to bring it up.
And as Koss, the Norwegian speed skater who won three Olympic gold medals at last year's Winter Games, plans to bring it up a lot.


Rowland Unveils a Plan to Toughen State's Stand on Crime
A month after taking office with a promise of tough new measures to fight crime, Gov.
John G. Rowland today unveiled a five-point plan that would make it easier to carry out the death penalty, to create longer sentences for juvenile offenders and to limit the number of offenders eligible for early release.
The measures are expected to pass in both the Republican-controlled Senate and the Democratic-controlled House.
The strongest criticism came from a prominent Democrat, who wondered why Mr.
Rowland's first news conference on crime as Governor featured no bold new initiatives.


HBO Show for Gumbel
BRYANT GUMBEL, co-host of NBC's "Today" show, was expected to be named today the host of HBO Sports's new quarterly sports-magazine show, according to people familiar with the appointment.
HBO would not confirm the appointment.
Gumbel's new one-year contract to remain on "Today" does not preclude pursuit of the type of work represented by the HBO show.
The job marks a return to sports for Gumbel, who was co-host of NBC's "Grandstand" football show and was host of baseball and college basketball coverage.


Documents Show F.A.A. Confirmed Safety Lapses at Air Charter
Documents from the Federal Aviation Administration show that the agency had privately concluded that there were numerous safety violations at the company that operated a plane whose crash last year killed three Government doctors.
The safety violations were first discovered by inspectors for another Government agency, the United States Forest Service, said the documents, which were obtained by lawyers for the doctors' widows.
The violations were apparently not known to F.A.A. inspectors until those inspectors were asked to go back and check the work of the inspectors for the Forest Service.


Space Radar to Study Khmer Temples at Angkor
ARCHEOLOGISTS, who make a practice of demystifying exotic cultures of the long ago, had their hands full here last week comprehending a very modern one that could be a valuable ally in their investigation of the distant past.
At first, it was one of those awkward encounters between two cultures -- not across the wide gulf between science and the humanities, as elucidated by the scientist-writer C. P. Snow in the 1960's, but between two quite different sciences: archeology and the technology of remote sensing from space.


A Testimonial From a Robeson
The president of Rutgers University, under fire for seeming to imply a genetic reason for low test scores posted by black college candidates, received some support yesterday from a man whose surname is indelibly linked to black protest.
Paul Robeson Jr. said that Francis L. Lawrence's reference at a faculty meeting to college applicants who lack the "genetic, hereditary background" to do well on admissions tests had been taken out of context.
Mr.
Robeson said calls for Mr.
Lawrence's resignation were "unfair and inappropriate."


New York Toughing It Out To Get Through Bitter Cold
It grew wondrous cold, in Col-eridge's words, though the ones that leaped to mind were brutal and bitter.
It stalled cars, froze rail switches and delayed thousands of commuters.
It shattered water pipes, made radiators fizzle and had people bundled to the eyes.
Even so, it was a misery for outdoor workers and a real danger for those without homes or heat or hope.
Halfway through a remarkable winter that has been almost balmy by ordinary standards -- and snowless as well, until a huge storm buried the region over the weekend -- New Yorkers and their suburban neighbors wrapped themselves in layers of heavy sweaters, bulky parkas and woolly scarves yesterday as the coldest weather of the season invaded the metropolitan area.


Growing Up Talented In Harlem: Poet's Tour
Like Dante on his journey through the circles of hell, Dael Orlander smith takes her audience at "Beauty's Daughter" on a one-woman guided tour of the tenements and street corners of our particularly American netherworld.
Toward the end of Ms.
Orlander smith's new show, the cicerone of the evening, Diane, walks home "through the crack smoke, past the boy/girl whores" in Harlem and explains, "The only thing that separates me from them is the books in my room."


Chinese Invite U.S. to Resume Talks on Trade
Just two days after being slapped with punitive tariffs against more than $1 billion in goods, China today asked United States negotiators to return to Beijing next week to resume talks on the piracy of American-made music, movies and software.
Administration officials welcomed the move, and said it might indicate that China's leadership was reconsidering the wisdom of a confrontation -- and perhaps a trade war -- over violations of American copyrights on items from compact disks to popular personal computer programs.


Factory Hogs Don't Deserve Such Treatment
To the Editor:
"Slopping the Hogs, the Assembly-Line Way" (news article, Jan. 30) makes some good points: the factory farming of hogs does often result in ground-water contamination (in Iowa there are days when tap water must be boiled before it's safe to drink), a foul odor in the air for miles around and profits for many farmers.
You touch on just about everything in this business except for the feelings of the animals.


Adviser to L.I.R.R. Suspect Threatens to Quit
One of Colin Ferguson's two remaining legal advisers threatened to quit today, and two of his former lawyers called on the judge to reconsider whether Mr.
Ferguson is competent to stand trial.
Disregarding all legal advice, Mr.
Ferguson is defending himself against charges that he killed 6 people and wounded 19 others on a Long Island Rail Road train a year ago.


HOUSE APPROVES A LINE-ITEM VETO FOR THE PRESIDENT
Continuing to roll untrammeled through the components of the Contract With America, the Republican House of Representatives voted tonight to give the Democratic President a line-item veto, the authority to strike specific parts of spending bills and some tax measures passed by Congress without vetoing the entire legislation.
Like the constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget, which the House approved last month, the line-item veto would fundamentally change the way the Government works.
The veto could radically shift control of the nation's purse to the President from Congress.


Executive Changes
BELL INDUSTRIES, Los Angeles, said Bruce M. Jaffe, executive vice president and chief operating officer, had been named president, succeeding Theodore E. Williams, who continues as chairman and chief executive.
GTE CORP., Atlanta, appointed Mark Feighner president of the GTE Personal Communications Services unit.


U.S. Took the Lead In Somalia Action
To the Editor:
Re "Conflict on G.O.P. Agenda Intense in Capitol Meetings" (news article, Jan. 29): Whatever the merits or demerits of placing American troops under foreign command in United Nations peacekeeping operations, Congressional action should not be based on inaccurate history.
Specifically, the common assertion that the deaths of 18 American soldiers in Somalia in 1993 were "due largely to wrongheaded foreign commanders" is false.


Get the Hook Ready, It's a Windy 6 Degrees
For Roberto Cruz, yesterday was a nonstop T-3 and T-4 type of day.
"Oh, man, look at these calls," he said.
"T-3, T-3, T-4, T-3, T-4. I've never seen anything like this."


Hillhaven Rejects Bid In Nursing-Home Deal
The Hillhaven Corporation, a leading nursing home chain, rebuffed a hostile $1.5 billion offer from the rival Horizon Healthcare Corporation today, refusing even to negotiate.
Hillhaven's chief executive, Bruce L. Busby, said that Horizon had offered too little and could bring Hillhaven few savings or advantages.
Hillhaven has trimmed its debt, raised its stock price and readied itself for rapid growth, he said.
"The offer is clearly inadequate," Mr.
Busby said in a telephone interview.
"It's a flat no." While the board recognizes its responsibility to hear any other, higher offer, he said, the company is not for sale.


Cathedral Models as Stunning as the Real Thing
The title is as bland as a textbook, but there is a haunting magic to "Italian Renaissance Architecture" at the National Gallery of Art, a power that few exhibitions of architecture have ever been able to achieve.
The exhibition consists of 14 wooden architectural models of Italian cathedrals that have survived from the Renaissance, as well as more than 70 related paintings, drawings and prints.
The models are, quite simply, some of the most remarkable pieces of art I have ever seen -- and you do not have to be interested in architecture to be bewitched by them.
The allure of these objects goes beyond the astonishing craftsmanship that they represent, though that is a part of it, and beyond the historical insight they offer into the design of Renaissance cathedrals, though that is considerable.
What makes this an extraordinary esthetic experience is the way in which this exhibition transcends -- no, smashes -- the distinction between architectural exhibitions and architecture itself.


Poland: Frustrations of Democracy
For President Lech Walesa of Poland, leading a constitutional state has proved more frustrating than leading a revolution.
He has been fighting with the elected parliamentary majority, a coalition of parties descended from the old Communist dictatorship, and now threatens to exercise his power to dissolve Parliament and force new legislative elections.
Though Mr.
Walesa portrays himself as a beleaguered defender of market reform and democracy, many Poles see him as a clumsy and sometimes undemocratic maneuverer primarily seeking his own re-election this November.
Winning will not be easy.
The former electrician and Nobel laureate, who led the Solidarity union movement to power in the 1980's, must overcome abysmal poll numbers that reflect a reputation for erratic leadership.


Republicans Want to Try Again With 'Star Wars'
Twelve years after President Ronald Reagan first proposed his "Star Wars" antimissile system, which cost $36 billion and built nothing, Republicans are pressing to revive it, although in a vastly different form.
Mr.
Reagan's dream of erecting an impregnable astrodome to shield the United States against an onslaught of Soviet nuclear-tipped missiles dissolved with the end of the cold war.
But in its place has risen a smaller, but still very costly, plan to defend the continental United States against a nuclear, chemical or biological attack from more than a dozen rogue nations like Iraq or an accidental strike from Russia.


Aetna Names Strategy and Finance Officer
Richard L. Huber, a well-traveled banking executive, has joined the Aetna Life and Casualty Company as vice chairman for strategy and finance.
Mr.
Huber joins a company whose managers have spent several years reorganizing and cutting costs, but which still suffers lower profits as well as higher expenses and claims costs than the industry average.
But while Aetna's financial results have been mediocre, Mr.
Huber noted that management of the Hartford-based insurer "has already gone through the full cycle from denial, to realizing the problems are real, to working for solutions with an open mind."


Senator's Wife Dies in Fall
Nina Leichter, the 63-year-old wife of State Senator Franz S. Leichter, committed suicide yesterday by jumping out a window of the couple's 11th-floor Riverside Drive apartment, the police said.
A statement issued by Mr.
Leichter, a Democrat who represents the 30th District in Manhattan and the Bronx, said his wife of 35 years had long suffered from a mood disorder and had recently been depressed and under a doctor's care.


Israeli Guard Slain in Gaza Strip As Gunmen Attack Fuel Trucks
Gunmen killed an Israeli security guard in the Gaza Strip today, defying Yasir Arafat's authority there days before his planned meeting with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin to discuss an expansion of Palestinian self-government.
The shooting, inside the Palestinian autonomy zone, challenged Mr.
Arafat at a time when he is under heavy Israeli pressure to curb violence by militants before self-rule can be extended from Gaza and Jericho to the rest of the West Bank.


For a Job Well Done, Devils Earn a Day Off
It took the Devils eight games, but they finally looked like last season's team on Sunday.
They skated with vigor, took the body and played excellent positional hockey in their 3-3 tie with the Pittsburgh Penguins.
Coach Jacques Lemaire was so pleased with the way the Devils played against the only undefeated team in the National Hockey League that he gave his players the day off yesterday.





Patterns
It Could Be Michael Kors
Recipients of the elegant invitations that arrived yesterday for the premiere of the ICB line of Onward Kashiyama were also invited to speculate about the initials.
"It could be," the invitation teased, 'International Clothing Builders' or 'Illustrious Cabal of Beauties.' " In fact, what is intriguing about the collection is not the initials but the designer. Michael Kors will again test the bridge market, this time for the Japanese apparel giant.


A Doctor on Call To Dissect Extremes Of Human Behavior
Oliver Sacks is perfectly cast in the role of neurologist savant.
A large man with a bushy beard, he is a swirl of excitement.
At his desk in his Greenwich Village office, he darts from subject to subject and periodically rushes into the next room to bring back a book or an article to illustrate a point.
It often seems as if his mind and his voice are racing each other to a finish line.
"I'm incontinently divergent in all directions," he said.
"I consist of footnotes and tangents and irrelevancies. But they're not really irrelevant. Sooner or later, they all circumscribe some central area." He is a master of the art of further elucidation.
Asked a question, he spins off three answers.
He added that his dream was to write footnotes to his footnotes, admitting that "maybe what one finally wants is an interactive text."


Anti-Abortion Group Uses Transcript of 1978 Hearing to Attack Surgeon General Nominee
A partial transcript from a 1978 Federal hearing made public today by an anti-abortion group created new problems for the nomination of President Clinton's choice for Surgeon General, suggesting he had performed many more abortions than he had acknowledged.
The nominee, Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr., vehemently denied through a spokeswoman that the transcript revealed his record, which he accused anti-abortion forces of misrepresenting.
But as controversy over the obstetrician and gynecologist from Tennessee grew, Mr.
Clinton appeared to soften in his support, telling reporters that he would back Dr.
Foster "if the facts are as I understand them to be."


Scully Is Named Jefferson Lecturer
Vincent Scully, the architectural historian, has been named this year's Jefferson Lecturer in the Humanities.
The lectureship, which includes a $10,000 honorarium, is the highest honor bestowed by the Government for distinguished intellectual achievement in the humanities.
The announcement was made by Sheldon Hackney, chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities.
Mr.
Scully, a native of New Haven, spent his entire 48-year teaching career at Yale, where he was a professor of art before being named Sterling Professor of the History of Art in 1982.
He retired in 1991 but has continued to teach at Yale, the University of Miami and the California Institute of Technology.


An Account Review For Marriott Unit
The Marriott Corporation has placed the account of its Marriott Hotels, Resorts and Suites subsidiary in review.
The billings on the account, handled for the last five years by FCB/Leber Katz Partners and a sibling, Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, were estimated at $30 million.
Vonda LePage, a spokeswoman for FCB/Leber Katz in New York, confirmed a report of the review this week in Adweek, adding that the agency would participate.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  A COLD WIND IN CENTRAL ASIA  Hundreds of thousands of ethnic Russians in the former Soviet republic of Kazakhstan are moving to Russia in one of the largest migrations since the cold war's end.
A1


Help the World's Children and Our Economy; Buy American
To the Editor:
Re "Foreign Aid, in Moderation" (editorial, Feb. 2): Most citizens might agree it is important for the United States to continue foreign aid that "can prevent the sort of political instability and humanitarian disasters that ultimately require more costly American involvement." But it may be easier to justify foreign aid programs that consist only of products and services purchased in the United States.
That would mean a $12 billion investment in our economy while achieving our stated goals.
TED SCHULTE  Lake Forest, Ill., Feb. 2, 1995


Treasuries Trade Thinly; Prices Mixed
The prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday in thin trading ahead of the Government's debt sales this week.
Dealers typically lighten their inventories of securities before an auction, but the rally last Friday left some market participants debating about how much strength was left.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; An unconventional promotional campaign trades goodie bags for data on consumers' tastes.
TO some, it's a paper bag.
To others, it's a sack.
To advertisers prospecting for sales among younger consumers, it's a marketing opportunity.
Since September, thousands of ticket buyers at General Cinema theaters in a dozen markets around the country have been filling out cards asking for demographic information about their ages, moviegoing habits and tastes in music.
In exchange, they have received bags (or sacks) filled with audio cassettes, coupons and other items meant to stimulate their interest in recordings by rock, rap and country musicians signed with labels owned by companies like the Bertelsmann Music Group.


Puzzling Rays Hit The Earth
TWO impacts of tiny objects on the atmosphere with more energy than ever before observed in nature have been reported by scientists from Japan and the United States.
The scientists described the events at an international meeting last week at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, Ill.
The scientists met to devise plans for arrays of detectors to be built in each hemisphere to observe them.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
5.94
3.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.83
5.78
3.24
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.10
6.05
3.40
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.53
7.48
5.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.64
7.62
6.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.47
8.48
7.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.54
6.56
5.49
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


James Merrill Is Dead at 68; Elegant Poet of Love and Loss
James Merrill, the Pulitzer Prize-winning poet whose 14 books of verse established him as heir to the lyrical legacy of W. H. Auden and Wallace Stevens, died yesterday in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 68 and had homes in Stonington, Conn., and New York City.
He had been in Tucson on vacation and died of a heart attack at the Arizona Health Sciences Center, said J. D. McClatchy, a friend and fellow poet.


A Contract and a Job, But Very Little to Cheer
THE moment the 250 men had anticipated for a year and three months finally arrived Friday night.
"The time is 7:04," Luis Ginorio announced, as if for posterity. "We have a contract."


Protein in Saliva Found to Block AIDS Virus in Test Tube Study
A small protein in human saliva blocks the AIDS virus from infecting human cells in the test tube, Federal scientists reported at a meeting here last week.
The protein might help explain why the spread of the virus through saliva is apparently so rare, said the scientists, who were from the National Institute of Dental Research in Bethesda, Md.
The protein does not directly attack H.I.V., the AIDS virus.
Instead, it seems to act indirectly, by attaching to the surface of white blood cells known as monocytes, thus preventing infection with H.I.V., said Dr.
Tessie B. McNeely and Dr.
Sharon M. Wahl, the scientific team leaders.
They reported the findings at a meeting sponsored by the American Society for Microbiology.


Sports of The Times; The Babe, The Party, The Deadline
THERE was a birthday party yesterday in Pigtown, the area near the waterfront here that was once known by that squalid name and whose old cobblestone streets and narrow row houses and roughhouse saloons have been mostly destroyed through gentrification.
But one building in particular, a three-story, red-brick structure at 216 Emory, was saved, just barely, from the bulldozer because it had historical significance: the son of a tavernkeeper was born there one hundred years ago yesterday.
And this is where the jubilant party was held.


CHRONICLE
FRAN DRESCHER, who plays a tough-talking nanny from Queens in the CBS sitcom "The Nanny," presented a real-life nanny, MARY CATHARINE HASLETT, with the Most Wonderful Nanny in America award yesterday in Beverly Hills, Calif.
The award was sponsored by several national child-care organizations.
Ms.
Haslett, who currently cares for a child in Richmond, was chosen from about 80 applicants because of her dedication to her first charges, three children whose mother left abruptly after the youngest was born, said Wendy Sachs, president of the International Nanny Assocation, one of the sponsors.


From Backup to Boss
Calling his newest hire "one of the great minds in the business," Denver Broncos coach MIKE SHANAHAN yesterday introduced the former Broncos quarterback GARY KUBIAK as the team's offensive coordinator.
Kubiak, 33 years old, was JOHN ELWAY's backup for nine seasons with the Broncos.
He began his coaching career at his alma mater, Texas A.&amp;M., working with running backs in 1992 and 1993.
Last season, he was quarterbacks coach for the San Francisco 49ers.


The Mayor and the Storm
The 10-inch snow in New York City last weekend was not the blockbuster that buried some suburbs, but a test nonetheless for the city's emergency systems and for Mayor Rudolph Giuliani.
For New Yorkers, a big snow puts heavy pressure on the Mayor to get the streets cleared in a hurry and to be seen doing it.
He did and he was.
Mayor Giuliani and the city managers who organized the cleanup, truck drivers who plowed all night, and the day laborers still chipping away at the ice made it all seem routine.
The Mayor made the rounds himself, sending the right message to city workers and citizens.


Gingrich Promoted a Company That Has Employed His Wife
The wife of Speaker Newt Gingrich has been earning $2,500 a month plus commissions by working for a company to which her husband has lent his support.
The business, the Israel Export Development Company, is backed by American investors and is trying to establish a free-trade zone in Israel.
Marianne Gingrich, a former county planner in Ohio, was hired by the investors to find American commercial tenants for the trade zone, which is to operate free of most taxes.


Profit at Capital Cities/ABC Up 44%, Helped by Ad Sales
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. said yesterday that net income rose 44 percent in the fourth quarter, exceeding most analysts' expectations, as the company posted strong advertising results from its broadcasting and cable networks.
The company said it earned $240.6 million in the quarter, compared with $166.7 million in the corresponding period a year earlier.
The 1993 period was six days longer.


Meggett Rejects Offer
David Meggett rejected a multiyear offer from the Giants yesterday, officially opening what will surely be tense negotiations between the team and its free-agent running back.
Terms of the offer were not available.
"The offer was unacceptable," said Meggett's agent, Tony Agnone, "but it was definitely a good start."


Help the World's Children and Our Economy
To the Editor:
Urging "Foreign Aid, in Moderation" (editorial, Feb. 2), you note how modest programs that fight "poverty, disease, overpopulation and environmental degradation can prevent the sort of political instability and humanitarian disasters that ultimately require more costly American involvement."


METRO DIGEST
BOMB PLOT DEFENDANT ENTERS GUILTY PLEA
The defense suffered a major blow in the terrorism trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 11 other men when one of the primary defendants, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, changed his plea to guilty and told the court that he and the others had worked together to plan a campaign of bombings and assassinations.
A1.


Quake-Shattered Japan City Reassembling Pieces
Surrounded by the debris of his home and business, Kanji Ioka spent the weekend in the same way as many other victims of last month's earthquake in western Japan: poking through the rubble of the past and spinning dreams about the future.
Mr.
Ioka is 64, but his plans have nothing to do with retirement.
Instead, he intends to rebuild his woodworking business -- "it'll be even bigger and better than before" -- and so he gingerly pried apart the remains of his partly collapsed home and business to extricate lathes, saws, chisels and other tools.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BOSTON CHICKEN INC., Golden, Colo., which operates and franchises rotisserie chicken restaurants, said it planned to open at least 325 more outlets this year.
FOSTER WHEELER CORP., Clinton, N.J., a unit of Foster Wheeler Energy Corp., has received a contract from Siam Styrene Monomer Co. to design and build a plastics plant in Thailand.
Financial terms were not disclosed.


Care at Most Child Day Centers Rated as Poor
The care provided by most American child-care centers is so poor that it threatens children's intellectual and emotional development, according to a four-state study of hundreds of such centers made public yesterday.
The study, conducted by child psychologists and economists at four universities, concluded that infants and toddlers -- the group researchers say most need security and stimulation to thrive later on in life -- were worst off.
As many as 40 percent of infant and toddler rooms provided poor care.


Clinton Issues Budget
President Clinton sent to Congress his plan for a $1.6 trillion budget for the 1996 fiscal year, challenging the Republican majority in Congress to show how it would meet its goal of making steeper tax cuts while still keeping its pledge in the Contract With America to balance the budget by 2002.
Article, page A22.


A Bird in Hand Isn't Enough
With only one rare gull caught since the Bronx Zoo aviary collapsed, the search has intensifed for the 32 others.
Page B1.


Chekhov in Small Doses By 5 Actors, Set to Music
For whatever reasons, the plays of Anton Chekhov are being taken apart and reassembled like Lincoln Log houses in a kindergarten.
Perhaps, as the director Anne Bogart suggests, it's because his characters, poised with waning hope on the edge of a new century, strike responsive chords in artists with their own fin-de-siecle blues.
Last summer saw the director Michael Greif exploding "The Sea Gull" in Williamstown, Mass.
The Wooster Group brought "Brace Up!," a fragmented, mixed-media take on "The Three Sisters," back to New York in the fall from its world tour.
"Samovar Fears," a "Sea Gull"-inspired evening of dialogue, music and dancing, opened last weekend at the Tiny Mythic Theater Company.
"Vanya on 42d Street" is still in movie theaters, with at least two other film versions of "Uncle Vanya" in the offing.


Donaldson, Lufkin Is Hiring Top Talent at Bankers Trust
Following the Chinese cliche that the word "crisis" also means "opportunity," the investment bank of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette hired four top Latin American traders and investment bankers away from the Bankers Trust Company yesterday, and may be in the process of hiring as many as 21 others from the troubled bank.
The four new executives, all of whom have been named managing directors, were led by Neil Allen, who until Friday was head of Bankers Trust's Latin American businesses, including sales and trading, derivatives, and investment and merchant banking.
Together, the four will build a new Latin American group specializing in those same businesses.


Another UConn Romp, Another Allen Highlight Film
Pittsburgh, which led Connecticut by 25 points before losing to the Huskies three weeks ago, never led at all in their Big East rematch tonight.
Indeed, Pitt (5-15 over all, 1-11 Big East) never got close as third-ranked Connecticut (18-1, 11-0) won its third straight game by a rout, 90-61, before a sellout crowd of 8,241 at the Gampel Pavilion.
Following one-sided victories over Miami and St.
John's, by 25 and 17 points, last week, UConn overwhelmed Pittsburgh in every phase of the game.
And for the third game in a row, Ray Allen, the 6-foot-5-inch sophomore, was spectacular, scoring a game-high 24 points, including 6 of 9 3-pointers.


Q&amp;A
The Icy Hudson
Q.
Why does the Hudson River no longer freeze over so that people could walk between Manhattan and New Jersey?
A.
It still sometimes gets cold enough to freeze the tidal estuary known as the Hudson River, but icebreakers now keep channels open for shipping.


Riley Shows the Knicks Error of Their Ways
Coach Pat Riley chose to roll out the VCR instead of the basketballs at practice today.
He ushered the Knicks into a room to watch some of the uglier scenes that led to New York's 103-100 overtime loss at Orlando on Sunday.
"It was a close game, and we just had to take a look at it from a defensive standpoint of what we didn't do," said Riley.
"When it's close, players can take a position like, 'Well, we lost a close game,' but you need to go through and look at the reasons why you lost, and then you understand that you don't understand what you're trying to do."


Guilty Plea By Suspect In Slashing
The teen-ager who faces Federal charges of violating the civil rights of a Hasidic Jew stabbed to death in the 1991 Crown Heights racial violence in Brooklyn pleaded guilty in Georgia yesterday to slashing a teen-ager with a razor last year.
Lemrick Nelson Jr., 19, pleaded to an aggravated-assault charge in DeKalb County Superior Court in Decatur and was sentenced to up to 120 days in a military-style camp and three years' probation.


A Testimonial From a Robeson
The president of Rutgers University, under fire for seeming to imply a genetic reason for low test scores posted by black college candidates, received some support yesterday from a man whose surname is indelibly linked to black protest.
Paul Robeson Jr. said that Francis L. Lawrence's reference at a faculty meeting to college applicants who lack the "genetic, hereditary background" to do well on admissions tests had been taken out of context.
Mr.
Robeson said calls for Mr.
Lawrence's resignation were "unfair and inappropriate."


Abdul-Jabbar Hits Again: Elected to Basketball Hall
In 1961, when Kareem Abdul-Jabbar took the court as a freshman at Power Memorial High School in Manhattan, everyone knew he would be special.
He was.
He became the best high school player of his day, the best college player of his era and perhaps the best professional player ever.
Yesterday came the ultimate recognition.
In his first year of eligibility, Abdul-Jabbar was voted into the Basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield, Mass.
Six others were also elected: Cheryl Miller and Anne Donovan, who starred for women's college and United States Olympic teams; Coach John Kundla and power forward Vern Mikkelsen, who helped the then-Minneapolis Lakers win six pro championships in the 1940's and 1950's; Aleksandr Gomelsky, who coached the Soviet team to the 1988 Olympic title, and the late Earl Strom, a National Basketball Association referee for 32 years.


Pataki Orders a Hold on Borrowing for Mass Transit Projects
The Pataki administration has told mass transit officials not to borrow $690 million this year, most of it intended for subway renovation, the officials said yesterday.
But an aide to the Governor said it was too soon to tell whether all the borrowing would be put off.
Metropolitan Transportation Authority officials said they planned to go ahead with projects this year by draining cash reserves.
But they and state officials were unsure whether Gov.
George E. Pataki meant to cancel the borrowing, which would mean a sharp cut in capital improvements over the next two years, or if he merely aimed to postpone it to next year.


Secret Sub to Scan Sea Floor for Roman Wrecks
THE Mediterranean was a lake to imperial Rome.
Hundreds of ships regularly sailed from its seaport town, Ostia, to the far reaches of the empire, ferrying troops and gathering in the oil, wine, slaves, spices, grains and other resources that fed the city.
The pace of transport was so great that inevitably, many ships went down in sudden storms, sometimes in deep water where they and their cargoes lay for many centuries, protected from waves and fishing trawls and weekend divers.
These time capsules have caught the attention of Dr.
Robert D. Ballard, the marine geologist who in 1985 found the hulk of the Titanic under more than two miles of water in the Atlantic.
On Mediterranean expeditions in the late 1980's, he discovered a Roman wreck and with the aid of a team of archaeologists recovered some of it, the deepest ancient shipwreck ever to come to light.


A Negotiating Game With Two Big Losers
The major league owners and players milled around the Mayflower Hotel, one of those classic "power" enclaves found in the nation's capital, all but powerless yesterday as they waited for President Clinton to decide their future.
The President, and his hand-picked mediator, Bill Usery Jr., only heightened the tension by putting off their Solomonic judgment until today.
But no matter how the President and Usery attempt to divide the riches that the owners and players could not, the third-party decision is bound to spark debate as to who the winners and losers are.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Reeves Paces Upset of No. 2 Kansas  Bryant Reeves played his best game of the season last night, scoring 33 points and grabbing a career-high 20 rebounds as No. 24 Oklahoma State beat No. 2 Kansas, 79-69, to move into first place in the Big Eight.
Oklahoma State (16-6, 6-1) outscored the Jayhawks, 20-6, in the final 13 minutes of the first half.
Kansas (17-3, 6-2), which had just moved up to No. 2 in The A.P. poll, cut a 12-point second-half deficit to 4 with 33 seconds left, but Cowboy free throws sealed the victory.
Reeves, outplayed by Kansas's Greg Ostertag in all three games a year ago, dominated this time.
Ostertag finished with 8 points and 2 rebounds. (AP)


Strawberry Suspended, And Giants Release Him
Darryl Strawberry, the 32-year-old outfielder whose career has been buffeted by personal problems dating back to his days with the Mets, suffered another self-inflicted blow yesterday.
He was suspended from major league baseball for 60 days for violating the provisions of his after-care program, and was dismissed by the San Francisco Giants, the team that signed him last June after a drug suspension had cost him his job with the Los Angeles Dodgers.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Francis L. Lawrence, president of Rutgers University, misattributed a comment about a controversial statement by Mr.
Lawrence about disadvantaged students.
It was William W. Ward, an associate professor of biochemistry, who said, "I wouldn't call for a resignation on the basis of those comments," not Walter Gordon, the Camden provost.
Mr.
Ward said he had called for Mr.
Lawrence's resignation based on broader critiques of his work.


Pricey Gingrich Dinner With Conservatives Draws Democratic Fire
Speaker Newt Gingrich was the big attraction tonight at what was billed as a $50,000-a-plate dinner to raise money for a conservative cable-television network that broadcasts a weekly call-in program featuring Mr.
Gingrich.
Several Democrats said the Speaker's attendance was unethical because the contributions were partly tax deductible and thus constituted a Government subsidy to a politically oriented enterprise.
The network, National Empowerment Television, which reaches 11 million homes, said it expected the dinner to raise more than $350,000.
The menu at the Hay Adams Hotel, near the White House, included smoked salmon, roast rack of lamb and cappuccino tortes.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Geerat Vermeij; Getting The Feel of A Long Ago Arms Race
RUNNING his fingers across a shell, whether the rocky spire of a 400-million-year-old fossil or the glassy dome of a modern-day cowrie, Dr.
Geerat Vermeij is quietly reading tales from the history of life.
Examining the shells' punctured armor, he sees every detail of their encounters with predators and their close scrapes with death or final agony.
Yet at the same time Dr.
Vermeij sees nothing at all, because he is blind.
Born with glaucoma and never able to make out more than fuzzy shapes, Dr.
Vermeij (pronounced Ver-MAY), a paleontologist whose colleagues call him Gary, has been completely blind since the age of 3 and has never really seen a single creature, living or fossil.
Yet by using his fingers to feel both the damage on shells as well as the girth and power of the claws and jaws that attack them, this professor at the University of California at Davis has found evidence of an ancient arms race.
According to the histories recorded on these broken and mended fortresses, mollusks appear to have evolved ever more rugged armor to protect their delicate flesh just as their predators developed more vicious weaponry.


Of Roots and Roller Coasters
If life is a roller coaster, everything is on the up side for the Gehlhaus brothers.
They have just reacquired the Keansburg Amusement Park, founded by their grandfather some 90 years ago, for an undisclosed price.
"It's a very happy time in all our lives right now," said Henry F. Gehlhaus 2d after he and his brother William repurchased the six-acre park in Monmouth County.


Help the World's Children and Our Economy; Don't Aid Arms Race
To the Editor:
I agree with much of "Foreign Aid, in Moderation" (editorial, Feb. 2).
Any aid that can reduce the causes of political instability, humanitarian disasters or war is money wisely spent.
However, I must vigorously disagree with your view that the $3 billion in aid to Israel and the $2.1 billion in aid to Egypt each year "directly reduce risks to U.S. security" and are positive uses of the foreign aid budget.


Mitterrand's Call for Europe Talks on Algeria Stirs Paris Split
A proposal by President Francois Mitterrand for a European Union conference to help end Algeria's war against Islamic militants put him at odds today with the Algerian leadership and France's own conservative Government.
The Algerian authorities recalled their Ambassador for consultations over the weekend after Mr.
Mitterrand suggested Friday during a news conference with Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany that the European Union call a conference to find a solution to a conflict that has taken an estimated 30,000 to 40,000 lives in three years.


Pricey Gingrich Dinner With Conservatives Draws Democratic Fire
Speaker Newt Gingrich was the big attraction tonight at what was billed as a $50,000-a-plate dinner to raise money for a conservative cable-television network that broadcasts a weekly call-in program featuring Mr.
Gingrich.
Several Democrats said the Speaker's attendance was unethical because the contributions were partly tax deductible and thus constituted a Government subsidy to a politically oriented enterprise.
The network, National Empowerment Television, which reaches 11 million homes, said it expected the dinner to raise more than $350,000.
The menu at the Hay Adams Hotel, near the White House, included smoked salmon, roast rack of lamb and cappuccino tortes.


Black Jeans Invade Big Blue; First Day of a Relaxed I.B.M.
On Jonathan D. Bick's first day as a salesman for I.B.M. 17 years ago, he wore what he remembers as a gray suit, a button-down white shirt, a "sincere tie" and Gucci loafers.
His boss looked him over and thanked him for wearing a suit but pointedly said: "Why did you wear your bedroom slippers to work?" The boss, he remembers, told him to take the rest of the day off and shop for a pair of wingtips.


Graham Troupe to Open Kennedy Center Series
A season by the Martha Graham Dance Company that includes a world premiere by Robert Wilson is to inaugurate a five-year survey of American dance at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington.


Burger King Shifts Children's Account
The Burger King Corporation said yesterday that after five years it had parted ways with Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York on the part of the fast-food chain's account to create campaigns aimed at children, with billings estimated at $10 million.
As a result, Burger King has consolidated its entire United States account at Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas in New York.
Cori Zywotow, a spokeswoman for Burger King in Miami, confirmed a report of the consolidation this week in Adweek.
The consolidation came a week after Burger King consolidated its European account, with billings estimated at $12 million, at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in London by eliminating Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising's London office from its roster.


Budget Plan Holds Big Cut In Money For Transit
The President's budget will hit New Yorkers hardest at the subway turnstile, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday.
Mr.
Giuliani, who praised the budget for increasing spending for the education of children of illegal aliens, for Head Start and for battered women's and AIDS programs, said there was "one serious problem" in the plan released yesterday.


CHRONICLE
JOHNNIE L. COCHRAN JR. doesn't spend all his time in court and preparing the defense for O. J. Simpson's murder trial.
On Sunday afternoon, he was the host for an open house at his law office on Wilshire Boulevard in Los Angeles to celebrate the opening of his firm's business affairs and entertainment divisions.


Stealth and an Odd Warmth In City Ballet's 'Firebird'
The New York City Ballet production of "Firebird" is a 1970 reworking of a streamlined version of the Diaghilev classic by George Balanchine.
The revision, by Balanchine and Jerome Robbins, has its flaws, but two fine lead performances made up for the disappointments when the ballet was performed for the first time this season on Saturday afternoon at the New York State Theater.
Lourdes Lopez's magical firebird was a chilly, imperious creature when first encountered by a prince lost in a mysterious forest.
Caught in his arms, she became almost spellbound, voluptuous but never quite yielding to the grasp of this unfamiliar creature.
And Ms.
Lopez's dancing in the lullaby section, in which she mesmerizes the prince's enemies, was a genuinely hypnotic blend of birdlike gesture and womanly warmth.


Three Queens Men Are Indicted in Plot To Ambush Officers
Three men were indicted in Queens yesterday on charges of conspiring to make false 911 emergency telephone calls to the police so they could kill the responding officers, the police said last night.
The plot was said to be retaliation against the police for breaking up the suspects' drug operations on Rockaway Beach Boulevard.


News Corp. Control of Fox Conceded
Testifying behind closed doors before Federal investigators in late January, Rupert Murdoch bluntly conceded that his Australia-based News Corporation controlled all the equity of the American television stations that were the basis for the Fox television network.
But he insisted he had not violated regulations that limit foreign ownership of American stations, in part because he is a naturalized American citizen.


Michigan National
Shares of Michigan National, based in Farmington Hills, Mich., rose sharply yesterday after the banking company agreed to be bought by National Australia Bank for $110 a share, or $1.6 billion.


Peering Out a 'Real Time' Window
The view from Steve Deering's office is spectacular.
"I'm sitting here right now watching the space shuttle hovering near the Russian space station, listening to live audio from the Russian ship," said Mr.
Deering, a computer scientist at the Xerox Corporation's Palo Alto Research Center.


Simpson Witnesses Review Final Hours of 2 Lives
After a week of focusing on O. J. Simpson's character and his volatile relationship with Nicole Brown Simpson, prosecutors began to get to the heart of their double murder case today by laying out a timetable through which they will seek to link Mr.
Simpson to the death scene.
The day in court saw the prosecution preparing springboards for later stages in the case, moving from one witness to another, questioning their recollections of events from about 8 P.M. to 10:15 P.M. on June 12.
Witnesses testified about various events that night, leading up to the discovery of the slashed and stabbed bodies of Mrs.
Simpson and her friend Ronald L. Goldman about 12:30 A.M. on June 13.


CHRONICLE
TONY KUSHNER and the producers of "Angels in America" will donate the elegant feathered white wings used in the Broadway production to the AIDS Resource Center's "Valentine Auction," to be held on Monday at the Puck Building in SoHo. (The Broadway show closed in December.) The wings, which have a spread of almost six and a half feet, will be sold along with works donated by the artists LOUISE BOURGEOIS and JENNY HOLZER and the estate of the photographer Robert Mapplethorpe.
Proceeds will benefit the center, which provides housing for homeless people with AIDS.


CHRONICLE
Comme des Garcons has removed striped pajamas from its winter collection in response to angry protests from the European Jewish Congress, which argued that the outfits, which were shown two weeks ago, resembled clothes worn in concentration camps during the Holocaust.
A letter from the congress to ADRIAN JOFFE, the company's managing director, said, "The style trivializes events that shattered the world 50 years ago."


Conviction Thrown Out, Ex-Inmate Faces Retrial
Vincent James Landano said he "would have bet the ranch," when he entered the Hudson County Courthouse today, that he would emerge free of any link to the murder in 1976 of a Newark police officer.
But instead, Mr.
Landano, a 54-year-old construction worker, was left shaking his head in disbelief at the latest development in his legal odyssey, which has gone as high as the United States Supreme Court and produced a virtual primer on tracking down scraps of evidence.


Dispute Won't Halt Chinese Wheat Sales
The United States plans to expand subsidized wheat sales to China even as it imposes sanctions on Chinese goods.
The move is intended to protect American farmers, but it is likely to raise questions about the consistency of American trade policy.
Business Day, page D1.


Knicks Start Fast and Fade Away
Forget about the Magic.
The Knicks had better worry about the rest of the Eastern Conference.
On a night when John Starks lit up Milwaukee for 17 first-quarter points, the Knicks squandered a 14-point first-half lead, scored a season-low 31 points in the second half, and lost, 95-87, to the Bucks last night at Madison Square Garden.


Ferrets Do Not Have Fido's Rights
The ferret is a second-class citizen that can be seized and executed without trial at the first sign of trouble, a Federal judge ruled yesterday.
Stepping into a long-running battle between several hundred ferret owners and the New York City Health Department, Judge Allen G. Schwartz of Federal District Court in Manhattan upheld the city's ban on the slinky, furry little creatures yesterday, as well as the Health Department's policy of destroying the rascals whenever they bite someone.


Peres Aside, Peace Isn't Near
"We will get an interim agreement. It will be a handshake."
When Shimon Peres, the Israeli Defense Minister and a Nobel Peace Prize winner, makes such a statement, one usually assumes that peace is at hand.


Face That Launched Millions of Shekels Heads for Retirement
Once in a while when money talks it can say something about a country.
In Israel, it said today that the people in charge sometimes take a cold-eyed, cost-effective view of national heroes.
For the last decade, Israel's smallest bank note, an orange-shaded bill valued at 10 shekels and worth about $3.30, has been graced with a portrait of Golda Meir, the late Prime Minister, a wry near-smile on her face.


METRO DIGEST
WHITMAN BACKS PATAKI ON PORT CHOICE
After withholding her endorsement for a month, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey has agreed to support Gov.
George E. Pataki's choice of a Conservative Party leader to head the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, all but guaranteeing that the nomination will be approved.
A1.
TERROR SUSPECTS UNDER WATCH SINCE '89
Government agents began conducting surveillance of some defendants in the terror conspiracy trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman as early as 1989, when officials photographed two of them taking target practice on Long Island with three men who were later convicted in the World Trade Center bombing.
A1.


2 Militants Back in Jail In Algeria
In a major blow to hopes for a negotiated settlement in Algeria, the authorities there returned leaders of the militant Islamic opposition to a military jail this week, ending their stay under house arrest in Algiers.
Rabih Kebir, a member of the opposition living in exile in Germany, confirmed that he had lost contact with Abassi Madani, president of the Islamic Salvation Front, Algeria's largest political opposition party, and with his deputy, Ali Belhaj, toward the end of last week.


Penn Engineering
Shares of Penn Engineering and Manufacturing closed yesterday at a 52-week high of $53.50, up $8.
The company, a fabricator of metal products, said fourth-quarter profit more than doubled.


Law Doesn't Prevent Subway Access to New York Airports
To the Editor:
Re your Feb. 1 news article on the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey's proposed scaling back of its plan to build a rail link between Manhattan and Kennedy International and La Guardia airports:


Food Notes
Sweets at F.A.O. Schweetz
On Friday, in time for Valentine's Day, F.A.O.
Schwarz plans to open a new candy boutique.
The shop, called F.A.O.
Schweetz, will be on the second floor of the store, at 767 Fifth Avenue, at 59th Street.
It was designed by Spector Group Architects of North Hills, L.I., to look like a giant gum-ball machine complete with a metal flap door.
Inside, plastic bins will hold more than 100 kinds of candies, including Gummi Bears, jelly beans and candy hearts.
Catering to the Many
Several months ago, Mitchel London Foods replaced Marche Bis, a branch of Marche Madison, at 22A East 65th Street.
This is the first retail shop for Mitchel London, who was a chef for former Mayor Edward I. Koch.
This lunch box of a boutique has items that were available only to his catering customers.
Mr.
London does all his cooking in a large commercial kitchen on West 42d Street.
Available are his individual "rustic" apple tarts ($3) and other pastries like his classic lemon pie topped with wildly exuberant meringue ($6.50), his lush banana cream tarts ($5) and pies ($16), and his creamy cheesecakes ($4 to $22).


F.C.C. Sets Foreign Plan
The Federal Communications Commission proposed a carrot-and-stick strategy today to prod foreign countries into opening their domestic telephone markets to American companies.
The agency proposed rules under which it would be more likely to allow foreign companies to own networks inside the United States if their home countries allowed American companies to compete within their boundaries as well.


Peruvians at Disadvantage in Border War
Roaring over the Amazon jungle, a Peruvian Mirage jet on Monday rocketed an Ecuadorean mountain base that had rained mortar fire on Peruvian army patrols struggling up a contested valley floor.
By increasing their firepower to a Mirage for the dawn raid on the base, Condor Mirador, Peruvian generals highlighted their disadvantage in the two-week-old border conflict with Ecuador.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 3
Jan. 27
Feb. 4
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.2
6.9
Distillate production, daily
3.0
2.8
3.1
Gasoline stocks
218.4
215.3
232.0
Distillate stocks
135.7
136.8
116.8
Crude imports, daily
6.0
6.6
7.2
Product imports, daily
1.4
1.4
1.8
Crude stocks
324.6
320.5
335.6
Crude production, daily
6.7
6.7
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
89.8
89.5
88.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


A Second Chance at Rutgers
The discredited notion of racial genetic inferiority breeds anguish and discord wherever it arises.
The latest example is Rutgers University, where the school's president, Francis L. Lawrence, is fighting for his career after asserting during a faculty meeting that disadvantaged students lacked "genetic, hereditary background" to score well on college admissions tests.
Mr.
Lawrence apologized for the comments in an eloquent and convincing fashion, describing the remarks as accidental and unrelated to his beliefs.
This claim is buttressed by his distinguished record as an advocate of minority students, both at Tulane University, where he served as vice president, and at Rutgers, where he assumed the presidency five years ago.
Members of the university community have rallied to his defense.
Paul Robeson Jr., son of the noted black singer and Rutgers alumnus, said yesterday that he was "absolutely convinced" that Mr.
Lawrence's remarks bore no real relationship to his beliefs.


President Will Call On Congress To Impose Baseball Arbitration
After an extraordinary meeting at the White House, President Clinton said tonight that he had failed to persuade baseball's owners and players to submit to binding arbitration to resolve their six-month-old dispute.
He said he now saw no option but to ask Congress to impose that course upon them as the best way to save the coming major league season.
"The players and owners still remain far apart on their differences," Mr.
Clinton announced at 11 P.M. in the White House briefing room.
"Clearly they are not capable of resolving this strike without an umpire."


Guilty Plea In Honda Bribery Case
A former sales executive at the American Honda Motor Company pleaded guilty in Federal court yesterday to scheming with other company officials to accept bribes of up to $1 million and gifts that ranged from a Mercedes-Benz to a laser karaoke machine, in exchange for granting franchises to sell popular cars.
The former executive, Stanley James Cardiges, is the highest-ranking Honda official and the 20th person to plead guilty in one of the largest Federal fraud investigations into the auto industry.


Germans in Turn Looted Russian Art
To the Editor:
"Russia's Hidden Attic" (Editorial Notebook, Feb. 1), on returning objects looted from Germany by Soviet forces in World War II, fails to explain the Russian side.


Everybody Is Shut Out at the White House Talks
At the end of the White House night game, it was Players 2, Owners 1.
Except there were no winners -- not the players, not the owners, not the President.
By the time player and ownership groups left the White House, where they had waded through the most unusual negotiating session in baseball labor history, they had no agreement because the two ideas the players agreed to the owners rejected and the one idea the owners accepted the players rejected.


N.F.L. Teams to Gain $2 Million From Cap
Preliminary figures released by the National Football League Players Association yesterday show that teams will have an additional $2 million under the salary cap for next season.
Gene Upshaw, executive director of the players association, said the cap would go from $34.6 million to $36.52 million, based upon projections of revenues that the 30 teams in the league will share.
He said that figure could go up to $37 million by mid-March once the final numbers are computed.


CLINTON CHOOSES RETIRED GENERAL TO BE C.I.A. HEAD
After a six-week search for someone willing to serve as Director of Central Intelligence, President Clinton will nominate a retired Air Force general, Michael P. C. Carns, a military manager with a Harvard business degree but no espionage experience, the White House said today.
A decorated veteran of 200 combat missions during the Vietnam War, Mr.
Carns, 57, was the chief administrative aide to the Joint Chiefs of Staff during the Persian Gulf war in 1991.
His commander, Gen.
Colin L. Powell, praised his work and endorsed his nomination, White House officials said.


U.S. to Sell China More Wheat Despite Trade Rift
Three days after imposing record sanctions on China for its piracy of American-made movies and software, the Clinton Administration announced today that it would expand subsidized wheat sales to Beijing, rather than let European farmers win a bigger share of the Chinese market.
The move points up the complexity of trying to punish a major trading partner even as the Government grapples with protecting the interests of American businesses that are trying to gain a larger foothold there.


Lifting the Land Mine Curse
Antipersonnel land mines do not discriminate between soldiers and civilians or between wartime and peacetime.
Once implanted, or scattered from the air, mines may lie dormant for years, ready to explode on contact.
Anyone can be a victim -- a farmer tilling a field, children on their way to school, a United Nations peacekeeper.
An estimated 500 people a week are killed or maimed this way.
Minefields now lay waste to arable land from Afghanistan to Cambodia.
Clearing the 80 to 110 million mines in place is a dangerous and costly business.
Yet new mines are implanted even faster than the old ones are cleared.


Old Line Back on Track?
It has been 36 years since the West Shore Rail Line carried passengers from Rockland County, N.Y., down through Bergen County and into Hoboken.
Now the New Jersey Transit Corporation will spend $1 million on preliminary work to restore the service.
A lot must happen, but transportation planners hope that by 2010 the line will carry 18,000 commuters each day.
It would wind from Rockland into New Jersey and through Norwood, Harrington Park, Closter, Haworth, Dumont, Bergenfield, Teaneck, Bogota and Ridgefield Park, continuing into the Meadowlands and terminating in Hoboken, where commuters could make the connection to New York City.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ARMSTRONG WORLD INDUSTRIES, Lancaster, Pa., a furnishing company, said that by the end of this year it would close its manufacturing plant in Braintree, Mass., possibly affecting about 250 employees.
SHOLODGE INC., Gallatin, Tenn., a lodging and restaurant company, is selling its option to buy half of Suites of America Inc., a unit of Prime Hospitality Corp., to Prime Hospitality, for about $33.5 million.


Spanish Dancer Wins Swiss Contest in Russia
The annual Prix de Lausanne ballet competition, held for the first time in Moscow, closed there on Sunday by awarding its gold medal to Gonzalo Garcia Portero, a 15-year-old Spanish ballet student.
Unlike other competitions, the Prix de Lausanne focuses on granting scholarships to new talent.
Mr.
Garcia Portero will use his scholarship at the San Francisco Ballet School.
The final round and awards ceremony were at the Bolshoi Theater, one of the few places outside Switzerland where the Prix de Lausanne has been held since its founding in 1973.
Major scholarships were awarded also to Maki Kawamura and Kenta Kura of Japan, Jean-Luc Burke of France and Hae Kan Hwa of Korea.


F.B.I. Has Kept 2 in Bomb Trial Under Surveillance Since 1989
Government agents began conducting surveillance of some defendants in the terror conspiracy trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman as early as 1989, when law-enforcement officials photographed two of them taking target practice on Long Island with three men who were later convicted in the World Trade Center bombing.
That information, which came out in testimony yesterday during the conspiracy trial of Mr.
Abdel Rahman and 10 others in Federal District Court in Manhattan, indicated that law-enforcement agencies were collecting information about the trade center bombers and other terrorism suspects considerably earlier than had previously been disclosed.


Comedy Central Romps In Uncharted Territory
What was one of last year's most talked-about and influential sitcoms?
Answer: The BBC's "Absolutely Fabulous." Roseanne has an option on the show for an American version, and there is already a copycat edition available in CBS's new hit "Cybill." And where could "Absolutely Fabulous" be seen?
On Comedy Central, a cable channel still enough of a fledgling to be omitted from a good many television-listing services.
But Comedy Central, a joint venture of Time Warner Entertainment and Viacom, is percolating.
Apart from taking chances on raunchily sophisticated sitcoms that current Washingtonians wouldn't touch with a computer mouse, "Comedy Central" indulges occasionally in some inventive stunts like marathon weekends devoted exclusively to the old series "Soap" or "Monthy Python's Flying Circus." Standup comics are all over the schedule, either in full-length specials or clips grouped around a single theme.
In short supply, though, is original progamming.
That's being remedied, quite promisingly.


SUNY Chancellor Warns of Big Tuition Increases if Budget Cuts Are Made
Students at State University of New York campuses would pay as much as $1,800 more a year in tuition if the state budget cuts proposed by Gov.
George E. Pataki are enacted, according to the SUNY Chancellor, Thomas A. Bartlett.
He said the university system faces two options to meet the Governor's proposed $290 million in cuts: raise tuition at each of the 34 campuses by $1,290 or raise tuition at the four university centers, at Albany, Binghamton, Buffalo and Stony Brook, by $1,800 and at the other colleges by $1,000.
Tuition is now $2,650 for state residents.


Sony Reshapes PC Screens To Accommodate Movies
Computer monitors, like televisions, are available in a range of sizes.
But big or small, most have screens that are nearly square.
Now Sony Electronics Inc. has introduced the first computer monitor with a rectangular screen that has the same proportions as a movie screen.
The monitor, which besides the wider screen has a higher resolution than most other computer monitors, is aimed at professional users.
Target customers include people who do digital editing and special-effects work for the movie industry, automobile designers who use computers to create 3-D models and anyone else willing to spend $21,900 for a computer screen.


Foreign Affairs; Israel's Economic Bomb
After two Palestinian suicide bombers killed 19 Israelis at the Beit Lid bus stop on Jan. 22, Yitzhak Rabin sealed off the West Bank and Gaza to prevent the 50,000 Palestinian laborers there from coming to work in Israel.
A few hours after the closure, Mr.
Rabin got an urgent phone call from the parents of one of the Israeli soldiers killed at Beit Lid.
They had a simple request: Could Mr.
Rabin make an exception and let their Palestinian workers into Israel so they could operate the family's factory?
Otherwise the whole family couldn't go to their son's funeral.
Mr.
Rabin made the exception, but he later told friends the request sent a chill down his spine, because it drove home to him just how tragically intertwined Israel and the Palestinians had become.
Mr.
Rabin has decided to do something about that.
He has already brought in 12,000 Thai workers to replace Palestinians, and he wants even more.
But there is a real danger that violence is going to drive Israel to separate from the Palestinians, before the Palestinian economy can stand on its own.
With Israelis having a per capita income of $14,000 per annum and Gazans $1,400, such a premature separation would be a recipe for explosion.


Protest Against President Halts Basketball Game at Rutgers
More than 150 students took over the polished basketball court of Rutgers University tonight, cutting short a sold-out game to demand the resignation of the university president, Francis L. Lawrence.
It was the third time in 22 years that a Rutgers game was suspended because of a protest.
Student protesters took to the floor because they were angered by Mr.
Lawrence's controversial remarks to faculty members last November that referred to disadvantaged students who lacked "the genetic, hereditary background" to score well on college admission tests.


A Show With Lessons Esthetic and Political
"Hidden Treasures Revealed" is not scheduled to open at the Hermitage in St.
Petersburg, Russia, until late next month, but it is already aswirl in controversy.
These French paintings were taken from private collections in Germany at the end of World War II and have been kept out of view in Russia ever since.
They are mainly Impressionists and Post-Impressionists by Degas, Pissarro, Daumier, Cezanne, Renoir, Toulouse-Lautrec, Seurat, Gauguin and van Gogh, and many have not been viewed publicly in 70 years.
When reproduced from old photographs, they were often tagged as "missing, presumed destroyed." In 1991 Art News magazine reported that they were being kept at the Hermitage.
In October last year, Mikhail B. Piotrovsky, the director of the museum, announced that some of them would go on view in the spring.


Puerto Rico Police School Combines Guns With Music
At the Puerto Rico Police Academy here, Jean-Paul Rojas learned how to fire a 9-millimeter automatic weapon and how to handle a case of domestic violence.
He also had to listen to Schubert and Chopin.
Mr.
Rojas, who is 26 and has been a police officer for two months, says the music appreciation class has helped him to become more perceptive and to "pick up subtle things that happen on the street that if you don't pay attention you can miss, like a body movement." But police officials say liberal arts courses are also helping them infuse the force with a new breed: the sensitive cop.


PRO BASKETBALL: Just Another Down-to-Earth Guy; Kareem Abdul-Jabbar Returns to His Old Grammar School to Set an Example
The boys and girls assembled and seated restlessly in the folding chairs at the St.
Jude grammar school gymnasium on 204th Street in Manhattan heard their principal make this announcement yesterday afternoon: "We just got a call from our special guest's limousine driver, and he is on his way here."
"Ooh," came squeals from the kids, first through eighth graders in the uniform code of yellow blouses and blue skirts for girls, blue jackets and ties for boys.
"Ooh." And some rattled their steel chairs both in anticipation for the guest, a very tall alumnus of the school, and excitement that he would arrive in such style.
He was coming from an appointment in midtown, where he and six others met the news media as the newest inductees into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame.


Arabs in U.S. Are Protesting 'Terror' Effort
Leaders of Arab-American organizations are protesting new efforts by the Clinton Administration to stop the flow of money to groups suspected of terrorism, saying they will hurt Arab-American charities and undermine efforts to get them to help Palestinian economic development.
"If there is an individual or group contributing to terrorism, we have no problem with the Government going after that behavior," said Khalil Jahshan, executive director of the National Association of Arab-Americans.
"But we're worried that this effort will have a chilling effect on all Arab-American philanthropic efforts. And it will hurt the U.S. policy aimed at getting us to help Palestinians."


In Los Angeles Gallery, Tears for Grumpy Guru
It was the sort of wake Curley Morrow would have loved.
His friends were there, Hank Williams was wailing, and there was plenty of beer and cigarettes to go around.
Mr.
Morrow, who died of bone cancer last month at the age of 70, was by all accounts an ill-tempered janitor who did little work in the Zero One Gallery, one of the most prominent showcases in Los Angeles for new artists.
But for the vast majority of the 50 or so mourners who turned out to see him off, Mr.
Morrow was much more, counted as a friend, confidant and critic by a whole beleaguered generation of hipsters and hopeful artists in a city not known for brotherly love.


A Skeptical Look at Mother Teresa
Christopher Hitchens tells in the February Vanity Fair of the furious reaction to a television program he wrote last year for Channel 4 in Britain as part of a series about "inflated and bogus reputations." The program was called "Hell's Angel." The article is titled "Mother Teresa and Me."
"Bogus?" "Inflated?" Mother Teresa!
I had to see that show, and Mr.
Hitchens kindly sent me a tape.
It lived up to the billing.
For a half-hour the nun is portrayed as a creation of "hyperbole and credulity." Mr.
Hitchens, an Englishman of leftish leanings who resides in Washington, says her reputation was baptized by a 1969 BBC program, "Something Beautiful for God," that portrayed her mission to India's newly born and dying in worshipful tones. ("A star is born," cracks Mr. Hitchens.) And 10 years later she received the Nobel Peace Prize.


It's Not Nice to Hit a Mascot
Cincinnati Cyclones Coach DON JACKSON drew a 10-game suspension yesterday for attacking the Atlanta Knights' mascot in the stands.


Rejecting Treated Milk
To the Editor:
Re your Feb. 1 Business Day article on Monsanto's claims to widespread acceptance of synthetic bovine growth hormone: In Vermont (where my father lives) and Washington State (where I live), many people are indeed consuming milk in the same quantity as before.
But many are purchasing from dairy providers that are hormone-free.
Many grocery chains in Seattle will not carry milk from B.G.H.-treated cows because of consumer demand.


United Nations Reports Serbian Helicopter Sorties in Bosnia, a Violation of Flight Ban
Serbian helicopters flew a large number of sorties into eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina last week in violation of a United Nations ban, the Security Council was told today.
A total of 62 helicopters flying too low for aerial surveillance were spotted by United Nations observers on the ground on Wednesday through Saturday north of the Muslim enclave of Srebrenica, a representative of the United Nations Secretary General told the Council.
The representative, Undersecretary General Chinmaya Gharekhan, said that one large contingent was flying in military formation.


Isles Play Beach Ball, But Game Uses a Puck
After spending most of the last three days getting acclimated to this sun-blessed metropolis, the Islanders played tonight as if they were more prepared for a friendly beach volleyball match than a jaw-rattling hockey game.
Though outshot, 2-1, the Tampa Bay Lightning scored early and played more aggressively in a 5-2 victory at the ThunderDome that left New York with a 4-4-1 record.
Tampa Bay improved to 4-5-1.


A Reprieve for the Wolves
So far, this has been a pretty good year for the wolves.
In mid-January, after two decades of public hearings, scientific studies and lawsuits, Federal biologists transplanted two small packs of gray wolves from Canada to Yellowstone National Park and central Idaho, areas where the animals were exterminated a half-century ago.


The New Volunteers -- A special report.; Program With 60's Spirit Butts Against 95's
On New Year's Eve, Kerri Goncher packed up her 1987 Toyota Supra in Chicago and drove here in 34 hours straight to begin teaching the severely emotionally disturbed and sometimes violent children who end up at the Little Canyon Center run by the Arizona Baptist Children's Services.
She will earn $4.50 an hour plus an annual $4,725 educational grant.
Ms.
Goncher's bouncy enthusiasm for a low-wage public service job may be just what President Clinton had in mind for the Americorps public service program.
In its first five months of operation, the program has placed 20,000 Americans like Ms.
Goncher, a recent University of Wisconsin graduate who hopes to become a teacher, in a wide variety of public service jobs tutoring children, serving as police cadets, repairing housing projects and monitoring contamination of rivers in 350 programs around the country.


20th Century and Benham to Join
The 20th Century Companies and Benham Management International Inc. announced a merger today that will create the nation's fifth-largest no-load mutual fund company.
The combined companies will manage assets of $37 billion after the merger is completed sometime in May or June, said James Stowers 3d, president of 20th Century, at his company's headquarters in Kansas City, Mo.
The value of the deal was not disclosed.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  SERBS ACCUSED OF BREAKING BAN  The United Nations Security Council was told that large numbers of Serbian helicopters have entered Bosnia, violating a ban on supplying the Bosnian Serbs.
A12  POLISH PRIME MINISTER SELECTED  A former Communist who was speaker of Parliament was nominated as Poland's Prime Minister, but it was uncertain whether the choice would be approved.
A6


Colombia Pledges Crackdown on Drug Trade
Under pressure from the United States and embarrassed by lenient sentences, the Colombian Government has promised steps to strengthen its prosecutions of drug traffickers.
In a report released in mid-January, the Justice Ministry concluded that judges and prosecutors were overly generous in their use of a plea bargain system initiated in an attempt to go after leaders of the country's drug smuggling rings.


George Kalafatis; Sports Agent, 50
George Kalafatis, a lawyer and sports agent who negotiated multimillion-dollar contracts in baseball, football and basketball, died on Saturday at his home in Shaker Heights, Ohio.
He was 50.
His family said the cause was either a heart attack or a stroke.


For Dutch, It's O.K. To Despise Germans
Only weeks before the last border controls between Germany and the Netherlands are to be lifted, Chancellor Helmut Kohl came to The Hague for a private meeting with about 30 Dutch politicians, intellectuals and business leaders.
Participants were sworn to silence and not even the topic of the discussion was announced, but it might have been "Love Thy Neighbor."
Mr.
Kohl had come to discuss ways of confronting deep anti-German sentiment in the Netherlands.
It is one of Western Europe's most enduring prejudices, and with the 50th anniversary of the end of World War II approaching, political leaders in both countries want to curb it.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $100 million of debentures due in 2000 through First Tennessee Bank.
Callable in six months, the issue is priced at par to yield 8.31 percent.


Law Doesn't Prevent Subway Access to New York Airports; Easy Extension
To the Editor:
Two simple connections to Kennedy International and La Guardia airports are feasible (news article, Feb. 1).
Both involve extending the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's subway line to the airports.


N.F.L. Teams to Gain $2 Million From Cap
Preliminary figures released by the National Football League Players Association yesterday show that teams will have an additional $2 million under the salary cap for next season.
Gene Upshaw, executive director of the players association, said the cap would go from $34.6 million to $36.52 million, based upon projections of revenues that the 30 teams in the league will share.
He said that figure could go up to $37 million by mid-March once the final numbers are computed.


It's Not Nice to Hit a Fan
Houston Rockets guard VERNON MAXWELL quietly left Portland with his teammates yesterday as National Basketball Association officials considered what penalty he would face for allegedly punching a fan.
Witnesses said Maxwell, who was being taunted by fans during Monday night's 120-82 loss to the Portland Trail Blazers, charged up a dozen rows into the Memorial Coliseum crowd during a timeout in the third quarter and punched 35-year-old STEVE GEORGE in the jaw.
George and his lawyer said they planned to press charges and are considering a lawsuit. (AP)


The Neediest Cases; Many Give to the Needy In Memory of Loved Ones
The letter, typed single space, overflows with details of a life well spent, a man beloved.
It describes his career (art), his hobby (the Sunday crossword puzzle), even his bad habit (pipe smoking).
Written in December, it was sent to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund with a donation honoring Joseph Hochfeld, a cherished grandfather who died 10 years ago.
Judith Remondi of North Quincy, Mass., who wrote the letter, is among hundreds of people who have contributed to the fund in memory of a relative.
But the letter she sent with her $200 donation is rare in its dense detail.
It fills two pages, recounting all the traits that endeared Mr.
Hochfeld to his family.


I.M.F. Talks With Russia Fail To Reach Agreement on Loan
A round of talks between Russia and the International Monetary Fund about a $6.25 billion loan has ended without agreement, but officials from both sides said they are hopeful that another round expected before the end of the month will succeed.
Russia is counting on the loan to help fill a big gap in its 1995 budget.
In return, the fund, which acts as the fiduciary agent for the big Western industrialized nations, wants a budget program that will help stabilize Russia's overheating economy.


An Unusual Acquisition In Software
Silicon Graphics Inc., a leading maker of computer work stations, said today that it would acquire two producers of three-dimensional animation software, Alias Research and Wavefront Technologies, in a stock swap valued at roughly $500 million.
Analysts and industry executives said the acquisition of two of its leading software vendors was an unusual move for a hardware company, but that it made sense for Silicon Graphics as a way to protect its strong position in the entertainment industry.


Hunt for Savings Turns to Higher Costs for Affluent Beneficiaries of Medicare
The Republican leaders of an influential House subcommittee indicated today that affluent Medicare beneficiaries were an early target in the hunt for savings in the insurance program for the elderly.
But spokesmen for groups representing the elderly signaled that they would not yield without a fight to what one called, in an echo of past battles, a "seniors-only tax."


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Delightful Demolitions And Conflations of Bach  Brooklyn Philharmonic Brooklyn Academy of Music
Lukas Foss and the Brooklyn Philharmonic offered a most unconventional Bach concert on Friday evening, a freewheeling blend of modernist sport and Romantic sentiment.


Igor Tamm, 72, Expert in Forms Of Virus, Dies
Igor Tamm, a biomedical scientist and educator who earned renown for his pioneering studies of the composition of viruses and how they replicate in the cells they invade, died on Monday at his home in Watch Hill, R.I.
He was 72.
The cause was lung cancer, said his wife, Olive.


No Headline
"Some people consider this drudgery, but I love the retail end of this job. My frustration is that I have to be in Washington Monday through Friday. Why can't I stop by a couple of volunteer fire  departments on a Wednesday night?" MICHAEL P. FORBES, a new member of Congress.  [ B1:2. ]


Walters Upset By 'Selfish' Anderson
He is either One Angry Man or One Disenchanted Dude, depending on the source.
Rex Walters has been on a kamikaze mission with his words lately, talking about his teammates as only a disgruntled second-year guard could.
Today, the Nets' newest iconoclast zeroed in on Kenny Anderson, implying that the Nets' floor leader is selfish and more motivated by his own numbers than victories.


Engine Fire Grounds Jet
The engine under the right wing of a Delta L-1011 jet caught fire yesterday morning as the plane was in line for takeoff from La Guardia Airport.
The pilot, alerted to the fire by a Delta ramp coordinator at the terminal, cut off the flow of fuel to extinguish the fire.
The plane, scheduled for an 8 A.M. flight to Atlanta as Flight 605, was towed back to the terminal, where the 88 passengers and the crew of 9 debarked the usual way.


Stop the Dishonest Debate on Social Security; Dr. Townsend's Plan
To the Editor:
James Gollin (Op-Ed, Feb. 1) pays tribute to the perspicacity of Dr.
Francis E. Townsend without naming him.
Truth is, Dr.
Townsend's name is usually skipped, even though President Franklin D. Roosevelt acknowledged his role in the passage of the Social Security Act.


Book Notes
Handing Over the Goods
The bad news for self-published authors is they have to do all the work themselves.
And pay for it.
The good news, for a handful of recent do-it-yourselfers who have built large followings, is that the payoff can be enormous.
James Redfield, who wrote and published the best seller "The Celestine Prophecy" out of his Alabama home, sold it in 1993 to Warner Books for $800,000.
Marlo Morgan did the same last year with her "Mutant Message Down Under," selling it to HarperCollins for $1.6 million.


For young adults, a reminder that Nov. 22, 1963, wasn't the only day of John F. Kennedy's life.
FOR those who think of John F. Kennedy as an airport, a high school or a performing arts center, an unusual new campaign seeks to rehumanize him.
The pro bono campaign by the Martin Agency, a creatively focused shop in Richmond, is intended to encourage visits to the New Museum at the John F. Kennedy Library in Boston, which seeks to place the life of the 35th President in the context of his times.


Mutombo an All-Star, After All
Denver Nuggets center DIKEMBE MUTOMBO, who complained bitterly last week about the National Basketball Association's lack of recognition for defensive players after he was passed over for the All-Star team, was named to the Western Conference squad yesterday.


Gun Victim Has Say in Court, for Himself and Slain Father
For two weeks, Kevin McCarthy has watched the trial of Colin Ferguson on television, knowing the day would come when he would take the witness stand to answer questions from the man accused of shooting him in the head and killing his father.
He expected to meet the same combative Colin Ferguson who has sparred with other victims of the Long Island Rail Road shooting, questioning their memories and their honesty.


Secretary's Debt Payments Are Scrutinzed
Congressional investigators looking into the business dealings of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown are examining transactions involving a Texas company that provided $71,500 to pay some of Mr.
Brown's personal debts.
The money from the company, the Jasas Corporation, was paid last summer to Mr.
Brown in the course of the sale of his stake in another concern, First International, documents show.


SOCCER REPORT
Italy
Team captains in Italy will read a statement before the start of all games on Sunday calling for fans to behave themselves in the wake of last weekend's suspension of all matches.
All games were called off after the fatal stabbing of a Genoa fan before the game against AC Milan at Genoa on Jan. 29.


A Times Square Tale: Alone in a Spotlight
THE message on Dael Orlandersmith's answering machine in the tiny sublet apartment on Second Avenue, off St.
Marks Place, parried all callers.
"O.K., folks, this is the week the critics come and make or break my butt, and probably I won't be able to get back to you," said the voice of the 35-year-old woman who is currently acting in "Beauty's Daughter," her one-woman autobiographical play at the American Place Theater.
Ms.
Orlandersmith is understandably anxious.
The theater, in the shadow of Times Square at 111 West 46th Street, is just a few miles from Harlem, where she was raised, and the lower East Side, where she went to school, waited tables and built her poems.
But the journey has taken a lifetime of zigzags and hazards, and now, in perhaps the riskiest step, she has reached the point where she stands alone, under a spotlight, a big woman in a leotard, showing her heart to strangers.


Albert Elsen, 67, Art Historian And an Authority on Rodin
Albert Elsen, an art historian at Stanford University and a leading authority on the sculpture of Auguste Rodin, died on Thursday at his home in Stanford, Calif.
He was 67.
The cause was a heart attack, a university spokesman said.


The Many Moods (and Levels) of Langston Hughes
THE COLLECTED POEMS OF LANGSTON HUGHES  Edited by Arnold Rampersad and David Roessel  708 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $30.
What would American art do without the Midwest, so averse to artifice or embellishment in its manners and morals?
From Willa Cather (born in 1873) to Langston Hughes (born in 1902), and with Ernest Hemingway, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Marianne Moore and T. S. Eliot in between, our Midwest produced writers who transformed the stern and plain into the rich and strange.
They were looking for the route that ties the spare to the ecstatic, and reserve to passionate intensity.


For Citizen Cuomo, a Law Job and a Book Deal
Turning down a lucrative offer to be the host of a daily talk-radio show, former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has joined the Manhattan law firm of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher and has signed a contract to write a book analyzing the "implications of the radical right revolution."
Mr.
Cuomo, who lost his campaign for a fourth term last year, said today that he was also continuing to negotiate for a part-time position with a university and that he may become host of a once-a-week radio show.
He has speaking engagements scheduled for London; Zurich; Sydney, Australia; Nashville and San Diego.


MADD Opposes Damages Cap
Members of Mothers Against Drunk Driving announced yesterday that they were opposed to legislation that would put a cap on punitive damages arising from lawsuits.
MADD's legislative director, Ken Zauber, said the threat of a multimillion-dollar jury award was necessary to deter drunken drivers.
DAVID STOUT


So It May Be True After All: Eating Pasta Makes You Fat
Bye-bye, pasta.
It's been fun.
But some diet experts who have been extolling the health benefits of low-fat, high-carbohydrate foods are now backtracking.
Starchy foods, they suspect, actually contribute to obesity.
"In the 60's, starch was the enemy, then sugar, then salt, then cholesterol, then fat," said Cathy Nonas, the director of the Theodore Van Itallie Center for Weight Control at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Two Choreographers Indulge In a Little Give and Take  Sari Eckler and Heidi Latsky St.
Mark's Church
Sari Eckler comes from Toronto; Heidi Latsky, from Montreal.
Both have choreographed in New York in recent years, and on Saturday night they danced together.


Nurses Go on Strike


Old Line Back on Track?
It has been 36 years since the West Shore Rail Line carried passengers from Rockland County, N.Y., down through Bergen County and into Hoboken.
Now the New Jersey Transit Corporation will spend $1 million on preliminary work to restore the service.
A lot must happen, but transportation planners hope that by 2010 the line will carry 18,000 commuters each day.
It would wind from Rockland into New Jersey and through Norwood, Harrington Park, Closter, Haworth, Dumont, Bergenfield, Teaneck, Bogota and Ridgefield Park, continuing into the Meadowlands and terminating in Hoboken, where commuters could make the connection to New York City.


Ramadan: A Time For Fasts And Feasts
AROUND lunchtime last Thursday, Mustafa Hassan Ibn Yusef, 27, was having a crisis.
"I wanted a cigarette," he said.
"I wanted a juice."
But it was the second day of Ramadan, the Muslim month of fasting and prayer, and he did not give in to his cravings.
He resisted.


INSIDE
Brown Finances Questioned
Investigators looking into the dealings of Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown are examining a Texas company that paid his personal debt and sought department help.
Page A17.
Time Warner Cable Deal
Time Warner agreed to acquire Cablevision Industries for $2.2 billion, in a deal that gives Tele-Communications Inc. a close rival for the title of No. 1 cable operator.
Page D1.
Suspicious Bosnia Flights
Serbian helicopters have been seen over Bosnia, United Nations officials said, raising concerns about whether a ban on aiding the Bosnian Serbs was being violated.
Page A12.
Game Halted at Rutgers
Rutgers students took over the basketball court and stopped a game with the University of Massachusetts to demand the resignation of the Rutgers president.
Page B1.
Prison for Tupac Shakur
The rap star Tupac Shakur was sentenced to 1 1/2 to 4 1/2 years in prison for sexually abusing a fan, and he apologized.
But he said he had committed no crime.
Page B1.


Sports of The Times; White House Couldn't Hit A Loud Foul
ONLY one week away from the grubby spectacle of Oil Can Boyd's comeback, we want action.
Instead, we're getting a civics lesson: The Impotence of the Executive Branch.
The President as Helpless Giant.
Against our own cynical better judgment, we still harbored the hope of the baseball owners and the baseball players being hauled off to the Ultimate Principal's Office.


The Public Gains From the Zion Case
The verdict in the lawsuit resulting from Libby Zion's death in 1984 at New York Hospital is a mixed one that allows both sides to claim some vindication and also to complain.
But a central theme emerges from the 10-year history of this wrenching case.
Hospitals and doctors run heavy risks when they schedule unrelentingly rugged working hours and conditions, and health authorities are right to try to regulate them.
The jury found the hospital not responsible for Ms.
Zion's death and charged no damages against it.
The jury did find negligence in the hospital's assigning a key intern too many patients on the night she was admitted to the hospital.
It found the intern and two other doctors responsible for individual mistakes and assessed $750,000 damages, but cut that award in half by finding Ms.
Zion and the doctors equally responsible for her death.


Time Warner Agrees To Acquire Cablevision
Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Cablevision Industries in a stock deal valued at $2.2 billion, giving Tele-Communications Inc. a close rival for the title of the nation's largest operator of cable systems.
The move is the latest in an aggressive cable strategy by Time Warner, which just two weeks ago bought the cable properties of Houston Industries in a deal estimated at $2.3 billion.


Bujumbura Journal; In the Chimps' Sad Fate Is an Omen for Burundi
The infant chimpanzee was tied to a pole in a windowless, padlocked mud hut.
Its owner told employees of the Jane Goodall Institute, who were posing as buyers, that he had found the creature and was trying to sell it for several hundred dollars.
The orphaned chimp was rescued by the institute's Burundian workers, who now care for it, along with 18 other chimps rescued from captivity.
They have named the baby Bahati -- Lucky in their Kirundi language -- because it survived.


New Editor Chosen for the Journal Science
The weekly journal Science, the world's largest peer-reviewed general science magazine, has selected Dr.
Floyd E. Bloom, a neuroscientist, as its next editor in chief, the American Association for the Advancement of Science announced yesterday.
Dr.
Bloom will assume the post this spring when the current editor, Dr.
Daniel E. Koshland Jr., retires after serving since 1985.


Willard Waterman, An Actor on Radio And TV, Dies at 80
Willard Waterman, an actor who played roles in numerous radio, television, film and theater productions, died on Thursday at his home in Burlingame, Calif.
He was 80.
The cause was bone marrow disease, his family said.


Chefs Turn Out for Team That Brought Them Duck Foie Gras
THE crowd arrived early -- before 7 P.M. -- and even then there was not enough foie gras to go around.
But the 1,000 or so revelers celebrating the 10th anniversary of D'Artagnan, the game and foie gras dealer, did not seem to mind.
The void was filled by more than a ton of food -- pates, pastrami-cured duck breasts, sausages, prunes stuffed with foie gras, quails, pheasants, venison, tubs of cassoulet and gallons of Champagne, red wine and Armagnac.
The bounty was arrayed on the balcony that rings the main concourse of Grand Central Station.


You Must Go Home Again; All Politics Is Local, Especially for Mike Forbes
Heading to his third Saturday night dinner, Mike Forbes, a freshman Congressman, turned to his wife, Barbara, and asked, "Honey, do we have any cereal at home?"
He had passed on the barbecued chicken at a fund-raiser for a Suffolk County legislator, didn't touch the shrimp cocktail at a Southold Republican function and pushed some rigatoni around his plate at a party honoring Coram's volunteer fire department.
He went home to a bowl of Raisin Bran and a few hours' sleep before rising to face two breakfasts and a brunch.


Delay Ending For Check Processing
Check processing and other banking activities were mostly back to normal yesterday at savings banks in the metropolitan New York area, a day after the State Banking Department took over Nationar, a trust company that processes almost $ 90 million a day in checks for the institutions.
The takeover "slowed down the clearance of most checks about a day, and there may still be a few bounced checks, but today everything's pretty well back to normal," Clare Sykes, a spokeswoman for the New York State Banking Department, said yesterday.


HEDDA GABLER; To Stay Home or Not: Varieties of Fear and Peril
It was the sort of weekend that seemed determined to prove agoraphobes right.
Snow had fallen thickly; the downtown streets were deserted, and Washington, with its white buildings shrouded in white, looked like a necropolis.
A noisy, piercing wind echoed with suggestions that the world could indeed be a dangerous place.
Stalwart theatergoers who chose to honor their Saturday tickets could have listened, curiously enough, to artificial versions of that same noise in two different theaters presenting two very different plays.
The sound of a forbidding wind whistled through both Liviu Ciulei's production of Ibsen's "Hedda Gabler" at the Arena Stage and the American premiere of "The Pitchfork Disney" by the English playwright Philip Ridley at the Woolly Mammoth Theater Company.


Panel Censures Brooklyn Judge for Lying
The State Commission on Judicial Conduct censured the Brooklyn Surrogate yesterday for what it said was his false testimony to another disciplinary group investigating his chief law assistant.
Censure, or public condemnation, is the second strongest action that the judicial conduct commission can take against a judge.
The action is less than the strongest sanction -- removing a judge from the bench -- but more than publicly admonishing him or privately cautioning him.


New Show Is First Not to Have to Pay Idle Musicians
Sealing a historic union-producer arrangement, a musical set to open next month will be the first to come to Broadway under a new rule eliminating payments to union musicians who are not even expected to play.
The deal was snarled for several weeks by union objections to the use of a synthesizer.
But on Monday, an arbitration panel ruled against them, so "Smokey Joe's Cafe" will open on March 2 with a seven-piece rock band on stage in a theater that normally requires 16 musicians in the pit.


James P. Grant Memorial
A memorial service will be held for James P. Grant, a foreign-aid expert and executive director of the United Nations Children's Fund, at 3 P.M. on Friday at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street.
Mr.
Grant died on Jan. 28 at age 72.


As Euphoria Fades, Haitians Run a Reality Check
There were impassioned speeches, performances by some of Haiti's top music groups and even free T-shirts for the crowd that made its way to the National Palace this morning.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide was sworn in as President four years ago today, and to mark the anniversary the Government had declared a national holiday.
But the celebration also meant that Mr.
Aristide, prohibited from running for re-election, has only one year left before he must step down and hand power over to a successor.
Deprived of more than three years of his own term by a military coup, he must now work against the clock, bureaucratic inertia and Haiti's own backwardness to achieve even a portion of his ambitious goals.


Clinton Rescue Plan Buoys The Price of Mexican Bonds
Foreign and domestic investors showed signs of new-found confidence in Mexico's battered financial markets today as the Government succeeded in selling its first Treasury bonds since a new international rescue package was announced last week.
The interest rate on the 91-day bond, though still much higher than comparable rates in the United States, plunged nearly 10 percentage points in today's auction, to a yield of 15.40 percent, reflecting strong demand.
Officials at the Mexican central bank said it was the largest one-time drop in percentage points ever for the Treasury bonds, which are called tesobonos.


New Setback On Abortion For Nominee
President Clinton's nominee for Surgeon General was dealt another blow today as anti-abortion forces stepped up their assault on his record, saying he had participated in a study designed to help women induce their own abortions.
Congressional Democrats complained that the White House was not adequately defending the nominee, Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr., an obstetrician and gynecologist from Tennessee, and even some of his supporters warned that his veracity was in doubt and his nomination could be in trouble.


Rossellini to Join Lancaster Group
Isabella Rossellini, the actress and model who was released last week from her contract with the Lancome cosmetics unit of L'Oreal S.A., said yesterday that she would join the New York office of Lancaster Group Worldwide as a vice president.
Ms.
Rossellini will work to create product concepts for Lancaster Group, which markets fragrances and cosmetics under brand names like Davidoff, Joop! and Lancaster.
She appeared in Lancome advertising for more than a decade; Lancaster Group has not decided whether she will appear in its ads.


Worries Over School Budget
The money is a tiny part of a proposed $1.6 trillion Federal budget that is bound to change a lot anyhow.
But school officials in Ocean, Monmouth and Burlington Counties are alarmed.
President Clinton's budget includes $619 million in aid to school districts with military bases.
The aid, meant to offset the absence of real estate taxes from those tracts, means a lot to the three counties, which are home to several installations.


Corrections
An article in Science Times yesterday about plans to use radar from space to study the temples of Angkor in Cambodia misspelled the surname of the program director of the World Monuments Fund.
He is John H. Stubbs.


Pepsico Earnings Increased 16% in the Fourth Quarter
Pepsico Inc. yesterday reported disappointing profits for its Pizza Hut, Taco Bell and KFC restaurant businesses, but said strong gains in its Pepsi-Cola beverage and Frito-Lay snack-food operations had given the company a solid fourth quarter.
Net income rose 16 percent, to $513 million, or 64 cents a share, from $442.5 million, or 55 cents a share.
The gain included pension-plan accounting adjustments of $10.7 million, or 1 cent a share, as well as an increase of $34.9 million, or 4 cents a share, because the fourth quarter had an extra week, for accounting purposes.


Bread: Satisfying A Need to Knead
FOR our 12th wedding anniversary, I bought my wife a diamond ring.
She got me bread pans.
We were both thrilled.
They weren't just ordinary bread pans, of course.
I already had those.
These were specialty pans for French bread -- elegant little stainless-steel couches where the baguettes could rise, yet still maintain their rough irregular forms right into the oven.
And they went well with my other bread toys -- my stained, character-etched old baking stone, my bread paddle, my collection of eclectic ingredients.


Wine Talk
CALL them Spanish dim sum or the culinary equivalent of wine by the glass, tapas are a big hit in New York these days.
From clams to calamari, from sardines to jamon de Serrano, tapas are being discovered by New Yorkers.
And so, too, is what the Spanish have known for centuries -- that grazing is an easy going, healthy way to eat.
In Madrid, a few late afternoon tapas, or snacks, can neatly bridge the long gap between lunch and the traditional Spanish dinner, which may not begin until 11 P.M. or later.
In weight-conscious America, a selection of the right tapas can take the place of dinner.


Careless Red Storm Fumbles Game to Hall
In the Seton Hall locker room late tonight, Danny Hurley was boldly predicting the Pirates would be part of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament come March.
"We'll get our 18 or 19 wins and we'll be there," he said confidently.


Study Rebuts 'Acceptable' Midlife Weight Gain
WOMEN who gain 10 to 40 pounds in midlife, an amount considered acceptable and even desirable under current guidelines, have a seriously increased risk of suffering a heart attack, a new study has found.
In a 14-year study of nearly 116,000 women, researchers from the Harvard School of Public Health and Harvard Medical School found that weight gains of even 11 to 18 pounds in adult life resulted in a 25 percent greater chance of suffering or dying of a heart attack compared with that faced by women who gained less than 11 pounds after the age of 18.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Time Warner agreed to acquire Cablevision Industries in a stock deal valued at $2.2 billion.
The move, which follows a $2.3 billion acquisition two weeks ago, means the company has caught up to the giant in cable systems, Tele-Communications.  [ D1. ]


CHRONICLE
Will he or won't he?
So goes the guessing game in Washington and around the country about whether Gen.
COLIN L. POWELL, the former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, will run for President in 1996.
So far, he won't tell.
But General Powell received some encouragement from an ostensibly neutral source on Monday night: SAM DONALDSON, the ABC correspondent who has badgered official Washington for years.
Mr.
Donaldson gave a testimonial as he introduced the general to a large audience who had paid almost $50 each to hear him talk about his view of the world at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.


Isles Play Beach Ball, But Game Uses a Puck
After spending most of the last three days getting acclimated to this sun-blessed metropolis, the Islanders played tonight as if they were more prepared for a friendly beach volleyball match than a jaw-rattling hockey game.
Though outshot, 2-1, the Tampa Bay Lightning scored early and played more aggressively in a 5-2 victory at the ThunderDome that left New York with a 4-4-1 record.
Tampa Bay improved to 4-5-1.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Undermanned Suns Edge Mavs  Elliott Perry scored 7 points in the final 1 minute 38 seconds, including the go-ahead basket with 13.8 seconds to play, to give the injury-depleted Phoenix Suns a 114-113 victory over the Mavericks in Dallas.
The Suns were playing their first game without second-leading scorer Danny Manning, who was lost for the season after tearing a knee ligament Monday.
Phoenix also survived the ejection of Charles Barkley with 4:25 to play.
Phoenix was also minus the starting point guard Kevin Johnson and the reserve forward Wayman Tisdale, both of whom are injured. (AP)


Ex-Communist Picked to Be Polish Premier
Poland's governing parties nominated a former Communist ideology chief tonight to replace a Prime Minister opposed by President Lech Walesa.
The nomination of the official, Jozef Oleksy, currently the Speaker of Parliament, must be approved by the President and by a parliamentary vote.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Announced a working agreement with Port City of the Southern League.
Named Dave Myers manager; Ron Romanick pitching coach; and Paul Harker trainer of Port City.


John Sawyer, Former President Of Williams College, Dies at 77
John E. Sawyer, a former president of Williams College and the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, died yesterday at his home in Woods Hole, Mass.
He was 77.
The cause was cancer, said his son John.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.99
3.24
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.78
5.83
3.24
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.07
6.10
3.40
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.51
7.53
5.97
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.64
7.64
6.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.47
8.47
7.29
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.51
6.54
5.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Lawyer for the Offense
As expected, MARC TRESTMAN, a lawyer who managed bond portfolios the past three years, was hired yesterday as offensive coordinator of the Super Bowl champion San Francisco 49ers.
He replaces MIKE SHANAHAN, who left last week to become the Denver Broncos' head coach.
Trestman, 39, is a former assistant coach with Minnesota, Tampa Bay and Cleveland. (AP)


More Room for High Rollers
The Bally Entertainment Corporation said yesterday that it would build 60,000 square feet of additional casino space next to its Park Place Casino Hotel and Tower on the Boardwalk.
Arthur M. Goldberg, Bally's president, said the announcement coincided with the 60th anniversary of the creation of the game Monopoly -- appropriate, since the new gambling space will be on Monopoly Square.


Paroled Rapist Is Charged In Sex Attacks in Bronx
A string of sexual attacks in the Bronx was carried out by a man who was paroled from prison a year ago after serving 13 years for rape, the police said yesterday.
At the time he carried out the attacks, they said, the man was dutifully checking in with his parole officer and even attending required rape counseling sessions.


Support for Port Nominee
After waiting a month, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman agreed yesterday to support Gov.
George E. Pataki's choice to run the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
By backing the nominee, George J. Marlin, Governor Whitman all but assured his appointment and extricated the New York Governor from an awkward position.
Page A1.


Wounded Man Testifies in Shooting
After two weeks of watching the trial of Colin Ferguson on television, Kevin McCarthy took the witness stand to answer questions from the man accused of shooting him in the head and killing his father.
But Mr.
Ferguson asked Mr.
McCarthy only one question on cross-examination.
"Mr. McCarthy," he said, "are you able to assist the jury in any way in identifying the man who shot you?"


No Indictments for 3 in Plot to Kill Officers
Charges that three men from Rockaway Beach plotted to kill police officers who had cracked down on drug pushers were dropped yesterday after a Queens grand jury declined to return indictments.
The grand jury's refusal to indict came as a shock to the New York City Police Department.
A statement issued by the department last night said it "strongly supported" the charges against the three suspects "and will intensively continue to investigate the matter."


Stop the Dishonest Debate on Social Security; A Tax on the Young
To the Editor:
Re "Everybody's Nest Egg" (Op-Ed, Feb. 1): James Gollin states that the Social Security system has no overt opponents.
It does.
PAC 20/20 registered with the Federal Election Commission on Jan. 6 as a nonconnected committee dedicated to raising money to support the reform of the inherently flawed system.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Singing of Love and Longing Amid Fans' Kisses and Hugs  Cristian Castro Radio City Music Hall
Cristian Castro faced a challenge on Friday night: how to keep singing his love songs while teen-age girls hurled themselves at him for kisses and hugs.
Girls poured into the aisles to photograph him; they sang along ardently on ballads; they squealed when he approached the edge of the stage; they chanted "Cris-tian! Cris-tian!" A few rushed past security men to grab their idol, who feigned fondness once they were pulled off him.


Giuliani and Molinari Bury the Hatchet
Two combatants from last summer, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Borough President Guy V. Molinari, acknowledged in a "town hall" meeting last night that the relationship between the once-close friends had been tense recently, but they were lighthearted in addressing their renewed friendship.
Mr.
Molinari, angered that the Mayor had broken ranks with the Republican Party to support President Clinton's anticrime bill, had labeled the Mayor a "traitor" and "disloyal" to his party.


Worries Over School Budget
The money is a tiny part of a proposed $1.6 trillion Federal budget that is bound to change a lot anyhow.
But school officials in Ocean, Monmouth and Burlington Counties are alarmed.
President Clinton's budget includes $619 million in aid to school districts with military bases.
The aid, meant to offset the absence of real estate taxes from those tracts, means a lot to the three counties, which are home to several installations.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, the Personal Computers column in Science Times yesterday about a program called a browser that is used to find information on the World Wide Web misstated the electronic address for information on a program called Slipknot.
It is slipknot@micromind.com.
It also misstated the address for a treatise on how to cause grapes to explode in flames in a microwave oven.
It is http://www.cbi.tamucc.edu/ pmichaud/grape/.


A Daring Distortion In 'Duo Concertant'
The New York City Ballet season continues with a series of debuts, some of them more startling than persuasive.
Nikolaj Hubbe obviously has his own ideas about "Duo Concertant," the enduring duet that George Balanchine choreographed for the company's 1972 Stravinsky Festival.


Rowland Watts, 82, a Lawyer Who Pressed Unpopular Causes
Rowland Watts, a lawyer who spent much of his career fighting on behalf of often-unpopular causes, died on Saturday at his home in Shelburne, Vt.
He was 82 and lived in Pleasantville, N.Y., until last year.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Stocks End Day Mixed, With the Dow Off 0.34
Despite an erratic session, the stock market put itself on hold yesterday, as stock prices closed mixed but little changed.
After falling more than 12 points earlier in the session, the Dow Jones industrial average ended the day down 0.34 point, to 3,937.39, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 fell 0.33 point, to 480.81.
But the smaller-company Nasdaq composite index rose 0.12 point, to 778.97.


Whitman Backs Pataki Pick For Port Authority Director
After withholding her endorsement for a month, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey has agreed to support Gov.
George E. Pataki's choice of a Conservative Party leader to head the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, all but guaranteeing that the nomination will be approved.
By dropping her objections to the Conservative politician, George J. Marlin, Mrs.
Whitman will likely save Mr.
Pataki from a setback to his new administration.
Mr.
Marlin has come under attack from some commissioners of the agency, who said they were reluctant to vote for him because he lacked the experience of previous executive directors.


Judge Delays Ruling On Saatchi Lawsuit
A judge has ruled that a lawsuit filed by the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company in New York State Supreme Court against Bill Muirhead, a former top executive of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, concerning his departure would be delayed until a decision was reached in a similar suit in Britain brought by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi against Mr.
Muirhead and three former colleagues.


Market Place; After bankruptcy, America West Airlines is humming but its stock is slumping.
AMERICA WEST AIRLINES tops several airline analysts' lists of best buys.
So why has its stock languished?
"Beats me," said Raymond Neidl, an analyst at Furman Selz who is recommending the stock.


Adele Green, 79, Rainwear Designer
Adele Green, a co-founder of the Lawrence of London raincoat company, died on Friday at Bronx Lebanon Hospital after a brief illness.
She was 79 and lived in Manhattan.
As the designer for Lawrence of London, which she founded with her first husband, Norman Lawrence, in the 1950's, Mrs.
Green helped to bring rainwear into the fashion spectrum by offering water-repellent coats that could also be worn on sunny days and as evening wraps.
At one time, she enlisted Valentino, the Italian couturier, to design a special collection for the company.


A Kidnapped Bride as Allegory for Oppression
Huang Jianxin's sweepingly handsome film, "The Wooden Man's Bride," is set in the arid steppe of northwestern China in the 1920's, but from the look and feel of the place, it could almost be the 13th century.
The inhabitants of this chilly desert region live a feudal existence in stone fortresses guarded by heavy wooden gates.
Those who venture outside their compounds risk being attacked by armed bandits on horseback.


Chicken a la Vinegar
THIS updated version of chicken in vinegar sauce is based on an old traditional French country dish that uses vinegar, tomato and white wine for flavoring.
Serve it with creamy polenta topped with mushrooms and Italian peppers, which are long, thin and light green, with a more delicate flavor than green bell peppers.
Chicken in Vinegar Sauce
12 ounces whole onion or 11 ounces chopped, ready-cut onion (2 1/2 to 2 2/3 cups)  Pan spray  8 ounces skinless, boneless chicken breasts  1/2 cup no-salt-added tomato puree  1/2 cup white wine  1 1/2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar  1/2 cup no-salt-added chicken stock  1/2 teaspoon dried tarragon  1/8 teaspoon salt
Freshly ground black pepper to taste.
1. Chop whole onion.
2.
Heat nonstick pan over high heat, reduce heat to medium-high and spray with pan spray.
Add onion, and saute until it begins to brown and soften.
3. Add chicken breasts, and brown on both sides.
4.
Reduce heat to simmer, and add tomato puree, wine, vinegar, chicken stock and tarragon.
Cover, and continue cooking until chicken is tender, about 10 minutes total.
Season with salt and pepper.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 310 calories, 4 grams fat, 70 milligrams cholesterol, 260 milligrams sodium, 30 grams protein, 30 grams carbohydrate.
Polenta With Italian Peppers and Mushrooms
12 ounces whole onion or 11 ounces chopped ready-cut onion (2 1/2 to 2 2/3 cups)  Pan spray  16 ounces Italian peppers
6 ounces portobello mushrooms or plain white mushrooms  1 tablespoon fresh thyme or 1 teaspoon dried  2 1/2 cups no-salt-added chicken stock  8 tablespoons instant polenta  1/8 teaspoon salt  1 ounce Parmigiano Reggiano ( 1/3 cup coarsely grated).
1. Chop whole onion.
2.
Heat nonstick pan until it is very hot, reduce heat to medium-high, spray with pan spray and saute onion until it begins to brown and soften.
3.
Wash, trim and seed peppers, and using slicing blade of food processor, slice peppers.
Add peppers to onions.
4.
Wash, trim and slice mushrooms in processor.
After peppers begin to soften, add mushrooms.
5. Wash and chop fresh thyme, and add to onion and pepper mixture.
6. Bring chicken stock to boil in covered pot.
7.
Reduce heat, and carefully stir in polenta; cook, stirring often until mixture thickens.
Season with salt.
8. Grate cheese.
9.
When polenta is cooked, spoon onto plates; top with pepper and onion mixture, and sprinkle with cheese.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 325 calories, 9 grams fat, 20 milligrams cholesterol, 500 milligrams sodium, 15 grams protein, 50 grams carbohydrate.


AT WORK WITH: Schuyler Chapin; Getting Ulcers for Art's Sake
THE women lunge first.
"Oh, look, Mr. Chapin is here. Thank you for coming, Commissioner."


House Backs Bill to Require Restitution From Criminals
In an overwhelming display of bipartisan sympathy for crime victims, the House voted unanimously today to require anyone convicted of a Federal crime to pay full restitution to the victim.
The measure was the first of six crime bills the Republicans are bringing up as part of a section of their Contract With America that they call the Take Back Our Streets Act.


Prices Rise On Treasury Securities
Prices of United States Treasury securities ended slightly higher yesterday, as the Government embarked on the first leg of its big quarterly auction with the sale of $17 billion in new three-year notes.
The 30-year bond was up 1/32 , to a price of 9812/32 for a yield of 7.64 percent, unchanged from Monday.
Rates on shorter-maturity bills improved an average three basis points, with the rate for a three-month bill at 5.78 percent.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Proposed Border-Crossing Fee in Clinton Budget Touches Off Storm
A White House proposal to impose a fee on everyone entering the United States by land has generated sharp protests in Congress as well as from Canada and Mexico, where critics contend that it would suppress tourism and trade.
The proposal to charge $3 for each vehicle and $1.50 for each pedestrian crossing the border was included in the budget President Clinton submitted to Congress on Monday.
The Administration has said the fees would raise $400 million a year to help ward off illegal immigration.


B-2 Builders Get Nearly $100 Million
At the direction of Congress, the Pentagon awarded nearly $100 million today to 45 military contractors to maintain production lines for the B-2 bomber until the military decides whether to buy more than the 20 radar-evading planes already on order.
The aircraft's two largest contractors, the Northrop-Grumman Corporation and the Boeing Company, are reaping the most from the decision.
Of the $94.7 million awarded, Boeing will receive $42.7 million and Northrop-Grumman $24.6 million to update work orders, recertify discontinued parts and keep engineering teams in place.


Penguins Lose 2 Key Players
Off to the best start in their history, the Pittsburgh Penguins will be without forward LUC ROBITAILLE for at least a day and KEVIN STEVENS for at least several weeks.
Stevens, an All-star left wing, sustained a hairline fracture to his left ankle when a puck struck him in a game against Tampa Bay last Saturday, and he is out indefinitely.
The National Hockey League suspended Robitaille yesterday, pending review of a stick-swinging incident on Sunday during a 3-3 tie with the Devils.
Robitaille, a left wing, received a minor high-sticking penalty for a one-handed, tomahawk-type blow to defenseman BRUCE DRIVER in overtime. (AP)


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Banks aren't what they used to be.
The other day I went to get updated interest on my account at the Lincoln Savings Bank.
Approaching the midtown branch, I saw the marquee with "Lincoln" on it.
Stretched across the front of the building was a banner with "Anchor" printed on it.
Lincoln was becoming Anchor.
I handed the teller my bankbook. "Please update this," I said.


Strawberry Tests Find Cocaine
DARRYL STRAWBERRY tested positive for cocaine on Jan. 17 and Jan. 18, according to documents obtained yesterday by The Associated Press.
Strawberry was suspended by major league baseball on Monday for 60 days for violating the game's drug policy and the terms of his after-care program.
The San Francisco Giants immediately released him. (AP)


Despite Bitter Cold, Many Homeless Resist the Shelters
Tony Ruelas was stretched across several seats in the last car of a Q train yesterday afternoon.
He covered himself with a threadbare yellow blanket and faded in and out of consciousness as the subway rumbled toward Queens.
"I don't have anywhere really to go," the unshaven 51-year-old homeless man muttered, half-awake.
"This is really the only place I can stay to get warm."


Rapper Faces Prison Term For Sex Abuse
The rap star Tupac Shakur was sentenced yesterday to 1 1/2 to 4 1/2 years in prison for sexually abusing a fan, and he tearfully apologized to his victim.
But even as he apologized, he said that he had committed no crime.
Looking fully recovered from gunshot wounds suffered in a mugging the week he was on trial, the 23-year-old performer used his pre-sentencing address to ruminate that his success as a rapper and film actor had perhaps caused him to lose "focus." The rap performer, famous for his lyrics that often deal with violence and sex, then said he was leaving his fate to God.


Stop the Dishonest Debate on Social Security
To the Editor:
With all the palaver in Congress and the media about whether or not to help balance the budget by invading Social Security trust funds, a few crucial points are rarely mentioned.


NEW JERSEY DAILY BRIEFING;
Carl Vogt had his share of bad luck: he had epilepsy and drowned in an accident in 1993 at age 42.
And he had his share of good luck: through shrewd investing, he made hundreds of thousands of dollars.
He also had more than his share of generosity.
Mr.
Vogt left the County College of Morris, which he attended in the early 1970's, the largest bequest it has ever received from an individual: $183,326.


Evers's Widow Plans to Run For Top Post Of N.A.A.C.P.
In another sign of conflict within the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, Myrlie Evers-Williams, the widow of a slain civil rights leader, announced today that she intended to seek the post of chairwoman at the board's meeting this month.
Her decision, after almost a year of lobbying by friends and supporters, is certain to touch off a floor fight on Feb. 18 at the board meeting in New York.
An increasingly divided board must determine whether to oust the chairman, Dr.
William F. Gibson, after a decade at the helm.


Click, Click, Flash, It's Kerrigan
EVANDER HOLYFIELD chatted about his plans to regain the heavyweight championship.
JIM BROWN told how he had designed and constructed his American Program to train convicts and gang leaders to lead responsible lives.
JOHN MCENROE talked about old-guy tennis.
For all the magnetic fame of those honored at last night's Thurman Munson awards dinner in New York, it was NANCY KERRIGAN who touched off the fireworks.
When she stepped off the elevator at the Marriott Marquis, Kerrigan was besieged by photographers and interviewers.
They were not thrilled when security personnel insisted on whisking her to the dais over the objections of her boyfriend-manager JERRY SOLOMON, and Kerrigan, denied an opportunity to schmooze, was briefly reduced to tears.


Strategy in a Rape Trial
Lawyers for Scott R. Johnson, who is on trial in the 1992 rape and killing of Gail Shollar, began their attempt yesterday to show that their client suffered from a mental disease or defect preventing him from knowingly committing murder.


Hard Queries For Director About Savings In the Budget
President Clinton's budget director, Alice M. Rivlin, was besieged today with questions from members of Congress in both parties who wanted to know why Mr.
Clinton had not proposed more substantial measures to reduce the Federal budget deficit or to control the growth of benefit programs like Medicare and Medicaid.
Ms.
Rivlin argued within the Administration for more aggressive steps to reduce the deficit, but she defended the President's new budget request in testimony today before the House Budget Committee.


C. J. McNaspy, 79, Jesuit Musicologist, Author and Linguist
The Rev.
Clement J. McNaspy, a Jesuit author, historian, musicologist and linguist, died on Friday at Ignatius House, a Jesuit nursing home in New Orleans.
He was 79.
The cause was a stroke, according to Loyola University in New Orleans, where he was professor emeritus of religious studies.


Illness Raises Concern On Herbal Preparations
THE near death of a woman from the chronic use of an herbal preparation has again raised questions about the wisdom of self-treatment with plant products that have not been fully tested for safety and effectiveness.
In a report in today's issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association, doctors from the University of Chicago Hospitals described a case of liver and kidney destruction resulting from the ingestion of an herbal product called chaparral.
The 60-year-old woman had been taking chaparral, among other herbal products, for the previous 10 months in the hope that its antioxidant properties would counter her coronary artery disease.


Argentina Gets Tough On Drivers
It has long been illegal in Argentina to drive faster than 38 miles an hour on city streets.
It has also been against the law to drive intoxicated, to drive in the wrong direction on a one-way street, or to run red lights.
But until this summer, motorists who committed these offenses usually got away with them or bribed their way out of citations, making driving here a near death-defying experience.


Gartner Hurts Himself And Takes a Slow Train
When the Maple Leafs put Mike Gartner on a train from Edmonton, Alberta, to Toronto this week, some of his younger teammates joked that the 35-year-old candidate for the Hall of Fame is old enough to remember when travel by rail was the norm in the National Hockey League.
But the reason wasn't something to kid about.
Gartner, the former Ranger who is president of the N.H.L.
Players Association, suffered a partly collapsed lung in a collision with Bryan Marchment of the Oilers on Friday night.


A Review for Part Of Jell-O Account
Kraft Foods said yesterday that it had begun a review on a new part of its Jell-O brand desserts account, for which billings were not disclosed.
Young &amp; Rubicam New York, which has handled the entire account for almost 70 years, with billings estimated at $70 million to $80 million, is among agencies being considered.
"We are not unhappy with their performance, but we wanted to get some different creative perspectives," Nan Redmond, a spokeswoman for Kraft in White Plains, said in response to a report of the review this week in the Frohlinger's Marketing Report newsletter.


Olympic Charter Bars Sex Discrimination
To the Editor:
Your interview with the Olympic champion long distance runner Hassiba Boulmerka of Algeria details the trials of women athletes in some countries where religious fundamentalism is powerful (sports pages, Feb. 2).
Boulmerka has been denounced for "running with naked legs in front of thousands of men" and has had her behavior called "not worthy of a Muslim woman."


Lipinski, 12, Shows the Form Marking Her as a Rising Star
Her parents sat in the stands, nervous to the point of exhaustion, wondering whether the $58,000 a year in training costs and the disruptive home life were worth it.
An entire year of their 12-year-old daughter's figure-skating career had been distilled to 2 minutes 40 seconds at the junior national championships.
But if Jack and Pat Lipinski were worried, Tara, their 12-year phenom of a daughter, was not.


Terrapins Are in First By Beating No. 1 Team
On one more wild night, in one more crazed corner, the chant bounced off the old arched ceiling and rattled within the walls.
"Overrated!" the Maryland students screamed tonight.
"Overrated!" And for one more night, the chorus might have been right.
Top-ranked North Carolina lost an early 14-point lead and came apart down the stretch of Maryland's 86-73 victory at Cole Field House.
At the end, the Maryland students in the sellout crowd of 14,500, many of whom had waited in bitter cold for the best seats, celebrated the first Terrapin victory over a No. 1 team in nine years by racing onto the floor.


In America; Marina Madness In Jersey
Soon after winning election on a promise to cut taxes, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey asked the public to submit ideas on how she could cut spending.
A real estate broker suggested she unload the state-owned marinas, which offer picnic and recreation areas and low-cost docking facilities for small pleasure boats.
Mrs.
Whitman thought that was a great idea and promptly announced that two of the four state marinas would go on the market for $7 million.
Besides needing all the cash she could get her hands on to pay for her tax cuts, Mrs.
Whitman had a philosophical problem with the marinas.
She argued that the state had no business being in a business that competed with private business.


Lipinski, 12, Shows the Form Marking Her as a Rising Star
Her parents sat in the stands, nervous to the point of exhaustion, wondering whether the $58,000 a year in training costs and the disruptive home life were worth it.
An entire year of their 12-year-old daughter's figure-skating career had been distilled to 2 minutes 40 seconds at the junior national championships.
But if Jack and Pat Lipinski were worried, Tara, their 12-year phenom of a daughter, was not.


At Halfcourt, Protesters and Not Players
Moments before the start of the second half of tonight's Rutgers-Massachusetts game at the Louis Brown Athletic Center, a young woman walked calmly to halfcourt, sat down and stared into the crowd.
Massachusetts Coach John Calipari, his back turned to the woman, was leaning into his bench, clapping his hands hard and offering last-minute words of encouragement to his No. 4 Minutemen (17-2), who trailed the Scarlet Knights (9-10) by 2 points at the intermission, 31-29.


Personal Health; Gaining health benefits without working up a sweat.
AN important health message was delivered last week to the many millions of Americans who have yet to make even moderate physical activity a regular feature of their lives.
The message from a prestigious group of experts in preventive medicine and exercise physiology was this: you don't have to become a jock or a fitness nut, you don't have to exercise vigorously three times a week for 20 minutes at a time and you don't have to build muscles a la Arnold Schwarzenegger to reap major health benefits from regular physical activity.
All you have to do, these experts concluded, is to incorporate a total of about 30 minutes a day of moderate activity into your routines.
That means actions like taking stairs instead of elevators and escalators, walking short distances instead of driving door to door, gardening, raking leaves, doing housework, dancing, playing actively with children or pets, riding a stationary bicycle while watching the evening news, playing golf without a cart or doing any other activities at the intensity of a brisk walk for however long you choose -- as long as you log a total of 30 minutes a day.
Why New Guidelines?
To those who have assiduously pursued the fitness gospel of exercising three or more times a week for 20 or more minutes at a time at a level that gets the heart beating at a rate of 60 to 90 percent of its maximum, the new guidelines may sound like heresy or at least a capitulation to a basically sedentary society that has so far largely resisted the exhortations to work up a sweat.


Where's Mother?
To The Home Section:
I loved your article about Dr.
Seuss ("Close To Home: Of Dr. Seuss and Preening Princesses," Jan. 19) and the lack of female role models in kids' literature.
But you didn't mention my pet peeve about Disney -- no mothers!


Celebrating Black Culture in Midtown


Spartan Official Quits
The Michigan State athletic director, MERRILY DEAN BAKER, resigned yesterday with two years left on her contract.
Baker will stay at least through the end of March, then take on other assignments at the school through June.
She was the first woman to head an athletic program in the Big Ten and the second in the nation to head one at a major football college.


Black and Hispanic Officers File Discrimination Charges
In 1986, the Suffolk County Police Department, one of the largest law-enforcement agencies in the state, settled a Federal discrimination suit by agreeing to recruit more members of minority groups and remove barriers to their hiring and promotion.
Nearly a decade later, black and Hispanic officers say little progress has been made in integrating the 2,575-member force or helping them rise through the ranks.
Today, 30 of Suffolk's 177 black and Hispanic police officers filed new discrimination charges against the department, asserting that members of minority groups are systematically prevented from receiving transfers and promotions on the force.


Mora Gets Extension
JIM MORA, the coach of the New Orleans Saints, whose contract was to expire at the end of the 1995 season, said yesterday that has received a one-year extension.
Mora, 59, has the longest tenure with the same team of any active coach in the National Football Conference, having taken the Saints' post in 1986. (AP)


Deadhead Design
AS the first person ever to sleep in the new Jerry Garcia Suite at the Beverly Prescott Hotel, I feel compelled to clear up a few common misconceptions about it immediately.
Though the bedspreads and shower curtains feature Mr.
Garcia's designs, they are not tie-dyed.
The artwork on the walls doesn't include psychedelic Grateful Dead posters.
The courtesy sweet near the bed is genuine milk chocolate, not an Alice B. Toklas brownie.
There is no Cherry Garcia ice cream in the mini-bar (though Ben &amp; Jerry's has offered some), and there aren't any joints amid the munchies.
In fact, the suite is actually on a no-smoking floor.


METRO DIGEST
TRADE CENTER FUGITIVE IS ARRESTED An Islamic militant accused by Federal authorities of being the mastermind in the 1993 World Trade Center bombing was arrested on Tuesday in Pakistan and flown last night to New York City, where he was held as one of the world's most sought-after terrorism suspects.
The man, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, fled the country soon after the deadly blast.
A1.
Throughout the World Trade Center bombing trial, the man who wasn't there, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, overshadowed the proceedings.
B2.


Ex-Majority Chief Resigns From State Senate
State Senator Ralph J. Marino, the former Republican majority leader who was ousted last Thanksgiving by allies of Gov.
George E. Pataki, resigned today from the Legislature after 26 years in office.
The announcement was expected by lawmakers, who had seen Mr.
Marino, an Oyster Bay Republican, fall from the heights of state power to being an outsider in his own party because of feuds with Mr.
Pataki.


Helping The Elderly At Home
HELEN LISEFSKI, 78, had gone from the living room to the sun porch on visits to her daughter's home in Rye, N.Y., dozens of times, so when she tripped there last year following other mishaps, it became clear she could never live alone again.
Her daughter, Rosemary Casson, then began a frantic search for home support services.
But, she said, "we didn't know what to do."


A Shadow From Bomb Trial Emerges
The name of the man whose arrest was announced by Federal authorities last night, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, was commonly invoked during the months of the World Trade Center bombing trial.
In that case, which ended in the conviction of four men last March, Mr.
Yousef, also known as Rashid, emerged in a mountain of testimony as the mastermind of the bombing, who arrived in the United States on Sept. 1, 1992, on a flight from Pakistan, organized the bomb plot and then, only a few hours after the explosion, left on a flight to Pakistan from Kennedy International Airport.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the Quaker Oats Company's sale of its pet foods business misidentified a potential bidder for the company.
Wall Street speculation has centered on the Coca-Cola Company, not Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc.


Bid for Journal of Commerce By British Company Is Seen
The British company that publishes The Economist magazine has offered to buy The Journal of Commerce, the New York-based financial daily, according to people familiar with the details of the offer.
Publishing executives speculated that if the paper was sold by its current owner, Knight-Ridder Inc., it could be a vehicle for a large-scale expansion in the United States by the Economist Newspaper Ltd., the company that owns the widely respected Economist magazine.


More Scrutiny for Commerce Secretary's Deals
The Justice Department notified Senate Republicans today that it had begun reviewing whether to seek the appointment of an independent counsel to investigate the business dealings of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown.
A group of 14 Republican senators wrote to the department on Jan. 23 asking whether it planned to take steps to determine whether Mr.
Brown had violated any Federal laws in his dealings with a former business partner, Nolanda Hill.


Rangers Are Finally On Road To Success
It's a little early to plan another parade or buy another banner, but the Rangers and their fans finally have reason to feel optimistic as this truncated season nears the quarter mark.
For the first time, the Rangers have won two games in succession, and they extended their unbeaten streak to a modest three games last night when they came from behind to edge the Washington Capitals by 5-4 at Madison Square Garden.


Basta With the Pasta!
You know how it is.
You go to a restaurant.
People to the right of you are scarfing down T-bones and people to the left of you are smacking their lips over duck a l'orange and you say to yourself, "Me, I'm going to be sensible." So you order linguine with garlic and olive oil because linguine is low-fat and garlic is said to work medical miracles and, sure, olive oil does have a calorie or two but it does something nice for your cholesterol.
So the way you see it, you are three steps ahead of the carnivores and more than a few pounds behind them.
Boy, have you got it wrong!


Economic Scene; A better safety net may or may not catch a falling currency.
WITHOUT the consent of Congress and with only grudging support from Europe, President Clinton managed to scrape up some $50 billion to save the Mexican peso.
But what happens the next time -- and the next, and the next?
In an era of emerging markets and high-rolling investment funds, the number of currency markets that are "too big to fail" is growing rapidly, argues C. Fred Bergsten, director of the Institute for International Economics.
One way or another, he says, international agencies will have to serve as lenders of last resort.


Teaching Responsibility
To The Home Section:
I appreciate your article "Of Dr. Seuss and Preening Princesses" and share your joy in Barbara Cooney's "Miss Rumphius" (Puffin, 1985), which I have been reading to my four children for the last 10 years.
I would like to recommend a book that was written in 1939 by Du Bose Heyward called "The Country Bunny and the Little Gold Shoes" (Houghton flin, 1967).
This classic is a delight and a lesson for all parents in imparting responsibility.
MARY KENNARD PERRY Millburn, N.J


Teaching Responsibility
To The Home Section:
I appreciate your article "Of Dr. Seuss and Preening Princesses" and share your joy in Barbara Cooney's "Miss Rumphius" (Puffin, 1985), which I have been reading to my four children for the last 10 years.
I would like to recommend a book that was written in 1939 by Du Bose Heyward called "The Country Bunny and the Little Gold Shoes" (Houghton flin, 1967).
This classic is a delight and a lesson for all parents in imparting responsibility.
MARY KENNARD PERRY Millburn, N.J


Pemex Chief Sees Sale of Units Soon
Pemex, the Mexican state oil company, will go ahead with the long-delayed sale of its petrochemical businesses in the next few weeks, the company's new chief executive said here today.
The executive, Adrian Lajous Vargas, in his first United States appearance since taking over late in December, alluded to Mexico's financial crisis in explaining the timing.
A plunging peso and the draining of foreign reserves in December and January pushed the country to the edge of default on its foreign debts.


New System for Linking Office Equipment Is in the Works
I.B.M. and many Japanese makers of office equipment are discussing the creation of a new standard for linking personal computers with faxes, copiers, telephones and other electronic devices, industry officials said today.
The effort represents an attempt by the International Business Machines Corporation to compete with a plan announced by Microsoft in 1993 to tie office machines together using its Microsoft At Work software.
The Microsoft system, which many Japanese companies had said they would support, has experienced some development problems, according to industry officials here.


GOODYEAR TIRE &amp; RUBBER CO. (GT,N)
Citing a worldwide surge in tire sales, The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company reported yesterday that fourth-quarter profit jumped 21 percent.
The company, based in Akron, Ohio, also reported record results for the full year.
Goodyear posted earnings of $136.5 million, or 90 cents a share, for the fourth quarter, up from $113.2 million, or 76 cents a share, for the comparable quarter a year earlier; revenue climbed to $3.2 billion from $3 billion.


From Taco Bell, a Healthier Option
Is the phrase "healthful Mexican food" an oxymoron?
Yesterday Taco Bell unveiled its new lower-fat "Border Lights" menu to test the idea.
And the fiercest critic of the $8.9 billion Mexican restaurant industry responded with a love letter.
The Center for Science in the Public Interest, a consumer advocacy group in Washington with 750,000 members, praised the new menu as being "more than a marketing gimmick." Michael F. Jacobson, the executive director of the organization, said: "Ten years ago they were the single worst chain, using some of the worst ingredients. The new menu is a tremendous improvement."


Prestone Account Goes to Grey
The Prestone Products Corporation said yesterday that it had selected Grey Advertising in New York to handle its account, with billings estimated at $5 million.
The account, which includes antifreeze and other automotive products, had been at Young &amp; Rubicam New York from 1985 until November, when that agency and the company agreed to end their relationship because Prestone Products had changed ownership.


Health Plans Are Forcing Change In the Method for Paying Doctors
In contract after contract, American doctors and hospitals are agreeing to be paid for their services in a way that many of them once thought unthinkable.
Instead of charging fees for everything they do, from $50 for an office visit to several hundred thousand dollars for an organ transplant, more doctors and hospitals are accepting predetermined fees for large groups of customers, regardless of the amount of medical care a group needs.
The practice, adopted under pressure from health insurance plans and their members to hold down medical costs, is creating new incentives for doctors and hospitals to provide care that is less expensive.


Mexico's Banks: A Weak Link in the Rescue Plan
Even with an international rescue plan worth about $50 billion in place, Mexico's efforts to revive the economy appear threatened by the nation's weakened banking system.
Before the peso was devalued on Dec. 20, Mexican banks were already burdened with too many bad loans and too little in capital reserves.
Now with the peso worth 36 percent less against the dollar than it was seven weeks ago, many Mexican companies are faced with loan payments they cannot meet.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $50 million of notes due in 1999 through Smith Barney Inc.
Callable in one year, the issue is priced at par to yield 8 percent. *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $125 million of medium-term notes due in 1997 through Chase Securities Inc.
The noncallable issue is priced at par to yield 7.29 percent.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; No Deal Means No Conviction
Two years ago, prosecutors won a conviction in the murder of a woman by using modern forensics.
On Wednesday, they suffered a defeat because of human betrayal.
A judge dismissed murder charges against Harvey Hahn because his co-defendant, Robert F. Brown, 37, reneged on his promise to testify against him.
Mr.
Brown, found guilty in 1993 after a bite mark on the dead woman was linked to his teeth, has been serving a life term.
After initially agreeing to testify, he balked, saying that he wanted his prison term shortened before he would cooperate.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; A New Dean at Princeton
Amy Gutmann will become dean of the Princeton faculty effective July 1.
Ms.
Gutmann, the Laurance S. Rockefeller university professor of politics and director of the Princeton University Center for Human Values, was unanimously recommended by the faculty search committee.


West European Companies Head East for Labor
Political leaders of the 15 nations in the European Union keep warning their electorates that high unemployment won't go down until rigid high labor costs do -- jobs will just flow east to central Europe, where it's cheaper to hire people.
Asea Brown Boveri Ltd., is a company that proves the point.
Dr.
Eberhard von Koerber, who heads its European operations, says the multinational engineering and electrical giant began shifting some of its operations eastward when Communism collapsed in 1989.


CHRONICLE
Famous faces have been scarce at the men's designer fashion shows taking place on the West Side this week, but the paparazzi finally had some people to focus on at Donna Karan's show yesterday morning.
JON BON JOVI, the rock star, and JULIAN SCHNABEL, the art star, were seated front row center, flanking INGRID SISCHY, the fashion critic of The New Yorker and editor in chief of Interview.
Neither man offered a compelling explanation for attending Ms.
Karan's presentation at the Sony Music Studios on West 54th Street, one of three venues for the New York Men's Shows, which are being run for the first time by Seventh on Sixth, the group that organizes the women's shows in Bryant Park.


Calendar: Lectures, Exhibitions and a Tour
On Modern Architecture  Avery Hall, Columbia University, Broadway at 116th Street; (212) 854-3414.
A series of nine lectures starts on Monday at 6:30 P.M. with a talk by the architect Zaha Hadid on her recent projects.
Other architects and their topics include: "Art, Where to Put It?" by William Alsop, on March 1, and "Against the Current," by Daniel Libeskind, on April 12.
Call for a schedule.
Programs start at 6:30 P.M.
No charge.


Songs From the Heart, With Plenty of Thought
Joan Osborne has worked her way up through the circuit of blues bars and rock clubs, all the way to a major-label contract and an album, "Relish" (Mercury), to be released in late March.
Her voice, full of raw-throated emotion and bluesy finesse, helped propel her.
But unlike many good-timey singers around the country, Ms.
Osborne has more to offer than party anthems.
At the Mercury Lounge on Tuesday night, she and a new band previewed her new album, in a set of remarkable songs that contemplate sex and faith, despair and trust, pleasure and loss.
Ms.
Osborne's songs carry the essentials of roots rock -- blues riffs, soul vamps, a folky twang -- into a modern urban setting.
She has plenty of vocal technique, from Bonnie Raitt's blues turns to Balkan glottal stops, but she uses it to illuminate the songs, not to show off.
In "St. Teresa," she had a hoarse, ravaged voice to sing about a drug-addicted prostitute; she was sweetly comforting in "Crazy Baby," pleading with a depressed friend not to commit suicide.


Journal; Barbra at Harvard
If you want to understand how obsessive Barbra Streisand is, consider her own account of her behavior on Sunday night.
At home in New York and upset by the loud volume of the commercials punctuating the TV premiere of "The Prince of Tides," she called the NBC switchboard, demanded to speak to the engineer in charge and, in crack studio lingo, instructed him to "take it down two db's."
Though the engineer never questioned the caller's identity, he did express fear he might be fired if he heeded her request.
"I told him I'd take full responsibility," Ms.
Streisand recalled later over the phone.
"He said they raise the volume all the time. And I said that doesn't make it right."


Helms and Cuba Sanctions
Senator Jesse Helms, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, is to introduce a bill on Thursday tightening sanctions against Cuba by barring most aid to countries that help Havana, Congressional aides said today.
The bill would also bar entry into the United States to any foreigner who buys property in Cuba that was confiscated from Americans.


North Balks, Threatening Korean Pact
The Clinton Administration's agreement to have North Korea freeze its nuclear program could fall apart over the North's continued refusal to let South Korea supply it with two new light-water reactors, American officials said today.
The officials said they were disappointed that North Korean officials, in talks held last week in Berlin, had continued to insist that another country provide the light-water reactors that the agreement promises to the North in exchange for freezing its weapons-oriented nuclear program.


Robert Mier, 52, Dies; Taught Urban Planning
Robert Mier, a professor of urban planning and public administration at the University of Illinois at Chicago and a leading expert on economic and social issues facing American cities, died on Sunday at his home.
He was 52 and lived in Chicago.
His family said he died of a form of lymphoma that resulted from his exposure to the chemical defoliant Agent Orange during the Vietnam War.


Pete Wilson and '96 Race: A (Coy) Natural
It is hard to imagine anyone in a better position to run for the Republican Presidential nomination next year than Pete Wilson, the boyish-looking 61-year-old Governor of California.
He seems like a natural -- re-elected by a landslide last year in a stunning comeback, firmly identified with several of the issues that have captured the nation's attention and emboldened his party, proud possessor of an efficient fund-raising network and the dominant political figure in a state whose wealth and sheer size give it an ever-more-dominant role in national politics.
None of his rivals for the nomination seem any better placed.


Holy Bull on Outside But Is Odds-On in Donn
Holy Bull, already assigned high weight of 127 pounds, drew the 10th post position on the far outside today for the Donn Handicap, and Jimmy Croll said: "It's an added factor, that's all. Unless he has a bad day, he'll handle it."
But for people wondering if the great gray Horse of the Year has a weakness, none was conceded by either his owner-trainer nor by any of his nine rivals for the $300,000 race, which will be run here Saturday at a mile and an eighth.
Holy Bull has won 13 of his 15 starts at distances up to a mile and a quarter, he has carried as much as 126 pounds and he is the king.


The Pop Life
Revising a Group
Last year was one of changes for the band formerly known as Suede, a young group whose first album went to No. 1 in England.
In the summer, a lawsuit from a little-known singer from Maryland who has performed as Suede for 15 years forced it to change its name in the United States to the London Suede.
Then its guitarist, Bernard Butler, left the band because of personal differences with the other members.


Davis Hopes Practice Routines Will Leave Jitters Behind
His stomach churning triple axels, his confidence spiraling into a death-drop spin, his nerves turning to slush, Scott Davis has resorted to an extreme cure for his stage fright -- virtual reality.
In practice, he remains the same self-assured skater who won the past two United States figure-skating championships, including an upset victory over Brian Boitano in 1994.
When no one is watching, or judging, the 23-year-old Davis delivers exuberant programs that are expressive, muscular and unmatched in the speed and quality of the spins.


Congressional Roundup; Senate Rejects Rule On Identifying Cuts
In the first vote after a week and a half of speech-making about a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced Federal budget, the Senate today rejected a Democratic proposal that would have forced the sponsors of the amendment to describe the specific spending cuts they intended to make to reach their goal.
The vote, 56 to 44, offered no indication of whether the constitutional amendment would eventually be adopted.
But it showed clearly the partisan nature of the issue.


Robert Netting, 60, Who Showed Societies' Links to Environment
Dr.
Robert McC.
Netting, who helped establish cultural ecology as a scientific discipline, died on Saturday in Tucson, Ariz., where he was professor of anthropology at the University of Arizona.
He was 60.
The university said the cause was bone-marrow cancer, diagnosed last December, complicated by valley fever, which is endemic in parts of the Southwest.


In Los Angeles, Harmony Outweighs Strife
To the Editor:
For more than a decade Los Angeles has seen great numbers of African-Americans moving out of the inner city and into suburbs in and beyond Los Angeles County.
The black population here is undergoing significant deconcentration.
Latino immigrants, taking advantage of cheap and available housing, have been drawn to areas that blacks have departed.


Some Familiar Faces Return to Power in Panama
Ernesto Perez Balladares took office here last September promising to "close the Noriega chapter" of Panamanian history.
But his first five months as President have witnessed a systematic rehabilitation of dozens of figures from the 20 years of corruption and brutal military rule that preceded the ouster of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega by American troops in 1989.
At the same time, Mr.
Perez Balladares, an American-educated banker and economist popularly known as El Toro, for his burly build and aggressiveness, has not hesitated to tweak the United States when there is political gain to be had.
The message is clear: the Democratic Revolutionary Party, founded by Gen.
Omar Torrijos as the political arm of the Panamanian military and inherited by General Noriega, is back in power and intent on settling old scores.


Bridge
We are always advised not to leap from the frying pan into the fire, but there are rare occasions on which the fire proves preferable.
One was a home game in November in which four students in Washington were being supervised by Steve Hoglund, who reports the diagramed deal.
North was too strong for an opening of four spades, but chose that bid and East doubled.
That contract would surely have failed, probably by two tricks, but South ventured out of that frying pan into the five-diamond fire.
East naturally doubled.


HOUSE APPROVES EASING OF RULES ON U.S. SEARCHES
The House tonight passed crime legislation long sought by conservatives that would overhaul two fundamental tenets of the judicial system: permitting prosecutors to use more illegally seized evidence at trial and placing time limits on appeals by death row inmates.
The votes were victories for the Republicans who are rewriting last year's crime bill to demonstrate a new toughness on criminals.
They were devastating blows to liberals, who said repeatedly that the votes were unraveling constitutionally protected rights.


Baseball's Unreal World
At this point, either we have a baseball season with real players or we have a lot of championship bowling reruns.
The guess here is that the longer the waltz between the baseball players and owners goes on, the less anyone will care.
President Clinton whiffed on the first try.
Knowing he had nothing to offer but the magic of the Oval Office, Mr.
Clinton invited both sides to the White House and tried his level best to get them to submit their six-month-old dispute to binding arbitration.
They rebuffed his efforts, at which point he spoke not just for himself but for increasingly disenchanted fans: "Both of you have a lot at stake, and I'm afraid you're both going to wind up losers."


U.N. Suspects Serbia of Aiding Serbs in Bosnia
Civilians monitoring the border between Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina are again being denied access to radar that could track violations of a ban on flights and a Serbian pledge not to supply Bosnian Serbs, the Secretary General's spokesman said today.
Calling this "a very serious situation," the spokesman, Joe B. Sills, said access to radar was denied for four days last week, during which time 62 unexplained helicopter flights were reported by United Nations ground forces.
Earlier reports said the radar had been denied for only a few hours.


State of Union or Foregone Conclusion?
To the Editor:
Re "State of the Disunion" (Op-Ed, Feb. 4): Marvin Kalb did a fine job in analyzing why the Washington press corps branded President Clinton's State of the Union Message a "stunning flop," while polls showed that many Americans saw it as a success.


Talking Baseball?
Lobbying continued on Capitol Hill for a binding arbitration bill, but the principals in the six-month-old baseball strike do not have any plans to return to the bargaining table.
Articles, pages B11 and B13.


Corrections
A sports article on Tuesday about Mike Grier, a Boston University hockey player, misstated one aspect of his career.
He is the third black American to play at the Division I level in college hockey, not the first.


Suspended Game Set To Resume March 2
The day after a student protest forced the suspension of their game against No. 4-ranked Massachusetts, members of the Rutgers basketball team remained silent today.
But their coach, Bob Wenzel, said his players wanted to continue playing Tuesday night's game, in which they led the Minutemen by 31-29 at halftime when the game was suspended.
"I'm not sure that the players are ready to talk to the media right now, and I think I'd like to leave it like that," said Wenzel, whose team will complete the game against UMass on March 2.
"People are upset about that comment, and I'm sure many of our players can identify with that situation."


Shaken by Scandal, Spain's Premier Again Vows to Finish Term
Shaken by financial and political scandals, Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez firmly rejected insistent calls from the right and left for early elections in his annual State of the Nation address today and hotly denied charges of Government misconduct in the fight against Basque terrorism.
Assured of a stable parliamentary majority with the support of the conservative Catalan nationalist party, Convergence and Union, Mr.
Gonzalez said once again that he had every intention of finishing his third four-year term, which ends in 1997, "to best take advantage of economic recovery."


AT HOME WITH Gloria Steinem; Decades as Icon; Now, Freedom
THE downpour was the sort of cold, mean winter rain that, when it falls on a political march, tends to make demonstrators more resolute, more defiant and more than a little sanctimonious.
In her 60 years, Gloria Steinem has weathered her share of soggy marches.
But during a recent afternoon deluge, she was curled on a green velvet couch, cosseted by a mound of kilim pillows, watching the gray storm through the casement windows of her East Side duplex.
After three decades as America's best-loved feminist, Ms.
Steinem began taking care of herself several years ago.
Turning the apartment where she'd camped out of boxes for 20 years into an eclectic, overstuffed nest was integral to correcting what she saw as an imbalance in her personal-is-political department.


Revival of House &amp; Garden
Conde Nast Publications plans to resurrect House &amp; Garden, the 92-year-old decorating magazine it closed down in 1993.
Steven T. Florio, president of Conde Nast, said yesterday that the magazine would be reintroduced next year and aimed at people in their 30's who have bought "the big house where they will be raising their children."
Mr.
Florio said that he and the company's editorial director, James Truman, were interviewing publishers and editors and expected to make appointments within two months.
Two or three direct-mail tests will be conducted before the end of 1995.
The magazine's circulation is expected to be in the range of 250,000 to 500,000.


Dog Howls and TV Shows Used to Fix Murder Time
A man who lived near Nicole Brown Simpson told jurors today how, shortly before midnight on June 12, Mrs.
Simpson's nervous, purposeful pet Akita pulled him toward its owner's condominium, stopped in front and peered into the yard.
When the neighbor looked for himself, he said, he saw Mrs.
Simpson prostrate and "full of blood."
"I turned to my wife and said there was a dead person there," the witness, Sukru Boztepe, told Marcia Clark, the chief prosecutor in the case.
"I could see the person was a lady, she was blond."


Raphael Robinson, Mathematician, 83
Raphael Mitchel Robinson, a mathematician who contributed to some of the more esoteric fields in his discipline during a career of nearly six decades, died on Jan. 27 at the Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in San Francisco.
He was 83 and lived in Berkeley, Calif.
The cause was pneumonia after a stroke in December, according to the University of California at Berkeley, where he was professor emeritus of mathematics.


Sampras Charges On
PETE SAMPRAS, the world's top player but a runner-up to second-ranked ANDRE AGASSI at the Australian Open, said yesterday from his home in Tampa, Fla., that he intended to hang onto his No. 1 status despite the continuing absence of his ailing coach, TIM GULLIKSON, and the new challenge posed by Agassi.
"I'm not losing my focus," said Sampras, who returns to the ATP Tour next week at Memphis and then moves on to Philadelphia, site of his first pro title in 1990.
"I want to get back to playing and staying No. 1, and hopefully I'll stay healthy for my sake and Tim's."


Larmore: Another Mezzo Contender
The battle of the hot young mezzo-sopranos grew livelier on Monday evening when Jennifer Larmore made her Metropolitan Opera debut, as Rosina in Rossini's "Barbiere di Siviglia." Ms.
Larmore, an American, came preceded by a fast-growing reputation, of course, as well as a fine recording of the role on Teldec.
Her performance lived up to her billing in every respect.
Her stage presence was as charming as her vocal production was gorgeous.


The Neediest Cases; Helping to Cope With Illness
Rosalind Lampert's basement apartment has the warmth of a grandmother's home.
Photo collages of her family decorate the wood-paneled walls.
Framed pictures of her children and grandchildren sit atop round coffee tables in the living room.
It even smells like a grandmother's home: a mixture of faint perfume and cleaning fluid.
With large brown eyes and soft skin, Ms.
Lampert, 74, looks like someone who could watch over grandchildren forever.
But because of failing health, she cannot.


AIDS Ensemble Plans A Chamber Concert
Positive Music, a chamber ensemble devoted to AIDS education and awareness, is to present a concert on Feb. 22 at 5:45 P.M. at the Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center, 208 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village.
The performance opens the group's second season of Fourth Wednesdays concerts.


For Any Mayor, Politics Is Always Close to Home
MAYOR RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI was going to Staten Island, the heartland in the city, the most Republican-voting borough of all five, the one known unofficially as Rudyland (even if it does still want to secede).
Surely here, at a meeting in the auditorium of Susan B. Wagner High School, the Mayor would hear echoes of the national Republican cries for lower taxes and tougher anti-crime programs, complaints about government waste and affirmative action, welfare reform and Medicaid cuts.
Wouldn't they denounce Mr.
Giuliani's defection to the liberal Cuomo camp in last year's campaign for governor?
Wouldn't they ask about the Republican revolution, or the new Governor's budget, or Newt Gingrich's book?


Meola a Rough Rider
TONY MEOLA, the World Cup goalie for the United States, signed yesterday to play soccer with the Long Island Rough Riders for the 1995 outdoor season.
Meola joins 16 returning players on a team that won the 1994 Northwest Division championship in the United States Interregional Soccer League with a record of 15-5. (AP)


'Pelleas,' Updated and Slightly Political
During his perverse and often powerful production of Debussy's "Pelleas et Melisande," which opened on Saturday night at the Los Angeles Music Center Opera, Peter Sellars seems to be imitating Golaud, the prince whose brooding presence dominates this work.
"Tell me, tell me," Golaud demands, again and again, seeking literal explanations.
Where did this mysterious woman Melisande come from?
Why is she so unhappy after he marries her?
What is she up to with Pelleas, his half-brother?
And finally, was their love innocent or guilty?
Mr.
Sellars, opera's now mature enfant terrible, insists on providing all the answers, with a vengeance.
This production, first seen at the Netherlands Opera in 1993, denudes Debussy of ambiguity and mist and symbol.
Gone are the castle, the fountain, the linden tree and the imaginary kingdom of Maurice Maeterlinck's play.
In their place, George Tsypin, the set designer, has provided a 20th-century Malibu beach house jutting out from a cliff, with cutaway rooms.
There is no dusk or dawn, just shifting glares from James F. Ingalls's' fluorescent lighting.


Boston College Sends Georgetown to Third Straight Loss
Boston College 78, Georgetown 67
Danya Abrams scored 21 of his 29 points in the second half last night as Boston College, the Big East cellar-dweller, beat No. 20 Georgetown, 78-67, the Hoyas' third straight loss.
Antonio Granger matched one career-high with 12 points and surpassed another with 10 rebounds for the Eagles (8-11), who won for only the second time in 11 conference games.


Tax Cuts in New York Will Give Small Businesses a Real Boost; Young Budget Victims
To the Editor:
A Feb. 2 news article states that Gov.
George E. Pataki would help trim $1.2 billion from New York Medicaid by "sharply reducing services to elderly people at home." The program is the long-term health care component (Lombardi Program), which was established to serve the frail elderly and disabled.


No Headline
"Feminism isn't responsible for divorce; marriage is responsible for divorce." -- GLORIA STEINEM  [ C10:3. ]


Directors May Hasten Agee's Departure
Confronting what is perhaps the worst financial crisis in the company's 82-year history, the directors of Morrison Knudsen Corporation plan to meet here Thursday to debate whether William J. Agee, the chairman and chief executive, should be forced to leave immediately.
Only last week, as the company disclosed that it would report a substantial loss for 1994, it offered a vague timetable for Mr.
Agee to leave the company later this year.
Its official plan was for a search committee, which includes Mr.
Agee, to seek a chief executive officer to lead a turnaround of the giant construction and transit equipment manufacturer.
Mr.
Agee, who has held his posts since 1988, planned to hold on to the chairmanship until 1998, when he turns 60.


Judge David Norman, 70, Dies; Civil Rights Chief Under Nixon
David L. Norman, a chief of the Justice Department's civil rights division in the Nixon Administration and a Superior Court judge in Washington until his retirement in 1983, died on Monday at the Washington Home and Hospice.
He was 70 and lived in Washington.
The cause was pneumonia, the hospice said.


Nominee Confirms He Performed More Abortions Than Disclosed
After several days of pummeling from anti-abortion groups over his abortion record, President Clinton's nominee for Surgeon General broke his public silence tonight, saying in a nationally televised interview that he had performed 39 abortions, far more than previously acknowledged by him and the White House, but that he opposed the procedure.
"I abhor abortions; I abhor war," the nominee, Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr., said in an interview on the ABC News program "Nightline." "To me, abortion is failure. I don't like failure."


Captain Dad? Just Call Him the Captain
At lunch, the Captain's game face began to slip off.
He had practiced hard, as usual without a helmet, and lingered in the trainer's room so old muscles could be kneaded and baked.
Now he was sitting at the bar of the Rye Grill, sipping at a tall glass of cranberry and orange juices.
His features, so harsh on ice, melted.
His pale brown eyes, almost yellowish in this light, seemed to be tracking the question as if it were a fly circling overhead.
"It's an interesting dance between the coach and the captain," he said in his easy, yet curiously pedantic way.
"It's never for the captain to say who plays. It's his job to give confidence, to be a nurturer."


Fugitive in Trade Center Blast Is Caught and Returned to U.S.
A shadowy Islamic militant accused by Federal authorities of being the mastermind in the 1993 World Trade Center bombing was arrested on Tuesday in Pakistan and flown to New York tonight, where he was held as one of the world's most sought-after terrorist suspects.
The suspect, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, whom the authorities accused of buying and brewing the explosive chemicals used to manufacture the huge trade center bomb, fled the country hours after the deadly blast on Feb. 26, 1993.
With his name on the F.B.I.'s Most Wanted List, he dropped from sight, eluding a global manhunt.
But in recent months reports of sightings of him had come from several cities around the globe.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Plants for Dark Sills
Q.
In my new apartment the sunlight on the windows ranges from none to only a little.
Can you suggest some easily grown plants to decorate my sills? -- Barbara J. Johnson, Queens.


The Gift of Gab: Even Babies Have It
If you've been looking for a playful introduction to Chomskyan linguistics, it arrives tomorrow night.
"The Human Language" bops among researchers, children and other language users and inspectors in a peppy effort, as the producer, Gene Searchinger, says, to make "the invisible visible." Droll drawings help.
This three-parter revolves about the famous theory advanced in 1957 by Noam Chomsky, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology: babies are born with an innate ability to use language; grammar is in the genes.
No, the theory is not made exactly visible here, but it is repeated so many times in so many ways that you can't help but glimpse what Mr.
Chomsky is trying to get across.


Hard Work Will Let the Knicks Rest Easy
After what they accomplished tonight, the Knicks can enjoy the All-Star break.
Outplaying one of their primary rivals in the Eastern Conference, the Knicks dominated the fourth quarter and rolled to an impressive 96-77 victory over the Indiana Pacers at Market Square Arena.
By halting a two-game losing streak, the Knicks (30-16) can savor the weekend break having won 18 of their last 22 games -- an impressive accomplishment for a team that started the season 12-12.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Fire Spreads a Cloud of Chlorine
Residents in a four-block area of the township left their homes in a hurry yesterday morning as a fire at a water-treatment plant sent chlorine-laden smoke spewing into the air.
They were able to return about five hours later.
Fifteen firefighters were examined for effects of the smoke, then released.


Plea Bargain in Mail Bombings That Killed 5 Upstate
One of two men facing trial in an onslaught of mail bombs that killed five people within 90 minutes in northern New York in December 1993 pleaded guilty in Rochester yesterday and promised to testify against his accused accomplice.
In return, Earl H. Figley, 57, of Canandaigua, N.Y., was told he would receive a 20-year sentence to a Federal prison in Butner, N.C.


A General for the C.I.A.
The Director of Central Intelligence used to be one of Washington's most coveted jobs, a critical command position on the front lines of the cold war.
But no longer.
Indeed, President Clinton must have envied those days as he searched for someone to take the job overseeing a troubled Central Intelligence Agency and a constellation of other espionage organizations, all becalmed in the aftermath of the cold war.
Several good candidates turned down the daunting but essential business of overhauling the intelligence services and their $28 billion annual budget.
The man who ultimately accepted, Michael Carns, a retired Air Force general, is a sound choice, with the potential to be a distinguished one.
General Carns, who served as vice chief of staff for the Air Force and is a graduate of Harvard Business School, brings extensive management experience to the job.
He could provide what the C.I.A. desperately needs -- a strong executive to pull the agency together after the trauma of the Aldrich Ames case, the most serious American espionage betrayal of the cold war.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Port Nominee Criticized
Though it appears that George J. Marlin has the votes to be confirmed today as executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, some New Jersey Democrats continued yesterday to criticize his selection.
Representative Robert G. Torricelli called on the agency's commissioners to reject Mr.
Marlin, a Conservative Party leader who is the choice of Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York.
Mr.
Torricelli said he was concerned about Mr.
Marlin's support for turning government assets over to private interests.


Ketchum Inc. Has Plan To Close Later This Year
Ketchum Inc., for many years the nation's largest fund-raising counseling company, has begun to wind down operations and will close later this year, Robert Carter, its president, said last night.
"While we are fully booked with fund-raising commitments throughout the country, the firm's inability to make a reasonable profit in the foreseeable future made this difficult decision a prudent business move," Mr.
Carter said.
Word of the company's plan began circulating in fund-raising circles yesterday after it started notifying clients that it would fulfill its contracts but would not extend them.


NEW CLASS OF STOCK WILL BE LINKED TO LIBERTY MEDIA
The Tele-Communications Inc. board yesterday approved plans to distribute a new class of common stock linked to Liberty Media, its domestic programming unit.
The board also approved the sale of stock in its international business unit to the public.
The moves are a part of a reorganization that Tele-Communications announced on Nov. 17.
The company said at that time that it would reorganize itself into four separate business groups, issuing stock in each of them.
A person close to the company said last night that the actions approved yesterday did not represent a change in its plan, but that the company was "doing it piecemeal." The company said it would spin off to shareholders a new class of Tele-Communications common stock intended to reflect the progress of Liberty Media.


Congress Isn't Eager to Play Hardball in the Big Leagues
As bad baseball metaphors rained on Capitol Hill like so many fungoes at fielding practice, Republicans insisted en masse today that President Clinton's proposal for a legislated end to the baseball strike is the wrong solution, offered at the wrong time.
But they held out a faint prospect that a right time for Congressional action might come later, if major league players and the 28 team owners continue their impasse and a second season of baseball is even more seriously imperiled.


Baseball Outlook Appears Gloomy
From the bargaining table to the mediator's office to the White House to Congress, the strike that defies settlement continued gathering potential outlets for failure today.
While President Clinton sent his binding-arbitration legislation to Capitol Hill and Labor Secretary Robert Reich began campaigning publicly for it, negotiators for striking baseball players and owners left town.
They will be back to lobby for and against the bill, which is opposed by Congressional leaders, but their travel plans do not include any visits to the bargaining table.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  MILITARY POWER RISES IN PANAMA  The first five months of the presidency of Ernesto Perez Balladares have witnessed the rehabilitation of dozens of figures from the days of the Noriega era, suggesting that the political arm of the Panamanian military is back in power.
A3


CHRONICLE
Who owns the right to write about JERRY SEINFELD?
That question is not included in a book that has 550 questions about the hit television comedy in which Mr.
Seinfeld plays himself, but it is one that will surely be asked in a Federal court in Manhattan.
Castle Rock, the company that produces the show, filed suit last week in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York against BETH B. GOLUB, author of "The Seinfeld Aptitude Test," and the Carol Publishing Group, whose subsidiary Citadel Press published the book in November.


U.N. to Send 7,000 Peacekeepers to Monitor Accord in Angola
The Security Council voted unanimously today to send a 7,000-member peacekeeping force to Angola, the largest operation in Africa since troops went to Somalia in 1993.
The Angola mission is a critical one for the United Nations because a previous international effort to monitor an Angolan peace accord and conduct elections after a long civil war was undone in 1992 when fighting resumed shortly after the voting.


Washington Memo; With New Year, Clinton Finds Himself Mired in Old Ways
This was to have been the week that President Clinton laid out his own vision of a smaller Federal budget.
Instead, it has become the week that Mr.
Clinton fumbled another high-profile nomination and failed in a no-holds-barred bid to settle the major league baseball strike.
The White House has repeatedly vowed to break that self-destructive pattern of allowing problems of its own making to overshadow initiatives.
But with a Surgeon General-designate who is being portrayed as an abortionist, and in a baseball dispute thrown into the hands of a reluctant Congress, Mr.
Clinton has presented his Republican rivals on Capitol Hill with two easy ways to attack his principles and cast doubt on his leadership.


One Actor, 15 Minutes, Two Faces
The changeover is so complete that it takes a while for most theatergoers to realize that this chubby circus figure in a wispy fright wig is, in fact, the angular, purse-mouthed prig they waved goodbye to only moments before.


How the Idea of Future Changed Over the Ages
VISIONS OF THE FUTURE The Distant Past, Yesterday, Today, Tomorrow  By Robert Heilbroner  133 pages.
The New York Public Library/Oxford University Press. $19.95.
Despite its title, "Visions of the Future," Robert Heilbroner's new book is not a collection of predictions in the tradition of, say, H. G. Wells's book "The Shape of Things to Come" (1933), which Mr.
Heilbroner incidentally calls "a marvel of insight, hindsight and blindsight, in each category a lesson for those tempted to foretell the future."


Nets Get Into It With Officials, But the Opponent Was Hawks
Like kids at recess teased on the playground, Butch Beard and Jayson Williams have been watching each other's backs all season.
Knock Beard, and Williams defends the first-year coach.
Shop Williams to another team, and Beard tells his superiors, "Hands off," his energy and enthusiasm are too valuable.
Together, they stood up to the people they perceived as big, bad National Basketball Association bullies tonight.


Dr. Foster's Job
To the Editor:
I fail to understand the logic of Republican attacks on Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. the nominee for United States Surgeon General, for having performed abortions.


Up to 35 Officials Ousted At Agencies by Giuliani
In a new drive to tighten his control over city agencies, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he was dismissing as many as 35 officials across the city government, some of them because they "had the agenda of the prior administration."
Some officials, he said, would not be replaced, while others would be replaced by people "who understand the philosophy, the direction of our administration."


28 Die in Colombia Earthquake
An earthquake measuring 6.4 on the Richter scale shook parts of central and southern Colombia today, and authorities said at least 28 people were killed in Pereira, Armenia and surrounding areas.
More than 200 people were injured, said Gen.
Luis Enrique Montenegro, deputy director of the National Police.


Landmark in Alzheimer Research: Breeding Mice With the Disease
After years of false starts, false claims and false hopes, researchers say they have finally produced the hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease in laboratory animals.
Researchers at Athena Neurosciences Inc. of South San Francisco, in collaboration with Eli Lilly &amp; Company of Indianapolis, report that they have inserted a human Alzheimer's disease gene in mice.
The mice seem fine when they are young but, starting in middle age, the areas of the animals' brains involved in learning and memory became riddled with plaque, the characteristic Brillo-like balls of protein that are found in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease.
Nerve cells in the mice degenerated in these areas of the brain just as they do in Alzheimer's patients.


Paris Journal; Homeless Man Finds Niche: The Cars' Caretaker
Philippe Hermand wants everyone to know that he is not one of the clochards, the scraggly outcasts who sleep on the streets or under the bridges of the Seine when the river is not overflowing its banks.
"I sleep in the street, but I get up every morning, wash and shave and take care of myself," he said.
"I just happen to live in the zone, that's all."


HEAD OF RUTGERS APOLOGIZES AGAIN
With student protesters literally pounding at his door, the president of Rutgers University struggled today to ease campus tensions by repeating apologies for his remarks about the "genetic" background of disadvantaged students.
But he also vowed that angry demonstrators would not be allowed to "interfere with the rights" of others.
The president, Francis L. Lawrence, issued the warning in the wake of demonstrations that forced the suspension of a sold-out Rutgers University basketball game on Tuesday night and filled the campus commons in New Brunswick with more than 500 students chanting for his resignation and for "power." Defending his leadership, he said again today that he did not plan to resign.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; 2 Officers Accused in Beatings
Two Kearny patrolmen used their fists, feet and flashlights to beat suspects, sending several to the hospital, Federal prosecutors said yesterday in announcing an indictment accusing the two of civil rights violations.


Usery Meets a Dispute Even He Can't Settle
Garment workers and mine workers have turned to Bill Usery Jr.
So have General Motors, the Chicago school system and Toyota.
All had a desire to see if Usery could step in and settle long, intractable and sometimes violent disputes.
The Federal Government still turns to Usery during the most dire national crises, and more often than not, Usery, a Secretary of Labor in the Ford Administration, does what he is asked.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Guilty Plea in Investment Case
When investigators were knocking at the door and her bosses told her to hide certain documents in a self-storage garage, JoAnne Boulin did as she was asked.
Now, with a grand jury considering charges against a Mendham investment firm accused of bilking investors out of millions, Ms.
Boulin, a 48-year-old secretary, is cooperating again.
She pleaded guilty in Federal Court yesterday to obstructing a grand jury investigation, implicating her bosses in the process.


Congressional Roundup: The Military; G.O.P. Criticizes Pentagon Budget
In the opening round of what will be a yearlong battle, House Republicans today criticized the Pentagon budget for the fiscal year 1996 as an insolvent plan that wastes billions of dollars on nonmilitary matters.
As Republicans gave Defense Secretary William J. Perry and his proposed $258 billion spending plan a chilly reception, a senior Democrat, Representative Ike Skelton of Missouri, was abandoning the Clinton Administration proposal and putting forward his own version that would increase military spending by $44 billion through 1999.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Cavs Tie Own Record for Futility  The Boston Celtics beat defense-minded Cleveland at its own game, overcoming a 25-point first half and winning, 75-67, last night as the visiting Cavaliers tied a team record for fewest points.
Cleveland led by 40-25 at halftime as Boston equaled a club record for fewest points in one half.
Then the Cavaliers matched their own record for lowest scoring half with 27 points. (AP)
HEAT 111, BULLETS 107: Bimbo Coles tied a career high with 25 points and the rookie Khalid Reeves hit a pair of 3-pointers in the final 4 minutes to help host Miami beat Washington.
Miami's Glen Rice scored 27 points.
The rookie Juwan Howard scored a season-high 31 points for the Bullets. (AP)


COMPANY NEWS: The Listerine Bottle Hunt;
A well-preserved Listerine bottle has made a 32-year-old carpenter $1,000 richer, giving him first prize in a national hunt for the oldest known Listerine container.
The contest began last summer when the mouthwash, first offered in bottles as an antiseptic in 1881, was repackaged in plastic containers.


In a Mixed Session, Dow Slips 2.02 Points
For the second consecutive session, stock prices closed mixed but little changed yesterday, except for a modest rally among Nasdaq issues, where two stocks accounted for much of the rise.
A weak dollar, hobbled by a report of a widening Japanese trade surplus with the United States, helped drag down stock prices.


Walesa Suggests He Will Accept New Premier
Easing concerns about a political stalemate, President Lech Walesa suggested today that he would accept the nomination of the Speaker of Parliament, Jozef Oleksy, as Poland's new Prime Minister.
But it was not clear how long it would take Mr.
Oleksy to form a new Cabinet, and in particular to find a Defense Minister and a Foreign Minister acceptable to Mr.
Walesa.
Both posts are vacant and have been a source of serious friction between Mr.
Walesa and Poland's leftist coalition Government.


Fears That Russian War Will Spread


Sports of The Times; 'They Wanted To Boycott'
ON a day students were voicing opinions across the Rutgers University campus, so-called student-athletes were ordered to keep their mouths shut tight.
"No comment -- Coach said it was an A-10 rule," the freshman forward Eriq Mason said yesterday on College Avenue, milling with teammates in the rear of the latest student protest demanding the ouster of Rutgers's president, Francis L. Lawrence, for making insensitive racial remarks.


An Unlikely Peace
The political realignment in Washington has produced no more curious or encouraging relationship than the tentative partnership between Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Senator Jesse Helms, the Republican chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee.
It cannot last, given the implacable policy differences that divide the two, and Mr.
Helms's penchant for reckless speech.
But contrary to predictions of confrontation and stalemate, Mr.
Christopher and Mr.
Helms have managed to maintain a surprisingly productive truce.
For those who like Washington as theater, the show of cooperation in the committee hearing room has been delicious.
Like two 19th-century gentlemen headed for a duel but determined to sustain the decorum of an elegant dinner party, Mr.
Christopher and Mr.
Helms have practically fallen over one another to be solicitous.
When one hearing extended beyond the appointed hour, Mr.
Helms apologized profusely and Mr.
Christopher replied, "Senator, my policy with this committee is to stay as long as you want me."


Burundi Strike Averted, Easing Ethnic Tension
A citywide strike that many feared could set off widespread ethnic violence was averted today when Burundi's powerful Tutsi-dominated opposition party said it had won its battle to oust the Prime Minister.
Government officials said there had been no such agreement, only a decision by President Silvester Ntibantunganya to eventually consider a new candidate chosen by all the opposition parties to replace Prime Minister Anatole Kanyenkiko.


Where Surfboards Are Made (Not China)
To the Editor:
"President Imposes Trade Sanctions on Chinese Goods" (front page, Feb. 5) mentions in an adjoining graphic that "surfboards" are a sporting good imported from China.
Surfboards are and have always been individually handcrafted articles made almost exclusively in the United States (California, Hawaii, Florida), Australia and Brazil.
The foam itself is blown only by a handful of manufacturers in the world in these three countries.
The foam is mowed, fiberglassed and resined by renowned craftsmen, who make the boards their name brand appears on.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Beanpot Tournament
Boston College and Boston University will play for the 43d annual Beanpot Tournament championship on Monday night at the Boston Garden.
It will be the last Beanpot at the arena, which is to be replaced next year by the Shawmut Center.
The Garden's 14,448 seats were filled to capacity for the first-round games last Monday, in which the Terriers had an easy time in defeating Northeastern, 6-2.
Boston College and Harvard battled until midnight, with the Eagles prevailing, 7-6.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Rutgers Chief Repeats Apology
With student protesters pounding at his door, the president of Rutgers University struggled to ease campus tensions yesterday by repeating apologies for remarks about genetic background while vowing that angry demonstrators will not be allowed to "interfere with the rights" of others.


At North American Alpine Event, No Shortage of Male Stars or Snow
It was a gathering of the fast guns in men's North American ski racing.
But most of the tourists who shuffled up to the chairlift here were like bird hunters without binoculars and didn't recognize the skiers preening themselves at a base picnic table.
It was early, but the racers had already skied a morning run down Big Mountain.
Still in their Lycra ski suits, and with traces of sweat drying on their brows, the skiers had just finished their first training run Monday.
The Big Mountain ski slope was "fun," some said, the way a Formula I driver might refer to a cruise in a Chrysler convertible.


Roach Queen Retires; Expert, 88, Says Goodbye to Subjects
Last month, Dr.
Berta Scharrer's cockroaches, hundreds of them, left the Bronx for the suburbs.
"The great exodus" was what Dr.
Scharrer called the migration, via moving van, to a laboratory at the State University in Old Westbury, L.I.
"I felt nostalgic," she said.
"I said goodbye to them."


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the effects of a takeover of Nationar by the New York State Banking Department misstated the relationship of the Astoria Financial Corporation to the trust company.
It is a customer, not one of the institutional owners.


Tax Cuts in New York Will Give Small Businesses a Real Boost
To the Editor:
"Cut, but Be Fair to the City" (editorial, Feb. 2) on Gov.
George E. Pataki's budget for New York State, was a reasonably fair description of the plan, the politics that surround it and the policy implications of the whole matter.
Reasonably fair, that is, until you start again with that old politics-of-envy refrain that infects so many of your editorials.


Hoping Budget Criticism Will Cancel Itself Out
Gov.
George E. Pataki looked soberly from the lectern as the complaints rose from the polite and comfortable crowd.
The head of the hospital where Mr.
Pataki's four children were born said the budget cuts would choke health-care providers.
A highway contractor from Tarrytown worried that transportation cuts would hurt his business.
A lawyer asked what would become of the poor.


B'nai B'rith and Israel
To the Editor:
An advertisement Jan. 31 criticized a high-ranking Israeli official in the name of Avigdor Warsha, who is identified as a B'nai B'rith international vice president.


Two Leaders Seek Laurels Along Peru-Ecuador Border
Over the last half-century, a border dispute with Peru has inspired Ecuadoreans to produce 500 books on the subject -- about 10 volumes for each of the 48 miles of Amazon jungle now being contested.
So two weeks ago, when President Sixto Duran Ballen ordered troops to resist Peruvian attacks, the 73-year-old leader seemed reborn, invigorated by a burgeoning nationalism.


Pataki Vetoes Pension Rise, Citing Budget
In the first significant veto of his young administration, Gov.
George E. Pataki today rejected the Legislature's attempt to raise pensions for state and municipal workers, saying the increase was unaffordable for both the state and New York City.
The veto showed Mr.
Pataki's willingness to stand by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani on an important fiscal issue despite the Mayor's vehement opposition to him during last year's campaign.
It allowed him to demonstrate his firmness against increased spending as he grapples with a $5 billion budget gap for the next fiscal year.


An 8-Year-Old's Favorites
To The Home Section:
I agree totally with "Of Dr. Seuss and Preening Princesses." Though I have not read that verse or heard about Daisy-Head Mayzie.
I read your article today.
My mother doesn't like Barbies.
I only have two (gifts, of course).
I like to play with dolls.
And two of them have a very real home.
I don't like Disney!
I am 8 years old.
I love to read.
I have read many novels about girl heroines and girls who do great things.
Here are some novels I liked:


Philharmonic Plans Spanish Series
The New York Philharmonic's 1995-96 season is to open on Sept. 20 with a program of music by Wagner and Strauss, conducted by Kurt Masur and with Jessye Norman as the soprano soloist.
The concert is to be broadcast on "Live From Lincoln Center." The season, Mr.
Masur's fifth as music director, is to include 125 performances of 38 programs.
Among the most novel offerings is a festival of Spanish music, including orchestral, chamber and flamenco concerts and preconcert lectures (Feb. 7 to 13, 1996).
The series is a tribute to Manuel de Falla on the 50th anniversary of his death.
Charles Dutoit is to conduct the orchestral program, which includes music by Falla, Albeniz, Rodrigo and Turina.
The festival is to be sponsored by the Sociedad General de Autores de Espana.


Treasury Issues Mixed In Uneventful Session
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday in what many traders called an uneventful session.
The price of the 30-year bond dropped 1/32 , to 9811/32, for a yield of 7.64 percent, unchanged from Tuesday.
Shorter-maturity bill rates, reflecting an increase in investor demand, dropped as much as 6 basis points for a three-month bill, to 5.72 percent.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Joyner Gets $245,000 In Los Angeles Lawsuit
The Olympic triple-jump gold medalist AL JOYNER and the city of Los Angeles have agreed to a $245,000 settlement of his lawsuit, in which the athlete contended that he was arrested because he was a black man driving a nice car.
A United States District Court judge ruled in October that Joyner was arrested without probable cause when the police twice stopped his Nissan 300ZX on May 8, 1992.
Joyner sued the police department for false arrest, false imprisonment and civil rights violations.
Officers said they stopped Joyner because they mistakenly thought the car was stolen.
Minutes later, the police stopped him again, suspecting him of being involved in a hit-and-run accident.


Drug May Help Curb Some Cases of Cerebral Palsy, 2 Studies Find
The incidence of cerebral palsy in babies with very low birthweight was substantially lower among those whose mothers received injections of a certain drug in the hours before giving birth, two new studies show.
The drug is an inexpensive natural chemical, magnesium sulfate, that obstetricians often inject as an intravenous infusion when a woman goes into labor prematurely.
The intention is to stop the labor and to prevent convulsions from pre-eclampsia, a serious complication of pregnancy.


Viacom's Cable Sale Threatened
The House Ways and Means Committee approved a bill tonight that would repeal a tax break for minority-owned media companies, a move that could kill Viacom Inc.'s plan to sell its cable television systems for $2.3 billion while avoiding hundreds of millions of dollars in taxes.
The bill, which was supported by House Republican leaders and approved on a voice vote, is part of a broader Republican effort to end Government programs that offer special preferences to women and members of minorities.


Not Only Italy, but a Soprano, Too
He's dour, frequently grumpy, sometimes melancholic.
In a television universe dominated by the incurably pert and perky, "Inspector Morse," as filtered through the unsmiling performance of John Thaw, offers blessed relief for the curmudgeons and misanthropes among us.
Tonight the series begins its eighth year on public television's "Mystery," growing old not just with grace but with decidedly keener plotting faculties.
In "Death of the Self," a two-hour presentation, Morse and his assistant, Detective Sergeant Lewis (Kevin Whately) are sent from gray Oxford to sunny Italy to follow up on a new case involving the diabolical Russell Clark (Michael Kitchen), whom the inspector considers "the biggest shyster on the books." Clark is running a self-help group for wealthy clients.
One has been found dead.
The Italian police have ruled the death an accident.
Morse is not so sure; the prickly Italians are not so sure about Morse.


Antonio Aris de Castilla; Guatemalan Diplomat, 81
Antonio Aris de Castilla, the Consul General of Guatemala and dean of the consular corps in New York, died on Jan. 23 at New York Hospital-Cornell University Medical Center.
He was 81 and lived in Riverdale, N.Y.
The cause was pneumonia, said his daughter, Lilly Rose Marshall-Carr.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CHASE MANHATTAN CORP, New York, said its equity investing unit, Chase Capital, had acquired U.S.
Electronics Components Corp., a maker of cable television remote controls, for $18 million.


Punchless Devils Need Some Short-Term Goals
The offense has produced only 14 goals in 8 games, but Devils Coach Jacques Lemaire is not ready to sound the alarm.
Last season, New Jersey scored a surprising 306 goals -- second in the National Hockey League -- playing Lemaire's tight-checking system.
Scoring opportunities were created off counterattacks from defense to offense.
And a defenseman, Scott Stevens, led the team in scoring with only 78 points.


2 Murders, Light Sentences, Hurt Families
The mother whose 21-year-old son had been murdered on the streets of New York read her prepared statement, her tears tumbling onto each of the eight typed pages.
The prosecutor, maintaining that he had done the best he could, given the limitations of the law, called the proceeding yesterday in Queens Criminal Court "ridiculous and absurd."
The judge, saying he would feel inhuman if he did not speak, was forced in the end to concede that there was not much he could add.
And with that, the plea bargain for manslaughter was accepted, a sentence was pronounced, and Tony Wilkins, who was 15 when he and two other teen-agers went on a robbery rampage last June that left two people shot dead, was gone, perhaps to spend only 3 1/3 years in jail.


Essay; Comes the Devolution
A quick insight to illuminate the political landscape: China, Russia and the United States -- all in their own ways -- are sending power long concentrated in their capital cities out to the boondocks.
Curiously, when Americans see this happening in China, we tut-tut about "warlordism." After Beijing-centric Deng dies, political power in China will probably devolve to centrifugalmen in a half-dozen regions, thereby reflecting economic reality.


The point-and-click universe is expanding into movies, television and marketing campaigns.
DIALOGUE boxes.
Pull-down menus.
Tool bars.
Windows.
Icons.
Button strips.
Arrows.
Screen savers.
These are the visual signatures of the mouse-controlled computer screen, and they are everywhere these days -- in television and print advertisements, in feature films and in television dramas and sitcoms.


Ketchum Reshuffles Executive Lineup
Ketchum Communications in Pittsburgh said yesterday that it had reorganized its top management and reassigned duties among several executives.
The goal, said Paul Alvarez, chairman and chief executive, "is to cut across all the office lines to provide a central focus for the agency."
Jan Hedquist, 49, vice chairman of Ketchum Communications, will relinquish his duties as the head of the Ketchum Advertising U.S.A. division to concentrate on operations like international development and Jerry &amp; Ketchum, Ketchum Advertising's New York office.
Craig Mathiesen, 50, vice chairman of Ketchum Communications and president of Ketchum Advertising Los Angeles, will assume the additional duties of heading Ketchum Advertising.


Congressional Roundup: Taxes; Legal Challenge To Voting Rule
Using a century-old Supreme Court case as a model, lawyers for 15 Democratic Representatives and the League of Women Voters filed a lawsuit today challenging the constitutionality of a new rule in the House of Representatives that requires a three-fifths vote to approve any increase in the income tax rate.
"It sets an extremely dangerous precedent that should not be allowed to stand," said Representative David E. Skaggs, a Colorado Democrat and the driving force behind the lawsuit.
"While this year the supermajority requirement might apply just to taxes, next year it could be trade or civil rights or clean air legislation or even a declaration of war."


A (Very) Exclusive Session on Ethics
At the New York Stock Exchange, some of the best and brightest of Wall Street will be meeting today to talk about their ethics policies.
It sounds like a worthy topic.
But apparently it's not worthy enough for the public to know about.
"I'm afraid I'm not extending an invitation," said Raymond Pellechia, a spokesman for the stock exchange.
Neither the news media nor the public will be welcome.


Sports of The Times: Baseball; One Fan to Congress: Just Do It, Pass the Bill
WHEN baseball was the national pastime instead of the national joke, the President always threw out the first ball.
But now baseball has thrown out the first President.
The first President caring enough to try to solve one of its labor disputes.


Success Halts Study of Drug To Help Heart
Studies evaluating an experimental drug for heart failure in this country were stopped ahead of schedule today on the recommendation of a monitoring committee because the preliminary results showed the drug was unexpectedly effective in reducing mortality, the drug's manufacturer, SmithKline Beecham, said.
But the company and one of the principal investigators declined to disclose the data upon which the monitoring committee based its decision.
A news release from the company said that additional data, including measures of symptoms and how much exercise patients can perform, must still be gathered and analyzed.
The company said the results would be presented later in a scientific forum.


Mexican Officials Now Suspect A 2d Gunman in Tijuana Killing
In yet another sharp turn in the inquiry into Mexico's most important assassination of the last half century, investigators have returned to the theory that the young worker convicted of the shooting did not act alone.
On the basis of evidence gathered by the third special prosecutor in the case, officials said today that they believe the man convicted of killing Luis Donaldo Colosio, a presidential candidate, got help, probably from a second gunman.


Getting a Real Grown-Up Life Can Wait
I'VE been waiting till I grow up to officially commit to a grown-up apartment.
Now, in my fourth decade, it's a challenge to postpone real life, but I'm still up to it.
Until I settle down, technically I'm in transition.
Even though I've lived in a glamorous four-room, park-view apartment for a year and a half, I'm only subletting grown-up life.
My ideal down-home breakfast is a large de-caf in an Acropolis-embossed takeout paper cup -- the more current styles offered at Starbucks and Seattle Bean are sadly lacking in the classical references -- and an "everything" bagel wrapped haphazardly in oil-spotted wax paper.
It makes breakfast in the city as satisfying as the farm because it's all been delivered fresh to your door.
Even better, if you close your eyes it's practically room service.


Alzheimer's Disease Is Produced in Mice
After years of false starts, false claims and false hopes, researchers say they have produced the hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease in a mouse.
The mouse model will allow testing of drugs for the disease.
Article, page A20.


Trying to Define Faith's Social Function
Although the signs identify the series "On Values: Talking With Peggy Noonan" as a conservative enterprise, two of the first program's three guests, Rabbi Michael Lerner, the editor of the Jewish magazine Tikkun, and Bill Moyers, are known liberals.
They are joined tomorrow night with the third guest, the Rev.
Richard John Neuhaus, by the belief that Americans are yearning for some sort of spiritual dimension to enrich their lives and guide their society.
Disappointingly for seekers after truths that Father Neuhaus teaches can only be derived from correct religious faith, they will find no agreement here on how such a revelation would work out in practice.


Four-Wheeling No Longer Just a Fad
Why, oh why, do city folk and suburbanites keep buying four-wheel-drive sport utility vehicles?
They are clunky, they are pricey and they get the same gas mileage as a giant Cadillac Fleetwood.
On the freeway, they whistle in the wind.
And don't even ask what an alignment costs.


Public Would Pay For Broadcast Tax
To the Editor:
Re Alfred E. Kahn's proposal to tax the use of the radio spectrum by broadcasters in order to pay for the Public Broadcasting Service (letter, Feb. 5): This is tempting but dangerous.
Such a tax is easily and soon extended to all users of the radio spectrum and pushes up the cost of communications to the consumer.


Corrections
A photograph yesterday with an obituary of Igor Tamm, a biomedical scientist who died on Monday, was published in error.
The picture showed Igor Y. Tamm, a Soviet academician, who died in 1971.


Subway Firebombing Suspect Enters Not Guilty Plea


INSIDE
Pataki Vetoes Pension Rise
In his first significant veto, Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York rejected the Legislature's attempt to raise pensions for state and municipal workers.
Page B1.
Outrage at Juvenile Laws
A teen-ager's manslaughter plea, and the lighter sentence he received, drew sharp criticism of the juvenile offender laws from prosecutors and the victim's family.
Page B1.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.94
3.15
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.72
5.78
3.23
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.03
6.07
3.37
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.54
7.51
5.92
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.64
7.64
6.41
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.46
8.47
7.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.50
6.51
5.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Victorville Journal; Boom to Bust in the Distant Suburbs
There is not a lot for teen-agers to do in this windswept high-desert town, where the bleak gray landscape is broken by swaths of tract houses with tall television antennas.
Most weekends, a handful of students from Victor Valley High School are out on empty street corners, dressed as clowns or cartoon characters and hired by desperate realtors to wave the few passing cars toward houses that have been on the market for months.


Inmate Violence Is on Rise As Federal Prisons Change
To D'Antonio Washington, getting a job in 1990 as a guard in the Federal prison in Atlanta was not only a way to make more money.
It also gave him, his family thought, a chance to work in a more professional environment than the South Carolina state prison where he had worked for several years.
"I felt that it being the Federal Government they ran things better than they do in the states," said Frederick Washington, D'Antonio's father, who is also a prison guard in the South Carolina system.
"At least I had that impression up until this happened. Now I feel it's not no better than any other system."


ARCHITECTURE'S YOUNG OLD FOGIES
LET history record that the Young Turks of American architecture are really old fogies.
Earnest and triumphal, they are stealthily invading the countryside with radical new architectural concepts -- Ionic temple fronts, rusticated pergolas and panoramic friezes depicting the labors of Hercules.
They are the antediluvian Vitruvians, the New Classicists.
And while some consider them true visionaries, others call them retro.


A Troubled Orchestra Faces Radical Surgery
The Louisville Orchestra, an ensemble long renowned for its adventurous recording series and its festivals devoted to contemporary music, is facing the fight of its life.
And musicians and orchestra managers elsewhere in the country are watching with concern, since a proposed restructuring of the orchestra may have ramifications for other ensembles as well.
The management and board, fretting over a $710,000 accumulated deficit, a projected deficit of $410,000 for next season and an expected drop in income, are demanding that the players abandon the three-year contract they negotiated in 1993 and accept a radical makeover.
Under their plan, only 45 of the orchestra's 67 musicians would keep their full-time positions; the other 22 would become part-time players.


An 8-Year-Old's Favorites
To The Home Section:
I agree totally with "Of Dr. Seuss and Preening Princesses." Though I have not read that verse or heard about Daisy-Head Mayzie.
I read your article today.
My mother doesn't like Barbies.
I only have two (gifts, of course).
I like to play with dolls.
And two of them have a very real home.
I don't like Disney!
I am 8 years old.
I love to read.
I have read many novels about girl heroines and girls who do great things.
Here are some novels I liked:


TALKING
The TALK of a young classicist can be tricky - it is nearly exclusively based on Greek and Roman architectural precedents, created for monarchs, emperors and mythological deities.
These terms should help you through the next cocktail party.
CAPITAL -- Carved or decorated block at the top of a column (also the money needed to pay for these often-custom details).
CORINTHIAN J-- A column substituting corn husks and tobacco leaves.
ENTABLATURE -- Horizontal structure supported by the column (composed of ARCHITRAVE, or lower part; FRIEZE, middle part, and CORNICE, detail at roof edge - before there were aluminum gutters).
ENTASIS -- Slight taper in the shaft of columns to correct optical distortions returns today as a counterpoint to modernism's concrete cylinders.
ORDER -- The parts of any colonnaded architecture: base, column, capital and entablature.
Through the miracle of catalogues, you can now mail -order any ORDER (Tuscan, Doric, Ionic, Corinthian or COmposite).
MOSAIC -- Once the organizing principle for floor pattern in great palaces (the bigger the stone the more important the room) - now reduced to four-inch sticky-backed squares from lumberyards.
PEDIMENT -- Shallow triangular gable on classicla buildings has evolved into a stick-on detail for suburbian imatation of Tara PROCESSION The way one passed through a temple, relative to scared altars and ritual sacrifices.
Now often organized around the powder room and whims of the host.
MICHAEL McDONOUGH


Parents Are Found Slain
A girl and boy returning from school yesterday discovered the bodies of their parents in their family's home in Springfield Gardens, Queens, where both had been shot to death, the police said.
The father, Wilfred Juan, 32, had been shot twice in the head, and his wife, Vanessa, 39, had been shot twice in the neck, said Sgt.
Edward Caro, a police spokesman.


Thomas Debevoise, Prosecutor, 65, Dies
Thomas McElrath Debevoise 2d, who was elected Attorney General in Vermont in 1960 and later was dean of the Vermont Law School, died on Feb. 1 at the Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center in Lebanon, N.H.
He was 65 and lived in Woodstock, Vt.
The cause was complications from surgery for lung cancer, said a son, Thomas Debevoise 3d of South Woodstock, Vt.


Suspect in Subway Firebombing Pleads Not Guilty
Looking gaunt and hobbling in pain from burns over 40 percent of his body, Edward Leary made his first appearance in a courtroom yesterday and pleaded not guilty in connection with the Dec. 21 subway firebombing that injured him and 47 other people.
The 49-year-old unemployed computer technician from Scotch Plains, N.J., slowly entered the courtroom in sneakers and appeared to have difficulty as he took his seat in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
With a scruffy beard and disheveled appearance, he looked starkly different from the earlier photographs of a healthy-looking, clean-cut man that were taken before the explosion.


Speaker Leads Drive to Undo Term Limits
A little more than a year after New Yorkers voted decisively to limit city officials to two terms in office, a quiet effort is under way to repeal the new limits, at least for City Council members.
While there are several ways to roll back term limits, the drive has focused on putting a new referendum on the ballot, most likely in November.
That would fall during the off-year election, when almost no one votes and party organizations could mobilize core voters for a greater impact.


Quantum Health Resources
Shares of Quantum Health Resources Inc., a provider of health services based in Orange, Calif., dropped sharply yesterday after its chairman canceled a meeting with analysts, prompting speculation about Quantum's prospects.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  Under pressure by health plans, more doctors and hospitals are accepting predetermined fees for large groups of customers.
In essence, those doctors and hospitals are taking on the same sort of risks as an insurance company that hopes the premiums it collects will be greater than the claims it pays.  [ Page A1. ] A Wall Street conference will discuss ethics -- in private.  [ D7. ]


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday, and a front-page reference, about Time Warner Inc.'s planned acquisition of Cablevision Industries misstated the estimated total value of the deal.
It is $2.7 billion, not $2.2 billion.


Accounts
American Electric Power, Columbus, Ohio, to Hameroff/Milenthal/ Spence, Columbus, to handle the utility's account, previously at Griswold-Eshleman Co., Cleveland.
Billings were estimated at $6 million to $8 million.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary on Jan. 16 about Guy Devaux, a leader in bringing French champagne-making techniques to the United States, misstated the ownership of the company that employed him.
The company, Gold Seal Vineyards, was owned by the Seagram Company Ltd. until 1987, when it was sold to Vintners International.
Gold Seal Vineyards was never owned by the Seagram Classics Wine Company, which is a division of the Seagram Company's American subsidiary, Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons, Inc.


At North American Alpine Event, No Shortage of Male Stars or Snow
It was a gathering of the fast guns in men's North American ski racing.
But most of the tourists who shuffled up to the chairlift here were like bird hunters without binoculars and didn't recognize the skiers preening themselves at a base picnic table.
It was early, but the racers had already skied a morning run down Big Mountain.
Still in their Lycra ski suits, and with traces of sweat drying on their brows, the skiers had just finished their first training run Monday.
The Big Mountain ski slope was "fun," some said, the way a Formula I driver might refer to a cruise in a Chrysler convertible.


Pressure On NATO To Expand
Willy Claes, the new Secretary General of NATO, a sometime music conductor, is struggling to keep his multinational group in tune as NATO seeks to expand despite its concerns over Russia's military operation in Chechnya.
The NATO line is that expansion has its own timetable, with a study of requirements for new members under way this year, and that turbulence anywhere, including Chechnya or the Kremlin itself, is irrelevant to that timing.


Germans, Too, May Trim Public TV
Most politicians have a love-hate relationship with television, loving it when it fawns and hating it when it sneers.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl seems to be tilting toward the latter.
For days now, Germany's political debate has been speckled with the fallout from Mr.
Kohl's threat to curb the public television network, which has become a vast institution since it was set up by the Western allies after World War II but which has been losing viewers lately as commercial stations have grown.


Bomb Brought to High School
A teen-ager was arrested this morning in Verona, N.J., after he brought a sophisticated remote-control bomb to the local high school and stored it in a locker, the authorities said.
The 16-year-old boy, who was not identified because of his age, told investigators he had not intended to detonate the homemade bomb, which was capable of blowing out the door of the locker, said Chief Douglas Huber of the Verona police.


Market Place; The usual tax-season cheer just isn't there at H &amp; R Block.
FOR H &amp; R Block Inc., the nation's largest preparer of tax returns, even taxes are not certain these days.
Earlier this week -- following the announcement by Washington that it would not pay earned income tax refunds electronically this year -- the company said that lagging consumer demand for electronic filing was likely to affect its earnings.
The stock fell $1.875 a share on Tuesday and dropped another 37.5 cents yesterday, closing at $35.875 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Bradley Switches to Offense; A Senator Seeks to Fill a Leadership Void in Washington
In the last two weeks, Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey has suggested on a radio show that President Clinton could face a primary election challenge in 1996 and issued a press release attacking the President's budget.
He also delivered a nearly two-hour speech on the Senate floor, denouncing what he called Mr.
Clinton's failure to adequately slash the deficit or address the enormous problems facing cities and children.
"That's not thinking about tomorrow," he said repeatedly in the Senate speech Tuesday, playing off Mr.
Clinton's 1992 campaign theme song, "Don't Stop (Thinking About Tomorrow.)"


Courtenay E. Benson, Actor, Dies at 80
Courtenay E. Benson, an actor in radio, television, theater and films, died on Feb. 5 at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 80 and lived in Mount Kisco.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday about Puerto Rican police officers attending liberal arts courses misstated the date the picture was taken.
It was Jan. 13.


G.O.P. Broke Faith On Tax Breaks
To the Editor:
The praise bestowed ("Hold That Line-Item," editorial, Feb. 6) on the House Republicans for the inclusion of targeted tax benefits in the line-item veto legislation is unwarranted.


The Tainted Foster Nomination
The nomination of Dr.
Henry Foster Jr. to be surgeon general has been so badly bungled, by the White House and by Dr.
Foster himself, that there is little choice but to hope it dies quickly.
Although Dr.
Foster is a highly respected obstetrician, his lack of candor about his abortion record disqualifies him from serious consideration.
Misleading statements by candidates for high position simply cannot be condoned.
Of course the chief blame for this debacle lies with the White House, which once again put forth a nominee without adequately vetting the person's background or knowing the answers to potentially explosive questions.
As a result, the Administration put out false information on the number of abortions performed by Dr.
Foster.
In this as in earlier episodes, White House bungling makes it difficult for President Clinton's natural allies to support him fully.
The situation moves from difficult to impossible for pro-choice Republicans like Senator Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas, who cannot reasonably be expected to take a political gamble amid such swirling incompetence.


Journal of Commerce Is Sold for $115 Million
The British company that publishes The Economist magazine will pay $115 million to buy The Journal of Commerce from Knight-Ridder Inc., the companies said yesterday.
The Economist Group will buy The Journal of Commerce Inc., the New York-based company that includes the 21,000-circulation daily financial newspaper and its foreign editions, shipping magazines, industry directories and electronic data services that provide specialized trade and tariff information.


Mapping a 14-Year-Old's Route to Fame, Fortune and Fun
After a competition in Pittsburgh in late October, Michelle Kwan put away her skating costume and pulled out a Halloween costume.
Back at home in Southern California, she went trick-or-treating as Fred Flintstone, and her sister, Karen, went as Pebbles.
Few people, if anyone, recognized the sisters, which was exactly the point.
By Saturday night, Kwan is expected to become the youngest winner ever at the United States figure skating championships.
At 14, she finds herself walking the tightrope of expectation, attempting with her family, coach and agent to balance the normal life of a teen-ager with the demands, responsibilities and temptations of a sport that has made her a celebrity before she is old enough to drive a car.


CHRONICLE
In November, MICHAEL PATRICK FLANAGAN took Representative DAN ROSTENKOWSKI's Congressional seat.
Now he's taking his living room, bedroom and kitchen.
Mr.
Flanagan, who defeated Mr.
Rostenkowski, the former chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, to become Chicago's first Republican Congressman in 35 years, is renting Mr.
Rostenkowski's apartment in Washington, The Associated Press reported.


Let's Get Government Out of the Tractor Seat; No Deep Pockets
To the Editor:
Oft overlooked in the farm subsidy debate (front page, Feb. 6): Deregulated farm prices here will encourage foreign producers to corner the world grain markets by driving out United States producers.
Especially the smaller ones.


F.A.A. Authorizes Airlines to Collect Data on Mistakes
After years of debate, the Federal Aviation Administration said today that it was authorizing airlines to collect and analyze data on mistakes and equipment malfunctions and to keep the information in data bases that could not be used to punish them or their pilots.
This immunity would protect them even if the information showed that they had broken rules.
Until now, the Air Line Pilots Association has blocked the collection of data from airplanes' "black box" systems for fear that it would give evidence that would cost pilots their jobs.
In the process, safety advocates say, the airlines have been denied information that could give early warning of problems that could cause crashes.


Serbs Halt Croatia Talks, Raising Chance of War
In another sign that a wider Balkan war could develop in the spring, the Serbs holding close to one-third of Croatia have cut off talks with the Government, balked on parts of an economic accord and formally placed themselves on "war alert."
The decision, reached Wednesday evening by the so-called parliament of the Croatian Serbs, is intended to put pressure on Croatia's President, Franjo Tudjman, to reverse his decision to end the mission of the 12,000 United Nations peacekeepers in Croatia on March 31.


Why Software Costs
To the Editor:
W.
Anthony Knight, in suggesting that we "Make Software as Cheap as a Paperback" (letter, Feb. 3), misunderstands software engineering.


Delta Limits Commissions, Stirring Outrage of Agents
In the most dramatic escalation yet of a simmering dispute between Delta Air Lines and travel agents, the airline imposed a limit yesterday on commissions for domestic air fares, and agents reacted with the fury of partners scorned.
Their anger was stoked by fear that if Delta succeeded, the other major carriers -- all of which are also looking to cut costs -- might soon follow suit.


Facing Financial Squeeze, Quayle Pulls Out of '96 Race
Former Vice President Dan Quayle abruptly and unexpectedly withdrew today from the contest for the 1996 Presidential nomination, joining several other prominent Republicans who said they were put off by the vastly escalating demands to solicit donations early.
"We were convinced that a winning campaign could have been accomplished and the necessary funds could have been raised," Mr.
Quayle wrote in a statement from his home in Carmel, Ind.
"However, we chose to put our family first, and to forego the disruption to our lives that a third straight national campaign would create."


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
BOSTON CELTICS -- Extended the contracts of Don Casey and Dennis Johnson, assistant coaches.


A Workout in the Cold


Alison Frantz, 91, Site Photographer At Excavations
Alison Frantz, one of the foremost archeological photographers of Greek sites and antiquities, died on Feb. 1 at the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J.
She was 91.
Ms.
Frantz died of injuries received on Jan. 27 when she was hit by a truck near her home in Princeton.


Expand NATO? Yes, Say Most Experts, but What Does the Public Think?
This is the season of international security conferences.
As European and American politicians, defense officials, academic experts and business leaders flocked from Davos to Munich to Brussels, no issue got more discussion than how soon the NATO alliance should extend its nuclear umbrella to Central Europe.
It wasn't a question of if, but when the emerging democracies in the region will escape the strategic void they have uneasily inhabited since the collapse of the Soviet Union.


Girl, 13, Held in Razor Attack On Boy in Brooklyn Junior High
A 13-year-old girl slashed a 13-year-old boy in the face with a razor as they fought over a sweat jacket in a corridor of a junior high school in Brooklyn, the police said.
The boy, who suffered a wound above his right eye, was taken to Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center, where he was reported in stable condition.


Talks to Open Israeli Borders Break Down
Whoever he may be, he is one of the few people on either side who still has high hopes as peace talks between Israel and the P.L.O. veer toward a full-blown crisis.
He is an unidentified Gazan who called Israeli lottery officials the other day and said he had won the $2 million first prize with a ticket he bought three weeks ago while working in Israel.


Devils Gain Confidence and a Measure of Revenge
With four players getting their first goals of the season and Martin Brodeur holding his ground in the nets, the Devils erased some bad memories from last spring with an inspired performance against the Rangers tonight.
In the first meeting between the teams since their epic playoff series last May, the Devils skated away with a 4-1 triumph over the defending Stanley Cup champions at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


In Texas's Tawdry Regions, Between Fact and Fiction
"Texas Justice," on Sunday and Monday, is the kind of old-fashioned television mini-series that depicts a tacky American way of life as big and formidable as the Lone Star State itself.
It's as if a couple of seasons of "Dallas" had been condensed into a single four-hour movie.
As insurance against flagging interest, Heather Locklear, megavixen landlord of "Melrose Place," stars as a trailer-trash sex kitten partial to the shortest skirts this side of the women who work motorists on dark streets.
Based on a true story and a subsequent book, Gary Cartwright's "Blood Will Tell," "Texas Justice" indulges in the usual fact-jiggling, changing the names of some characters and making composites of others.
Most of the action takes place in Fort Worth in the 1970's.
The divorced T. Cullen Davis (Peter Strauss), worth about $100 million, marries his flashy mistress, Priscilla Hatcher (Ms. Locklear).
The party girl is showered with clothes, jewelry and a big new home.
Then Cullen takes a closer look at the incurably flirtatious Priscilla and decides: "Nothing wrong with a little flash once in a while but after a time, it's like leaving your Christmas tree up all year round. Doesn't fit in with the rest of the furniture."


Canadiens Get Recchi
The Montreal Canadiens acquired the goal-scoring they need yesterday when they got right wing MARK RECCHI in a multiplayer trade with the Philadelphia Flyers.
Montreal sent defenseman ERIC DESJARDINS and forwards GILBERT DIONNE and JOHN LECLAIR to Philadelphia.
The Canadiens will also get Philadelphia's third-round draft pick in this summer's entry draft. (AP)


Times Co. Had Net Income Of $40.7 Million in Quarter
The New York Times Company said yesterday that its fourth-quarter profits from continuing operations rose 13 percent and that it had rebounded from a net loss in the 1993 quarter.
Including one-time charges, gains and other accounting adjustments, the company said, its fourth-quarter net income totaled $40.7 million, or 41 cents a share, compared with a loss of $24.1 million, or 23 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Without those adjustments, earnings would have totaled 43 cents a share in the latest quarter, up from 38 cents a share in the 1993 period.


Congressional Roundup: Crime; Bill Would Revise 1994 Measure
Continuing its efforts to crack down on criminals, the House today took up a measure to make states keep inmates in prison longer in order to get Federal money to build prisons.
The bill would also prohibit Federal prisoners from weight-lifting or any other activity that might increase their strength or fighting ability.
All exercise training equipment would be immediately removed from Federal prisons.
The measure would also restrict prisoners' ability to file frivolous suits against their keepers.


Washington Talk; U.S. Fight for Uzbeks? No Way, Pentagon Says
Would the United States and its NATO allies ever go to war to defend Uzbekistan?
No way, Defense Secretary William J. Perry told Congress on Wednesday.


Strawberry Pleads Guilty To Tax Charge
Darryl Strawberry, who has been labeled in turn as a phenomenal baseball prospect, an outstanding major league hitter, a violent husband and a persistent drug abuser, became a convicted felon yesterday.
Standing meekly before a Federal judge in a courtroom here only three days after being suspended from baseball and dropped by the San Francisco Giants for renewed use of cocaine, the 32-year-old outfielder pleaded guilty to a single count of tax evasion.


On My Mind; The $20 Billion Inquiry
This Clinton-Mexico affair reminds me of the time a fellow editor came up to my desk in the newsroom, put a piece of paper in front of me and told me to sign it.
When I asked why, he said I was to be his co-signer on a loan.
You can understand I did not want to be crude but I did ask how much as I was writing my fool name.
He looked at me, coolness trembling on disdain, and then picked up the signed paper.
As he walked away he said over his shoulder: "Bad form, old boy, bad form." Well, I was ashamed of myself and didn't get up and snatch the paper back.


Citing Fund Raising, Quayle Quits Race
Less than three weeks after he seemed to declare his candidacy at rally in his home state of Indiana, former Vice President Dan Quayle abruptly and unexpectedly withdrew yesterday from the contest for the 1996 Presidential nomination.


Intel and Microsoft Added to Apple Lawsuit
Apple Computer has expanded a lawsuit against a small software company by adding Microsoft and Intel to the complaint, contending that the two companies have illegally duplicated and distributed Apple's software.
The suit for theft of intellectual property and breach of contract was originally filed on Dec. 6 against the San Francisco Canyon Company, a small software company working for Apple to develop software to make features of an Apple operating system component known as Quicktime available for Intel-compatible computers.


A Monumental Slide Show at a New Gallery
It is no exaggeration to describe Nan Goldin's monumental slide show, "The Ballad of Sexual Dependency," as one of the most important photographic works of recent years.
This compilation of more than 700 of Ms.
Goldin's color photographs, accompanied by a musical soundtrack that ranges from opera to blues to rap, became legendary in the 1980's in the downtown art world, where it was shown in night clubs as well as galleries.
Since then, the work has been presented at museums, film festivals and elsewhere in the United States and Europe; it was in the 1985 Whitney Biennial and was published in greatly condensed form as a book in 1987.
A reworked version of the slide show is the centerpiece of Ms.
Goldin's exhibition at Matthew Marks's new gallery space in Chelsea.
Accompanying the 45-minute presentation are large prints of pictures from the piece and recent images from New York City, Berlin and Japan.


Sounds Around Town
Minimalist Quartet
Kronos Quartet, Majestic Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene, (718) 636-4100.
Strings scrape and beat furiously like the futile struggle of an animal caught in a trap.
So begins the Kronos Quartet's exploration of George Crumb's "Black Angels," a bleak journey through the Vietnam War, which the string quartet is to perform tonight along with Quartet No. 5 by Philip Glass and Quartet No. 2 by Henryk Gorecki.
Tomorrow, the quartet will drone through the New York premiere of "Chronos Kristalla" ("Time Crystals"), a piece composed for them by the Minimalist pioneer La Monte Young.
With just eight pitches, Kronos finds a world of overtones and sounds.
The group will also appear Feb. 17 and 18.
All performances are at 8 P.M.; tickets range from $10 to $30.
NEIL STRAUSS Many Facets of Punk
New Bomb Turks, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
It's fast, loud, simple, sloppy and nihilistic.
It's punk rock, and it's back in the malls.
But this Ohio quartet takes it back to the garage for a tune-up, making punk seem not like a trend but a necessity as it tears through three-chord stompers touched with everything from rockabilly to hardcore.
They'll be performing with Gaunt tonight at 10; admission is $7.
N.
S.
The Music of Africa
Francis Bebey, the New School, Tishman Auditorium, 66 West 12th Street, (212) 545-7536 or (212) 229-5690.
For decades, Francis Bebey has been on a tireless quest for knowledge, studying singing, playing and storytelling from different African and non-African traditions.
But he is best known as an ace synthesist, bringing his research together to form his own modern folk music (he also writes fiction and nonfiction, and directs films).
Tonight at 8, he is to perform original compositions on guitar, mbira (or thumb piano) and Pygmy flute.
The concert is to be preceded (at 7 P.M.) by a lecture and demonstration about African music delivered by Mr.
Bebey, and is to close with an improvised duet with Nana Vasconcelos, the Brazillian percussionist.
Admission is $16.
N.
S.


Reno Supports 'Megan's Law'
The Justice Department will help New Jersey defend "Megan's Law," the state law allowing the police to notify a community where a convicted sex offender plans to live.
"The public deserves a fair chance to be on guard," Attorney General Janet Reno said.
She said the Federal Government would file a brief backing the law but had not yet selected the case.


Priest Held in Molestations
An Episcopal priest has been charged with molesting two boys.
The suspect, the Rev.
Charles W. Mitzenius, 57, is the abbot of Holy Redeemer Abbey in Keansburg and had been pastor of St.
Mark's Church there.


MAYOR IS SEEKING UNION CONCESSIONS TO RESCUE BUDGET
Facing a budget gap expected to grow as high as $2.7 billion next year, the Giuliani administration plans to ask New York City's labor unions for $600 million in concessions, in exchange for a pledge to avert wholesale layoffs of municipal employees, city and union officials said yesterday.
The administration is seeking to extract savings from an array of health benefits, pensions and work rules as a stopgap measure to get the city through its fiscal difficulties, after which the concessions could be reversed, the officials said.
The proposals are part of a preliminary budget plan Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is to unveil on Tuesday.


5 State Workers Held in Theft
Five employees of the Division of Motor Vehicles were charged yesterday with stealing thousands of dollars collected from customers.
Altogether, the employees at the Wayne Regional Service Center made off with about $500 a day for several weeks, law-enforcement officials said.
The five were arrested as they arrived for work.


Art in Review
Guerrilla Girls
Printed Matter  77 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through Feb. 26
The Guerrilla Girls are artist vigilantes whose names and number remain secret.
Their targets have been racially and sexually discriminatory practices in the art world, and their main weapon has been a series of tersely worded posters that periodically cover the walls of SoHo and beyond.


Robert Kaiser, 64, Who Helped In Revamping Malaria Control
Dr.
Robert L. Kaiser, an epidemiologist who helped change the direction of malaria control around the world, died today at his home here.
He was 64.
The cause was cancer, said a spokesman for the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, where Dr.
Kaiser was a leading researcher on tropical diseases for 30 years until his retirement in 1993.


Recalling The Critic Who Was A Sculptor
Last December, when the Whitney Museum of American Art held a panel on "Donald Judd Reconsidered," one speaker after another praised Judd's art criticism, but virtually nothing was said about his sculpture.
Judd's reputation as high priest of Minimalism seemed to have placed an interdiction on discussion of his work: it could be described but not interpreted.
The memorial exhibition currently at the Paula Cooper Gallery provides a sorely needed opportunity to break out of this critical impasse.
Too small to be a full-fledged retrospective, it nonetheless provides a broad overview of his development.


Men Found to Do Better in Law School Than Women
Some male law students at the University of Pennsylvania devised a career strategem a few years ago: Sign up for a course that has lots of women and increase your chances of getting a grade higher than the minimally acceptable "qualified," or "Q." The female contingent in a class was called "the Q-buffer."
The men were on to something, to judge from a study just published in The University of Pennsylvania Law Review.
The study found that women indeed get lower grades than men at the University of Pennsylvania's law school.
A much larger study of 6,000 male and female students at law schools across the nation yielded similar results, suggesting that men outperform women at other law schools, too.
The results of that study are expected to be published in the summer by the Law School Admission Council.


17 Cited In Insider Trading
In one of the largest cases of insider trading on record, the Government charged yesterday that 17 people used confidential information about the AT&amp;T Corporation's plans to acquire four companies between 1988 and 1993 to realize $2.6 million in illegal profits.
Other insider-trading schemes have netted bigger profits, but officials were hard pressed yesterday to cite a case where more people were involved.


K-III PLANS SALE OF PREMIERE MAGAZINE
Premiere, the movie magazine, has been put up for sale by the K-III Communications Corporation.
Industry executives, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said yesterday that K-III was selling Premiere because it was not considered to be a good fit with the company's other magazines.
K-III, based in New York, acquired Premiere and eight other publications from Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation in 1989.
Since then, K-III has doubled its size through acquisitions and the start-ups of special-interest publications concentrated in education, media and information companies and products.
Premiere, begun in 1987, lost money until last fall, when it edged into profitability.
The asking price for Premiere has not been disclosed.


An Agnew Revival in Maryland


Four Finalists In Kmart Review
The Kmart Corporation said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its national image advertising account to four finalists.
The account, with billings estimated at $125 million to $175 million, has been at Ross Roy Communications in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., since 1969, but that agency declined Kmart's invitation in November to participate in the review.


Official Leaves New Yorker
Julie A. McGowan, the advertising director of The New Yorker for the last 10 months, has left the weekly magazine.
Thomas A. Florio, president of The New Yorker, said yesterday, "We had a mutual parting of the ways" but declined to discuss specifics.
He added that a successor would be named shortly.


The Neediest Cases; One Day at a Time, a Woman on Her Own Builds Confidence in Her Life
She boarded the bus to New York with a bottle of soda and two packs of cigarettes.
Everything else stayed behind, reminders of a wearisome past.
Betty W. arrived in winter 1993, after living with her sister in Michigan for years.
She suffered from diabetes, asthma and hypertension, but was not taking medication.
She was also mentally ill and had been hospitalized several times.


Ralph Heyman, 86, Can Company Chief
Ralph Kirstein Heyman, a former president and chief executive of the Consolidated Cork Corporation, a manufacturer of bottle caps and can-manufacturing equipment, died on Monday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 86.
The cause of death was a stroke, said his daughter, Jeanne H. Keller, of Rye Brook, N.Y.





Game 8 Shows Rangers It's Really a New Season
The real hockey season began last night, with chilly winds howling through frozen snow mounds of a crowded parking lot.
As they left their cars, excited Ranger fans exchanged chanted insults with hardy Devils fans as all pushed through the doors and into the warmth of Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
This was the game that was supposed to open the season last Oct. 1, before the labor-management money war.
This was the rematch of last spring's Stanley Cup semifinals, won by the Rangers en route to winning the Stanley Cup.
Devils supporters know it wasn't really Game 8.
That was then, this is now.


Police Testimony Starts in Simpson Trial
The first police officer to arrive at Nicole Brown Simpson's house shortly after she was killed last June told a Los Angeles jury today how he found her bloodied body, sidestepped her and the pool of blood around her, entered her home and discovered what the world would soon realize: this was no ordinary criminal case.
"I called my watch commander and told him we had a double homicide and I told him that O. J. Simpson was somehow involved," said the officer, Robert Riske.


At the Modern, a Deliberated Crash Landing
Nancy Rubins, a 42-year-old Los Angeles artist who has taken over the Projects gallery at the Museum of Modern Art, is good at mashing things together and defying gravity.
Sometimes her materials are eminently mashable, as with a wonderful suspended sculpture seen in her first New York show, at the Paul Kasmin gallery in 1993, in which bound and coiled mattresses were festooned with piles of mangled cakes.
The work had a mad baroque energy.
Although abstract, its roiling composition and largely pastel colors brought to mind a dangerously heavy amalgam of putti and clouds struggling heavenward.
This association was confirmed a few months later when "Mattresses and Cakes" was exhibited again, this time at the 1993 Venice Biennale: it looked completely at home (and somewhat higher off the ground) at the end of the Arsenale, the tall, navelike space that houses the Biennale's Aperto section.


METRO DIGEST
INFORMER'S TIP LEADS TO FUGITIVE
In the end, officials said, it was an informer who may have been seeking to collect a $2 million reward who simply walked into the American Embassy in Islamabad, Pakistan, and provided information that led to the capture of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the man the authorities consider the main plotter behind the bombing of the World Trade Center.
A1.


Pataki Nominee Is Elected to Run Port Authority
Gov.
George E. Pataki's choice to head the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, George J. Marlin, was officially confirmed yesterday at an unusually contentious meeting of the agency's board, ending a monthlong dispute over his qualifications and conservative views.
Mr.
Marlin's approval as executive director by a 10-to-2 vote of the authority's commissioners was somewhat of a formality after Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey came out earlier this week in his support.
But the discord at the meeting nonetheless indicated that Mr.
Marlin, a longtime executive in the municipal finance industry, is likely to be closely monitored by some commissioners.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
William Agee has been caught again in the harsh spotlight of corporate politics.
He is under fire from directors of Morrison Knudsen who contend his free spending and mismanagement have hurt the company.
The clash between the board and the chief executive illustrates how easily a celebrity executive can dazzle his board and promise more than he can deliver, to the eventual disappointment of shareholders and employees.  [ Page A1. ]


High-Risk Bargaining by North Korea
Isolated and paranoid, North Korea has developed a nerve-racking bargaining style.
It stonewalls and threatens until the last minute, then steps back from the brink and deals.
Last year that style brought an acceptable result, October's agreement with Washington to close down Pyongyang's nuclear program in exchange for safer reactors, additional oil supplies and steps toward U.S. diplomatic recognition.
Both sides have scrupulously abided by the terms of that agreement.


Laura Scott Taylor Dies at 79; Ran Bedford-Stuyvesant School
Laura Scott Taylor, the co-founder and retired principal of the Concord Baptist Elementary School in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, died on Sunday at Kings County Hospital Center.
Mrs.
Taylor, who lived in Crown Heights, was 79.
Mrs.
Taylor was fatally injured when she was hit by a truck last Friday while crossing a street in Crown Heights.


Does Virginia Rapids Have Makings of Upset?
Allen Jerkens, who three times beat the great Kelso and twice outran the matchless Secretariat as the master of the racing upset, watched Virginia Rapids working out for the Donn Handicap this morning at Gulfstream Park, and said: "It's not just running against Holy Bull. The Donn is a big race and, if my colt runs a credible race, I'll be happy."
But not as happy as if his colt were to pull the upset of the decade and beat Holy Bull, the Horse of the Year and maybe of the decade, who is drawing long-shot rivals now the way Jack Dempsey used to draw them.


Lauder in Distribution Venture With Rival
Operating on the theory that if you can't beat 'em, join 'em, the Estee Lauder cosmetics empire has joined forces with Make-Up Art Companies, a cosmetics company that has grabbed a big share of the prestige makeup business over the last few years with its MAC line.
Estee Lauder International Inc., the division of the privately held Estee Lauder Companies that handles overseas business, will distribute MAC products in Europe, Asia and other markets outside North America.
William Lauder, president of Lauder's Origins division, will be responsible for the joint venture.


A Tribute to the Giants Of Film Special Effects
Executives of Industrial Light and Magic and Skywalker Sound will present workshops for the public this weekend at the Walter Reade Theater as part of a Film Society of Lincoln Center tribute to the two giants of movie special effects.
Film clips from recent movies will be used in the presentations.
Jim Morris, the president of Industrial Light, will offer a digital history of the company, which has been responsible for effects in "The Abyss," "Terminator 2," "Jurassic Park," "Star Wars," "The Mask" and "Forrest Gump."


Corrections
The obituary on Wednesday of Igor Tamm, a biomedical scientist who died on Monday, misstated the cause of his death.
It was chronic lung disease.


Highsmith Haus
To the Editor:
I noted with regret the death of the writer Patricia Highsmith (obituary, Feb. 6).
I had the opportunity to interview Ms.
Highsmith in her home in Ticino, Switzerland, for an article that appeared in the Nov. 2, 1992, issue of Publishers Weekly.
The oldest thing about the house was Ms.
Highsmith herself.


Infusing the Hard Sell With Complexity
Jazzdance by Danny Buraczeski, as the name of a company, conveys only partly the type of choreography and creativity that Mr.
Buraczeski will be serving up through Sunday at the Joyce Theater.
Whatever you call it, the opening program on Tuesday night blew in some fresh air in a dance season with too few surprises.
At the end of the evening, Mr.
Buraczeski's "Swing Concerto," which is downright terrific, brought down the house, but all three local premieres are well worth a visit to the Joyce (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).


Thomas L. Marchioro, 66, Crucial Researcher in Liver Transplants
Dr.
Thomas L. Marchioro, a surgeon whose research laid the foundation for the first successful liver transplants, died on Sunday at the University of Washington Medical Center in Seattle.
He was 66 and lived in Bellevue, Wash.
The cause was complications from heart disease, said the university, where Dr.
Marchioro had been a member of the medical faculty since 1967.


Doctors Identify With Plight Of Surgeon General Nominee
Dr.
Hakim Elahi does not know Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr., the President's nominee for Surgeon General, but as he watches the attacks on Dr.
Foster by anti-abortion groups, he says questions about abortion would also haunt him if he were ever in that position.
"In my dreams it's there," Dr.
Elahi, an obstetrician-gynecologist who heads La Guardia Hospital in Flushing, Queens, said reflecting on one of the highest honors for a doctor in this country.
"But I don't want to have to defend myself for abortions I've done in the past. I think it's irrelevant. I don't want to have to apologize for what I have done, legally and conscientiously."


COMPUSERVE PLANS TO OFFER WIDER INTERNET ACCESS
Compuserve Inc. said yesterday that it was within 60 days of offering the World Wide Web and other Internet services to some of its 2.6 million on-line information service customers.
The company, a division of H &amp; R Block that is based in Columbus, Ohio, will make the Internet services available to computer users with "dial P.P.P." Internet connections.
Such connections are typically more complex than those made to standard commercial information services and are usually made through companies called Internet service providers.
Only a relatively small number of Compuserve's customers are thought to have dial-P.P.P. connections.


Rescheduling to Fight Killings
Police Chief George Pugh announced a new work schedule yesterday to deploy more police during high-crime hours in this violence-plagued city.
He said the change will make it possible to deploy an extra 30 to 35 officers between 2 P.M. and 6 A.M., when most crimes are committed.
The department has about 350 officers.


A Retrospective Honors Pagnol's Centenary
To celebrate the 100th anniversary of the birth of the French writer and film maker Marcel Pagnol, the Museum of Modern Art has scheduled a retrospective of 15 films that he wrote or directed or both.
The series, which opens today and runs through Feb. 28, includes the "Fanny" trilogy -- "Marius," "Fanny" and "Cesar" -- as well as "The Baker's Wife," "The Well-Digger's Daughter," "Letters From My Windmill" (adapted from Alphonse Daudet's book), "Topaze" (starring Louis Jouvet and Edwige Feuillere), "Angele," the rarely screened comedy "Cigalon" and Pagnol's own 1952 versions of "Manon of the Spring" and "Ugolin." About one-third of the films do not have English subtitles.


Jurors in Bomb-Plot Trial Questioned About Arrest
The judge in the trial of 11 men charged with plotting to blow up New York City landmarks questioned jurors yesterday to insure that they had not been prejudiced by news of the capture of a suspect in the World Trade Center bombing.
The suspect, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, was arrested in Pakistan and flown to New York on Wednesday night.
Federal authorities said he was the mastermind behind the February 1993 explosion at the trade center.
He fled the United States hours after the bombing.


Art in Review
'Neo-Dada'  'Redefining Art, 1958-1962'
The Equitable Gallery  787 Seventh Avenue, at 51st Street  Manhattan  Through March 18
This exhibition, organized by the American Federation of the Arts, reviews the halcyon days of the late 1950's and early 60's when Abstract Expressionism was on the wane and it began to seem (as it still does) that anything could be art.
It's not unfamiliar territory, thanks to the large "Fluxus" survey seen at the Whitney Museum of American Art in 1993 and "Blam," a 1984 show, also at the Whitney, which examined the origins of Pop and Minimal art.


Any Chance of Reconciliation?
Jennifer Mell didn't want to hurt her former boyfriend, she just wanted to damage his car.
A lot.
That's what Police Chief Douglas Huber said yesterday after the 18-year-old Ms.
Mell, a senior at Verona High School, was charged with conspiracy.
On Wednesday, a 16-year-old friend of Ms.
Mell was arrested after an explosive device equivalent to a half-stick of dynamite and a remote-control device was allegedly found in his locker.
The police said the bomb was to be used to blow up the former boyfriend's car.
The 16-year-old, whose name was not disclosed, faces Family Court charges.


Fear and Loathing In Upscale Glasgow
"What on earth could make you think we'd want to share a flat like this with someone like you?" ask Alex (Ewan McGregor), Juliet (Kerry Fox) and David (Christopher Eccleston) of a prospective roommate.
Which instantly raises the question of why an audience would want to spend two hours in the company of a trio like this.
But "Shallow Grave," Danny Boyle's mordant, brittle film about Glasgow yuppies who evolve into killers, uses the "shallow" in its title quite deliberately.
Mr.
Boyle is way ahead of his viewers in grasping his characters' emptiness.
Indeed, he may be too far ahead for his own good.
An obviously talented visual stylist, Mr.
Boyle is more at ease with the bright, bold, increasingly coldblooded imagery of "Shallow Grave" than with the personalities of its three principals.
A sky-high level of misanthropy overwhelms his film in ways that prove more sour than droll, despite the presence of skillful actors and a bizarrely enveloping plot.
Mr.
Boyle's nasty ingenuity recalls the playful early days of the Coen brothers, but his own sense of the absurd is less witty or acute than that.


Family Values vs. a Free Spirit and Her Deconstructed Lover
Toward the end of "The Truth-Teller," the new Joyce Carol Oates comedy, there's a remarkable, quite eerie scene that takes the audience by surprise.
A middle-aged woman, separated from her boor of a husband, is reunited with the suitor she has remembered for 35 years.
Unlike the rest of the play, which is blunt, the scene is oblique, full of innuendo, an electric reminder of Ms.
Oates's particular gift for locating the grotesque, the melancholy and the menacing within the resolutely commonplace.
It's also the first and last moment when "The Truth-Teller" comes to bitterly funny, spontaneous life.
The play, which opened last night at the Circle Repertory Theater's new home on Bleecker Street, otherwise has the manner of something written according to a conventional, prearranged plan.


Art in Review
Alfonse Borysewicz
Richard Anderson Gallery  476 Broome Street (between Greene and Wooster Streets)  SoHo  Through Feb. 25
One look around the gallery tells you that Alfonse Borysewicz is a person of tremendous spiritual intensity: the problem is getting this intensity onto canvas in a convincing way.
Mr.
Borysewicz studied for the priesthood before becoming a painter in the early 1980's.
Since then, his work has alternated between abstraction and more or less explicit religious imagery.
The paintings in this show mostly use abstract forms as metaphors for spiritual experience.
Gray, white and tan stripes converge upward in "I Believe in the Holy Spirit." In "Going Home," a row of splotchy black verticals seems to float like a rust-eaten fence in front of a light gray background with darker curved forms at right: the allusion to landscape (a prison-camp yard?) is inescapable.


Taking Back His Words; Rutgers President Faces Wall of Skeptics
In the three decades of his academic career, the embattled Rutgers University president, Francis L. Lawrence, built a reputation for courting and recruiting minority students.
At Tulane University, he helped increase the black student population to 10 percent, from 1 percent.
At Rutgers, he raised millions of dollars for scholarships and programs benefiting black and Hispanic students.
He presided over the opening of a $1 million cultural center for African-Americans.


Red Storm Hopes to Put the Brakes on Runaway Train
Brian Mahoney didn't expect to win the Big East championship this season.
But he didn't figure he would be fighting to stay out of the conference's cellar either.
"What are we 2-9, in the conference right now?" Maloney, the St.
John's coach, was saying yesterday in his office at Alumni Hall.
"I figured we'd be about 5-6, something like that. But we're not."


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "BEAUTIFUL NIGHTMARES: THE FILMS OF DARIO ARGENTO," American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
Last weekend of screenings.
Films tomorrow are "Four Flies on Grey Velvet" (1972) at 2 P.M. and "Suspiria" (1977) at 4 P.M.
On Sunday, the films are "The Cat o'Nine Tails" (1971) at 2 P.M. and "Opera" (1987) at 4:30 P.M.
Screenings are included in museum admission: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for children and students.
Information: (718) 784-0077.


RESULTS PLUS
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  UConn Stays Unbeaten  Rebecca Lobo scored 19 points and No. 1 Connecticut breezed to another Big East victory, beating Miami, 85-48, last night, to remain the nation's only unbeaten Division I team.
The result was never in doubt after the first 5 minutes for the Huskies (20-0, 12-0), who held Miami to 2 field goals and 2 free throws in the final 15 minutes of the first half en route to their 31st straight home victory before a sellout of 8,241 at Gampel Pavilion.
Lobo also had 11 rebounds and 8 blocked shots. (AP)


A Celebrity Boss Faces Exile From 2d Corporate Kingdom
It was 1980, and William Agee and Mary Cunningham were playing leading roles in the business world's steamiest soap opera.
He was the young, fast-rising chairman and chief executive of the Bendix Corporation.
She was his smart, young executive assistant.
Within two years, she had risen to Bendix vice president, had been forced to leave the company and had become Mrs.
Agee.
Mr.
Agee, meanwhile, attempted a takeover of the Martin Marietta Corporation, a messy fight that presaged the merger battles of the 1980's.
He ended up losing his prey and his job.


Fans Should Turn Their Backs, Too
Striking major league players, union officials and White House aides were given a lesson -- part civics and part history -- by President Clinton on Tuesday night.
They were listening to tales about President Theodore Roosevelt for about 15 to 20 minutes because the owners who negotiate for the 28 major league baseball clubs were out of the room, caucusing.
We all know that caucuses are necessary, but because of this one, the remaining players in the nonplayingest sport in the professional ranks had nothing better to do.


Sports of The Times; Devils Face Overtime Memories
NEW YORK wasn't big enough for Martin Brodeur last spring.
Everywhere he went he could hear the thumping stereophonic sound, the same theme, over and over again.
"Rangers-Rangers-Rangers," the bubbly young New Jersey goalkeeper recalled yesterday, before he faced his memories and defeated them, 4-1, in the first meeting of the season between the two teams.
"I didn't want to stay around and hear that for the next few weeks," Brodeur recalled.


Retracing a Path That Led to the Presidential Trail
FIRST IN HIS CLASS A Biography of Bill Clinton  By David Maraniss  Illustrated. 512 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
There is a recurrent scene in "First in His Class," a new biography of Bill Clinton, that gives the reader a vivid glimpse of the President's ambition and political instincts.


Five Fail Drug Tests
Five track and field athletes, including the Americans MIKE GRAVELLE and GEA JOHNSON, have been suspended after failing recent drug tests, the sport's world governing body said yesterday in Monte Carlo, Monaco.
Gravelle, the top-ranked United States discus thrower; Johnson, a former National Collegiate Athletic Association heptathlon champion, and the Jamaican sprinter ASTON MORGAN, the world leader in the 55-meter dash this season, were among the athletes facing four-year bans.


Past and Future Collide on San Francisco's Waterfront
The finger piers are still there, fanning out into San Francisco Bay, some of them used for parking lots, many of them rotting and cracked.
For all but a handful of the docks at the oldest port on the West Coast, it has been decades since they held a cargo ship.
The piers' grand arched entrance ways remain as well, many covered with graffiti or boarded up.
As for sailors, well -- the maritime museums are full of pictures recalling the days when more than 1.5 million troops passed through the Golden Gate on their way to war.


A New Deal for Casinos
New Jersey's top gambling regulators pledged yesterday to eliminate duplication and cut costs to make it easier for casinos to do business.
In a meeting with executives from all 12 gambling halls, the Casino Control Commission chairman, Bradford Smith, and the acting director of the Division of Gaming Enforcement, Frank Catania, presented a "memorandum of understanding" that more clearly defines the responsibilities of each.


Inside Art
Maryland Collection to Be Sold
On the heels of last month's auction of some of the art and objects belonging to the financially distressed New-York Historical Society comes word that the Maryland Institute of Art in Baltimore is preparing to go it one better.
And just as the Historical Society's decision did, the news that the art school intends to sell its entire art collection to raise money has caused an uproar in the art world.
The collection has been on loan to the Baltimore Museum of Art and the Walters Art Gallery in Baltimore for more than 50 years.
"We are absolutely against this kind of de-accessioning," the executive director of the Association of Art Museum Directors, Mimi Guardieri, said.
"The collection is important educationally. If it is lost to Baltimore, it would be, well, unfortunate is not a strong enough word."


A Crackdown on Phone Marketing
The Government proposed sweeping new rules yesterday to fight criminals who coax money over the telephone from Americans who are too ready to believe, too harried to care or too greedy to check.
Law enforcement authorities say abuses in what is known as telemarketing represent the nation's fastest-growing form of consumer fraud.


2 Astronauts In Deep Chill During a Test Of Spacesuits
Two astronauts donned spacesuits modified for warmth and ventured into the icy darkness outside their spaceship yesterday to see how the bulky garments handled temperatures of about 100 degrees below zero.
As it turned out, the spacesuits need a bit more work.
The astronauts' fingers got so cold that officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration cut the planned five-hour space walk short by 25 minutes, allowing the astronauts to return early to the warmth of the space shuttle Discovery.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan gallery shows: "MATERIAL DREAMS," Gallery at Takashimaya, 693 Fifth Avenue, at 54th Street (through March 11).
Five artists using fabric.
Beverley Semmes displays a yellow-green mohair coat fit for a giant, but the standout here is the fashion designer Han Feng, whose rectangular tents of glistening, patterned fabric seem equally appropriate for a sacred ritual or a hot shower (Pepe Karmel).
ROBERT MORRIS, Leo Castelli Gallery, 578 Broadway (near Prince Street), SoHo (through tomorrow).
This exhibition of recent work is Mr.
Morris's first since his Guggenheim retrospective last February.
It includes a group of sculptures titled "Malaprops," which recycles some of his signature materials from the early 60's, including knotted ropes and lead sheets engraved with words.
There is also an installation of big clunky fiberglass urns holding audio components (Holland Cotter).


2d Sea Bird, Wounded, Recovered by Zoo
A stunned, frostbitten Inca tern has been found in a New Jersey driveway, the second of 33 exotic sea birds recovered after a weekend escape from the Bronx Zoo.
The birds flew away after the zoo's nearly 100-year-old aviary collapsed in Saturday morning's snowstorm.
Zoo officials expressed acute dismay over the loss because the birds -- 12 Inca terns, 12 Andean gulls, 8 gray gulls and one band-tail gull, all from South America -- are so rare on this continent.


Accounts
*
Bertucci's Inc., Wakefield, Mass., to Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson, Boston, as the first agency to handle the restaurant chain's integrated account.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.


Sounds Around Town
Songs by Jewish Immigrants
The Ilyas Malayev's Ensemble Maqam, Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, (212) 362-8719 or (212) 545-7536.
Mr.
Malayev, who leads an eight-member group, comes from a long line of Bukharan Jewish court musicians.
A composer, poet and songwriter, he creates pieces that use his own poetry, in both the Persian and Uzbek languages.
His Queens-based group of recent immigrants includes established musicians from Central Asia.
The concert, which will concentrate on Bukharan Jewish folk songs, features Zulfira Asanova performing the highly stylized dances of Uzbekistan and Tadzhikistan.
Showtime is tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $16.
STEPHEN HOLDEN


Man in the News; A Street Conservative -- George John Marlin
As the new executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, George J. Marlin, a self-described "street-corner conservative" from Queens, now faces a fundamental philosophical challenge: running the kind of expansive governmental agency whose very agenda he might otherwise oppose.
The Port Authority's mission from its inception has been to use its quasi-governmental powers, coupled with its ability to issue bonds and condemn property, to promote the economies of the two states, something very much at odds with the beliefs of free-market conservatives like Mr.
Marlin.


G.O.P. Senator Lays Out Pain of Balanced Budget
Democrats like to note that Republicans keep promising to balance the Federal budget but never seem to get around to saying how they plan to do it, much less who will suffer as a result.
But one Republican with a substantial say in the matter has detailed notions about how to eliminate the deficit, and now he is laying them out -- suffering and all.
He is Senator Judd Gregg, a conservative freshman from New Hampshire whose personal fiscal views, like those of other first-termers, might ordinarily inspire yawns.
But Mr.
Gregg is different: this winter the majority leader, Bob Dole, designated him to comb through the Federal budget's $850 billion in mandatory spending programs, like Medicare and Federal pensions, in search of savings to apply to the deficit.


Art in Review
Josiah McElheny and Dan Peterman
Andrea Rosen Gallery  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through Feb. 25
In this show an unlikely pairing of artists pays off.
Josiah McElheny, a young glass blower, exhibits beautiful objects of clear glass: supposedly 17th- and 18th-century crowns, engagement goblets and drinking cups.
Their traditions, partly invented and elaborated upon by the artist, are explained in quaintly handwritten advertisements for commissions and in museum-type labels.


Art in Review
Alfred Jensen
PaceWildenstein Gallery  32 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through tomorrow
The centerpiece of this show of work by Alfred Jensen (1903-1981) is a series of eight large paintings dating from 1968 titled "Where the Gods Reside." Stretching across a gallery wall like a vast multi-panel altarpiece, the bright geometric paintings, with their illusion of spacial recession toward a central point, have a proto-Op pull.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  U.N.
CONCERNED BY SECURITY BILL  A national security bill that could undermine international peacekeeping operations and fundamentally change Washington's relations with the U.N. is arousing concern in the capital and abroad.
A9  MEXICO CRACKS DOWN ON REBELS  The President of Mexico ordered the arrest of rebel leaders in southern Mexico after federal agents uncovered what he called major weapons caches and plans for widespread violence.
A3


INSIDE
Bill Would Limit U.N. Funding
A Republican-sponsored bill that would cut American contributions to peacekeeping operations and fundamentally change U.S. relations with the U.N. is arousing opposition in Washington and abroad.
Page A9.
Mexico Rebels Face Arrest
The President of Mexico sent hundreds of troops and federal police agents to arrest the leaders of the uprising in the southern state of Chiapas as criminals.
Page A3.
New Port Authority Chief
Governor Pataki's choice to head the Port Authority, George J. Marlin, was officially confirmed, ending a battle over his suitability.
Page B1.


U.N. Voices Concern Over a Bill to Limit U.S. Peacekeeping Role
A national security bill that could undermine international peacekeeping operations and fundamentally change Washington's relations with the United Nations is arousing concern among officials here, in the capital and abroad.
The legislation, sponsored by Republicans, could be approved by the House of Representatives as early as next week, House aides and Administration officials say.


Jets Promote Assistant
The Jets have elevated PAT KIRWIN, who had been an assistant on both the professional personnel and coaching staffs, to the director of player administration.
Kirwin, 44, will handle various duties, including signing players and keeping an eye on salary-cap records.


BORLAND FOUNDER FORMS SOFTWARE COMPANY
Philippe Kahn, the flamboyant founder of Borland International who resigned as chief executive last month as part of a corporate restructuring, has formed a new company called Starfish Software that will focus on products to "help people around the world get organized," Mr.
Kahn said yesterday.
The new company's line is supposed to include two consumer products Mr.
Kahn is purchasing from Borland for an undisclosed amount: the Sidekick scheduling program and the Dashboard Windows utility.
The company also plans to develop products for the forthcoming Windows 95 operating system software from the Microsoft Corporation.
Mr.
Kahn and Sonia Lee, a computer graphic artist who is co-founder of Starfish, will employ about 30 people in Santa Cruz, Calif.
Mr.
Kahn remains chairman of Borland.


Usery's Status In Negotiations Up in the Air
The owners were the ones who agreed to accept the mediator's suggestions as a settlement to the six-month-old baseball strike, but they were the target of his thinly veiled criticism yesterday for disclosing his ideas and representing them as his "final recommendation."
In between conversations with the chief representatives of the owners and players, Bill Usery Jr. issued a statement explaining the background of his effort to suggest a settlement.


Jury Clears Heyward
A jury in Pittsburgh cleared Atlanta Falcons running back CRAIG HEYWARD of civil liability in a 1991 scuffle with a police officer.
Officer DARRYLL BRISTON had contended he suffered neck, back and hand injuries in a scrape with Heyward outside a bar Feb. 17, 1991.
The panel Wednesday ruled unanimously in favor of Heyward, the former Passaic, N.J., high school and University of Pittsburgh standout. (AP)


Isles Ripped on the Ice, and Then Off It, Too
Before tonight's game, Islanders General Manager Don Maloney said he had all but worked out a minor transaction to help bolster his team, but that no major trades had materialized quite yet.
A few hours later, Maloney's sense of urgency had heightened considerably.


CHRONICLE
This is a time for change for the three major leadership bodies in Reform Judaism.
Rabbi ERIC H. YOFFIE was nominated this week to be the president of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations, the organization of more than 850 reform synagogues in the United States and Canada.
He is expected to be voted in by the 220-member board in May to succeed Rabbi ALEXANDER M. SCHINDLER when he retires in July 1996.
Rabbi Schindler has served in the post since 1973.


Republicans Advance Proposal To Replace the Welfare System
House Republican leaders moved today to undo more than a half-century of social welfare policy by proposing to eliminate the right of poor women and children to receive cash assistance from the Government.
In place of the welfare program established 60 years ago as part of the Social Security Act, Republicans said they wanted to make a lump sum payment of $15.3 billion a year, which the states could use "in any manner reasonably calculated" to assist needy families with children.
This represents the amount spent in 1994; there would be no allowance for inflation.
Benefits would no longer be automatically available to people who met certain criteria.


Knicks Are Walking Tall at the Right Time
At the All-Star Game break, the Knicks are unfazed by where they have been and confident about where they are going.
A disappointing 12-12 start tested the Knicks' unity and commitment.
Their 18-4 record since Christmas has re-established them as contenders for a championship.


The Welfare Enigma
If anyone knew for sure how to lift people out of poverty, Americans would embrace the solution eagerly.
It would make everyone's life safer and more prosperous.
But no one does know, and no one has known since people first started thinking and talking about the problem in biblical times.


Let's Get Government Out of the Tractor Seat
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 6 front-page article on the coming political fight over farm subsidies overlooks a key part of the policy debate.
At issue is not just the cost of subsidies to the Treasury, but also the huge, indirect costs of misguided agricultural policies to rural communities, farmers and other links in the food chain of industries.


Adviser Says L.I.R.R. Suspect Prefers Conviction to Insanity Finding
Colin Ferguson would rather be found guilty of murder than be found insane, his chief legal adviser said today.
"He is a proud person, and it is his position that he is a sane person and does not want to be seen otherwise," said the adviser, Alton G. Rose.


Whitman Chief of Staff Quits After 16 Months
Saying that "I need a rest," Judith L. Shaw, the chief of staff for Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, announced today that she would leave the administration on Feb. 24.
Ms.
Shaw said that she had made no plans for her future but thought that the time was right to make a change "before I get involved in some new projects." She said she made a commitment to Mrs.
Whitman after the November 1993 election to work on her transition, help set up the cabinet, reduce the governor's staff by 25 percent in keeping with a campaign pledge and manage the office through the opening months of the administration.


Clinton and Kohl Criticize Chechnya Assault but Stress Support for Yeltson
President Clinton and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany today criticized Russia's assault on Chechnya but said it was nonetheless vital to continue supporting President Boris N. Yeltsin, warning that anti-democratic forces could take power in Moscow if the West abandoned him.
Mr.
Clinton and Mr.
Kohl -- the two Western leaders who are closest to Mr.
Yeltsin -- faulted Russia for using such heavy force and urged it to end the war in the breakaway region of Chechnya as quickly as possible even as they gave the Russian leader their strongest embrace since Moscow first attacked Chechnya in December.


Seven Injured as Train Rams Another Waiting at Brooklyn Signal
An empty subway train, on the way to its first station on a midafternoon run yesterday, slammed into a Manhattan-bound B train that had stopped at a red signal on a curve in Sunset Park, Brooklyn.
Six people on the B train and the motorman on the empty train, an M, were treated for minor injuries after the crash, which wrapped the metal skin of the M over and around the skin of the B, like one snake trying to swallow another.
The accident left one car of the M tottering on a trestle over Fort Hamilton Avenue, and disrupted the end-of-the-day routine for commuters heading to Brooklyn from lower Manhattan.


Giuliani Call For Firings Briefly Defied
In a brief show of defiance, the Health Commissioner, Margaret A. Hamburg, turned up at a City Council hearing yesterday accompanied by her press aide who is one of 35 people that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani wants dismissed.
Dr.
Hamburg, one of the few commissioners from the Dinkins administration who were kept on by Mr.
Giuliani, testified for several hours at a hearing on a new city agency for control of stray animals.
After her testimony, she was asked by a group of reporters if she was supporting Steven J. Matthews, her associate commissioner for external affairs.


Foes Vow to Defeat Surgeon General Nominee
Opposition to President Clinton's nominee for Surgeon General began to harden today among the Republican majority in the Senate, with some pledging an all-out fight to defeat the nomination and Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, suggesting for the first time that it may have to be withdrawn.
But the White House indicated that it intended to continue to fight for the nominee, Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. of Meharry Medical School in Nashville, through Senate confirmation hearings and on the Senate floor.


Sweden's Social Policies Put Us to Shame
To the Editor:
"A Deficit Reins In Sweden's Welfare State" (front page, Feb. 2) portrays Sweden's social and economic policies and its citizens as childishly naive.
By leaving out information, you give a conservative American bias against Sweden's government-intensive economic and social approach and add fuel to American anti-government hysteria.


When Art Puts on a Party Hat: A Guide to Gallery Openings
PAINTERS and sculptors create, for the most part, in solitude and silence.
Ideally, their works are contemplated in the same way.
But that is not how they are thrust upon an unsuspecting world.
In late-20th-century New York, art takes its first bow in a room as loud and crowded as a commodities trading pit and as smoke-filled as an off-track betting parlor.
The fruits of genius are toasted with Chilean chardonnay and honored with offerings of suspect cheese.
For a mad two hours, artists, critics, hangers-on, insiders, befuddled outsiders and outright scroungers mingle, collide, preen, dish, fawn, toady, snub and, as a last resort, take a fleeting glance at the art on the wall.
This ritual, played out hundreds of nights a year in galleries great and small, uptown and downtown, is known as an art opening.
It is held, as a rule, the night before a show officially opens, or at the end of the show's first day.
It is given as a courtesy to the artist who, after toiling long and lonely hours in his studio, has earned a chance to stand in the spotlight and bask in semi-sincere praise.
For a brief, intoxicating moment, the heavens will align properly and move the artist to his or her rightful place: the center of the universe.


Mourning The Gorgeous Mosaic That Was Sarajevo
ONCE again, little Storefront for Art and Architecture in SoHo has cast our big institutions into the shade by staging a world-class show on a shoestring budget.
"World class" here stands for more than high praise.
"Warchitecture -- Sarajevo: A Wounded City" looks at a major global crisis from an architectural perspective.
Prepared under harrowing wartime conditions by Midhat Cesovic and four other members of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Association of Architects, the show documents the destruction of Sarajevo's architectural heritage during the Serbian siege.
Its mission is to inform the international community about the extent of the damage and to drum up financial support for rebuilding.
The show has already appeared in several European museums, including the Pompidou Center in Paris.
The presentation at Storefront is, thus far, the only American stop scheduled.


Investment Firm's Officials Charged
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the New York State Attorney General sued the principals of the Korbean International Investment Corporation in Manhattan yesterday, charging them with fraud and other infractions.
They also froze the assets of the firm, which the complaint described as a "bucket shop," and appointed a receiver to determine the amount of money that might be returned to the small investors who were clients of the firm.


Restaurants
Entering March is like walking into a warm embrace.
A fire burns in the hearth just inside the door.
One person waits to take your coat, another to lead you through the gracious town house and seat you at a table.
Champagne and drinks appear almost before you ask.
It is a very relaxing experience.
Few restaurants handle the transition from street to table as smoothly as March.
But then, most things go smoothly at this small, elegant restaurant, from the bargain $39 prix fixe winter menu to the top-of-the-line menu at $175 a person (wine included).
The owners clearly want you to feel that you are dining in a private home, and for the most part they succeed.


Strong Police Monitor Will Reassure the Public
To the Editor:
Although the independent police monitor is now the law in New York City, it is clear that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani intends to continue his battle with the City Council over this issue (news article, Feb. 1).


Ratings Start For H.M.O.'s By A.M. Best
The A. M. Best Company, the leading rating firm for the insurance industry, said yesterday that it had started rating health maintenance organizations, the groups that provide health care to more than 50 million Americans.
The ratings would measure the financial strength and performance of the H.M.O.'s, and their ability to provide the medical services they promise.
The ratings would not measure the quality of their customer service or medical care.


On Stage, and Off
'Nunsense' Closing
"I don't know if we've just nunned everybody in New York to death or if it's just that everyone's suffered in the past year," says Dan Goggin, the author, director and producer of "Nunsense" and "Nunsense II." "But it's better to go out while you're hot than to run out of steam in the summer and have to sneak out of town."
Thus endeth the run.
On Feb. 26, after more than nine years, the singing, dancing, wisecracking, habit-wearing kick line of Mount St.
Helens High is leaving town.
The cast and the "Nunsense II" set are going to Ford's Theater in Washington for what they hope will be 22 weeks.
The "Nunsense I" set will winter in Maui and Las Vegas, picking up casts.


J. William Fulbright, Senate Giant, Is Dead at 89
J.
William Fulbright, the Arkansas Democrat whose powerful mind and eloquent voice helped to rally opposition to the Vietnam War, died at 1:15 this morning at his home here.
He was 89.
The cause of death was a stroke that he suffered three weeks ago, said his wife, Harriet Mayor Fulbright.
He had suffered an initial stroke that weakened his right side in 1988 and another, more severe one in 1993.


A Senator's Saving Courage
The youthful anti-war generation that looked to J. William Fulbright for leadership has passed into middle age, and now the former Arkansas Senator is gone at age 89.
His opposition to the wasteful and unjust war in Vietnam led him to confront another old lion of the Senate, Lyndon B. Johnson, who had moved into the White House and seemingly taken leave of his senses.
As chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, Senator Fulbright defied first Mr.
Johnson and later President Nixon for the mad prosecution of a war that had no importance to the nation's survival.
Among those who remember those fraught days, Mr.
Fulbright will long be venerated for these acts of unmitigated political courage; they crowned his career.


Sharon Stone as Taciturn Gunslinger
It's customary for Western townsfolk to be awestruck by a tough new gunslinger, but not over the way she looks in leather pants.
However, the new kid in town in "The Quick and the Dead" is Sharon Stone, which gives the old formula a definite extra swagger.
Striding into one-horse Redemption while doing her best Eastwood mad-dog squint, Ms.
Stone may smoke a cigarette instead of a cheroot, but she still gets the attitude right.
The look is hardboiled and the dialogue suited to a person of few words: words like "Just shine my boots."
Ms.
Stone's presence nicely underscores the genre-bending tactics of Sam Raimi, the cult director ("The Evil Dead," "Army of Darkness") now doing his best to reinvent the B-movie in a spirit of self-referential glee.
Mr.
Raimi is limited by a sketch mentality, which means his jokes tend to be over long before his films end.
But his tastes for visual mischief and crazy, ill-advised homage can still make for sly, sporadic fun.


Door Into Winter


Poked, Prodded, Timed and Tested
When running back Garrison Hearst arrived here at the National Football League scouting combine two years ago, he was eager, hopeful and full of promise.
And it was here where Hearst's knee injury was discovered and where several teams teams became cool toward him.
He was fortunate.
He survived, slipping from the favorite to be the No. 1 pick to being chosen No. 3 by the Arizona Cardinals in the 1993 N.F.L. draft.
When safety Eric Turner arrived at the combine four years ago, he was a top prospect but several other defensive backs had caught more of the pro scouts' fancy.
Turner, however, ran the 40-yard sprint in under 4.4 seconds.
Run under 4.4 and you turn heads.
And Turner certainly did, vaulting himself into a higher draft spot, all the way to the second pick, owned by the Cleveland Browns, in the 1991 draft.


Congressional Roundup; Backed by Business, G.O.P. Takes Steps To Overhaul Environmental Regulations
Emboldened by their recent legislative victories and urged on by a powerful coalition of business groups, Republican lawmakers are taking the first steps toward redefining the basic premises of many environmental regulations.
Legislation moving rapidly through the House of Representatives would substitute economic calculations for health considerations as the determining factor in writing regulations governing air pollution, water quality, hazardous wastes and the like.


15 Charged in Car Fraud
The Queens District Attorney said yesterday that 15 owners and employees of automobile inspection stations had been charged with fraudulently issuing inspection stickers.


Fox Is Losing Big, But Winning Bigger
Fascinating financial news was nearly buried earlier this week: News Corporation, the parent of Fox Sports, took a $350 million write-off to reflect future losses on its four-year $1.58 billion National Football League contract.
The write-off was an admission that advertising revenues will fall at least $350 million short of the costs of the contract, production and marketing through the 1997 season.
"It's a conservative expectation of what we think will happen over four years," said Chase Carey, the chairman of Fox Television.
Will it happen again?
"You can't be absolutely certain of the next three years."


Abroad at Home; Out With The Bath Water
In 1914 the Supreme Court held unanimously that Federal prosecutors could not use evidence seized in violation of the Fourth Amendment's rule against unreasonable searches and seizures.
Justice William R. Day wrote:
"If letters and private documents can thus be seized and held and used in evidence against a citizen accused of an offense, the protection of the Fourth Amendment declaring his right to be secure against such searches and seizures is of no value and, so far as those thus placed are concerned, might as well be stricken from the Constitution."


Maxwell Tells His Side
Houston Rockets guard VERNON MAXWELL, suspended for 10 games and fined $20,000 for attacking a fan, will appeal his punishment, saying the National Basketball Association did not know the reasons behind his action.
"First, I don't believe the N.B.A. has all the information about the fan's conduct that provoked this incident and I believe the punishment would not have been as harsh if they had known about it," Maxwell said in a statement read yesterday by his lawyer, DICK DeGUERIN.


Cowboys Keep Irvin With $15 Million Deal
Wide receiver MICHAEL IRVIN agreed to terms of a five-year, $15 million contract with the Dallas Cowboys last night that puts him at the top of pro football salaries, the team said.
"Michael has become tonight the highest-paid receiver in the history of the N.F.L., in the history of football," said JERRY JONES, the Cowboys' owner.


Looking Away From Dixie And Leaving It Far Behind
Between 1940 and 1970, five million Southern blacks moved to Northern cities.
The story of that odyssey, from its bitter roots to its profound consequences, was admirably set forth by Nicholas Lemann in his 1991 book, "The Promised Land." Inspired by that work and borrowing its title, the resonant five-hour BBC documentary that begins on Sunday gives some of the people who took part in the greatest peacetime migration in American history an opportunity to tell what it was like.
The opening hour is alive with memories of growing up in sharecropping families in the Mississippi Delta.
Men and women tell of the sunup-to-sundown days in the cotton fields, which brought them little but debt and abuse.
"You just couldn't win," one man says.
"They all was playing on the same piano, everywhere you went."


New Delhi Journal; A Demon Housecleaner to Clean India's House
If a poll were taken to find India's most admired personality, a strong candidate would be T. N. Seshan.
And if a poll were taken to find the public figure Indians consider most high-handed, Mr.
Seshan would be a probable winner again.
Mr.
Seshan is not an actor in Bollywood, the Bombay-based film capital of India.
He is not a cricket player, nor even a Hindu mystic of the kind known here as godmen.
He is, rather, a babu, a type every Indian knows but rarely loves -- a long- serving member of the country's civil service elite.


CHRONICLE
WILLIAM H. GRAY, the president of the United Negro College Fund and the former special adviser to President Clinton on Haiti, is to receive that country's National Medal of Honor from President JEAN-BERTRAND ARISTIDE at a ceremony in Port-au-Prince today.
Mr.
Gray was the special adviser on Haiti from May to October last year and helped design the American policy that led to the restoration of the Aristide Government.


Behind Arrest of Bomb Fugitive, Informer's Tip, Then Fast Action
For two years, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, No. 1 on the F.B.I.'s most wanted list and the man the authorities consider the main plotter behind the bombing at the World Trade Center two years ago, was the target of an international manhunt spanning several countries and thousands of miles.
But in the end, officials explained yesterday, it was an unexpected informer who simply walked into the American Embassy in Islamabad, Pakistan, last week and provided information that led to Mr.
Yousef's capture in a hotel room there on Tuesday and his return to the United States the next day.


Art in Review
'The Artist's Camera'  Photographs by Contemporary Artists
Thread Waxing Space  476 Broadway (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow
Photographs by dozens of American and Japanese artists, most of them better known for work in other media, are in this disjointed show organized to benefit AIDS research.
Some of the artists, among them Robert Rauschenberg, William Wegman, Jack Pierson and Eric Fischl, regularly exhibit their photographs; others seldom do.


The Black Entrepreneur At a Firestorm's Center
Just a few weeks ago, Frank Washington thought he had reached the pinnacle of success among black entrepreneurs.
The son of middle-class parents who was born in a segregated hospital in the District of Columbia 47 years ago, Mr.
Washington had an agreement to buy a large set of cable television properties from Viacom Inc. for $2.3 billion.
But today, far from being lionized, he is at the center of a political firestorm, attacked as a front man for white-owned media conglomerates.
His deal has been held up as a symbol of how a Federal program to help minority-owned companies has been abused, leading the House Ways and Means Committee to vote on Wednesday to repeal the program entirely and specifically block Mr.
Washington's cable deal.


For Children
Wondercamp
27 West 23d Street  Chelsea  (212) 243-1111  Recommended ages: 1 to 10
If one Sunday in early January was any indicator, New Yorkers are desperate to spend winter afternoons in that new beast, the indoor playground-entertainment center.
Families outside the city head for these havens not only because the backyard is mushy, but to keep a tighter eye on their children.
For city families, there's nothing like getting out of the house, even if it means ending up in noisy places with minor hysterical overtones.


AST Is in Talks With Samsung
AST Research Inc., one of the largest personal computer makers, said yesterday that it was talking with the Samsung Electronics Company of South Korea, as well as other companies it did not identify, about a potential "significant minority investment" in AST and possible "strategic business arrangements."
In a separate announcement, AST's computer unit and Texas Instruments said yesterday that they had reached a cross-licensing agreement covering personal computer patents and calling for AST to periodically pay royalties to Texas Instruments.
Additional terms of the agreement were not disclosed.


Home Video
DVD, the CD
The home-video industry has a decision to make about the digital video disk, or DVD, the CD that some people in the business say could replace the videocassette.
Consumers probably won't see the disk in stores until 1996, but last month two competing versions were introduced to the trade and are vying for acceptance by the movie studios.


Art in Review
'Drawings From a Private Collection'
Nolan/Eckman Gallery  560 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 18
A personal collection should have a theme.
It should also have some quirky, surprising choices.
The anonymous collection on view here succeeds on both counts.
It's mostly devoted to 20th-century drawings in the tradition of Expressionist realism from Egon Schiele down to Georg Baselitz, with many detours for Surrealism and abstraction.
There are several welcome appearances by French artists often ignored in the United States.
Henry Michaux's 1956 "Mescaline Painting" is like a miniature Barnett Newman in which an orange and yellow vertical stripe has mysteriously turned into the spine of a fish, with curved ribs radiating to either side.
A 1950 "Corps de Dame" by Jean Dubuffet provides a reminder that Abject Art didn't begin in 1975.


Prints on Loan From the Bibliotheque Nationale
"The French Renaissance in Prints from the Bibliotheque Nationale de France" at the Metropolitan Museum is not nearly as prosaic a show as its title makes it sound, though it requires attentive looking and patient reading to yield its charms and secrets.
The 16th-century woodcuts, engravings and etchings on view represent a body of work familiar until now primarily to scholars.
Although the term Renaissance evokes images of Raphael in Italy and Albrecht Durer in Germany, its application to French art has always been less certain.
The period produced literary lights aplenty, including Rabelais and Ronsard, but memorable French painters were few between the late Middle Ages and the 17th-century Baroque.


In the Shadows of Immigrants


COMPANY BRIEFS
EASTMAN CHEMICAL CO., Kingsport, Tenn., said it would increase its annual production capacity for polyethylene terephthalate to 2.8 billion pounds by 1998 from a current level of 1.6 billion pounds.


Law Student Is a Quick Learner
A third-year law student at Rutgers University has turned a class project into a lawsuit challenging beach restrictions in Greenwich, Conn.
Brenden Leydon filed suit in a Connecticut court this week to challenge the policy that restricts access to public beaches to residents and their guests.





G.O.P. Finds A Foe Within
Congressional Republicans are vowing to strip from the Pentagon budget billions of dollars of what they call "non-defense" items, like aid to help Russia dismantle its nuclear weapons and the costs of cleaning up military bases that are closing.
But it seems that no one told the Governor of California, Pete Wilson, about the strategy of his fellow Republicans.


Massachusetts Lawmakers Pass Bill on Welfare Restrictions
Shortly after several hundred women on welfare marched through the Statehouse to protest proposed cuts in their benefits, both houses of the Massachusetts Legislature today passed a bill that would give their state one of the most restrictive welfare systems in the country.
The legislation would require able-bodied welfare recipients with school-age children to find work after 60 days of benefits, eliminate the practice of increasing aid to families that have more children while on welfare and end payments altogether after two years.


Intolerance in Albany
Joseph Bruno, the new majority leader of the New York State Senate, has revealed a streak of intolerance and ignorance toward New York's gay community.
Mr.
Bruno, a Republican, made that plain this week when he barred unmarried Senate employees from receiving domestic-partnership health benefits available to all other state workers.
He says he is concerned about the costs of the coverage, which the previous Governor, Mario Cuomo, negotiated with state employees' unions.
But Mr.
Bruno's real concern seems to have little to do with costs -- they are likely to be modest for the Senate in any case -- and everything to do with homophobia.


Critic's Choice/Film; Keaton Reconsidered
He was born 100 years ago this year (on Oct. 4), and he lived and worked far ahead of his time.
The sublime Buster Keaton, whose career will be celebrated by a not-to-be-missed series beginning today at the Film Forum, endures as the most hauntingly modern of silent-film comedians, with a grace and solemnity quite unlike the more sentimental style of Chaplin, his one true peer.
If Keaton was the less celebrated and spent much of his career in decline, that, too, seems prescient in its way.
The daring of Keaton's work looks as bracing now as it was baffling for some silent-era viewers, who found that his films could be as disturbing as they were funny.
"For those who sensed it," James Agee wrote in 1949, while Keaton languished in hack work and relative obscurity, "there was in his comedy a freezing whisper not of pathos but of melancholia." Samuel Beckett, another admirer, thought Keaton an ideal actor for "Waiting for Godot."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Seeking stability, Wells Rich Greene BDDP sets up a satellite shop.
ONE of Madison Avenue's best-known creative teams will run a satellite shop spun off from Wells Rich Greene BDDP.
Charlie Moss, the agency's vice chairman and corporate creative director, and Stan Dragoti, the Hollywood director who has collaborated with him on advertising campaigns since 1968, have become chairman and president of a creatively focused spinoff named Moss/Dragoti.
The embryonic agency will be based in space adjacent to the Wells Rich office in midtown Manhattan.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.93
3.16
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.75
5.72
3.25
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.06
6.03
3.40
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.57
7.54
5.92
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.68
7.64
6.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.50
8.46
7.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.51
6.50
5.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Excerpts From Bradley's Speech to the Press Club
Here are excerpts from a speech delivered to the National Press Club by Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company.
Today, I will suggest that any prescription for America must understand the advantages and limits of both the market and government, but, more importantly, how neither is equipped to solve America's central problems, which are the deterioration of our civil society and the need to revitalize our democratic process.


Diner's Journal
Bakery Plus
The mystery of Manhattan -- why the Upper West Side has so few good restaurants -- remains unsolved.
But there is good news for people in that part of town: an excellent bakery has just opened.
Actually the Columbus Bakery does much more than merely bake.


J. William Fulbright, Senate Giant, Is Dead at 89
J.
William Fulbright, the Arkansas Democrat whose powerful mind and eloquent voice helped to rally opposition to the Vietnam War, died at 1:15 this morning at his home here.
He was 89.
The cause of death was a stroke that he suffered three weeks ago, said his wife, Harriet Mayor Fulbright.
He had suffered an initial stroke that weakened his right side in 1988 and another, more severe one in 1993.


Suspect Linked to 2 Bomb Plots in Asia
Federal authorities said today that they were convinced that the man accused of directing the World Trade Center bombing is a master terrorist who plotted other bombings while a fugitive from the United States, including failed attacks in the Philippines and Thailand.
Federal agents, believing that Ramzi Ahmed Yousef is tied to a larger terror network or even a foreign government, have launched a broad investigation into his activities since the trade center blast, focusing on a failed bomb attack in the Philippines last month when the Pope toured the country.


A Man, a Van, a Plan: Short-Circuiting Thefts
THESE are times that can try a man's van.
Jose Lopez thought he had taken precautions.
Living in a city where he parked on the street, he armed his 1985 Chevy Astrovan with a powerful alarm.
But circumstances led him to drastic measures.


Mamet in a Bleak Living Room of Childhood
"The Cryptogram," David Mamet's spooky, very good new play, is elliptical but far less minimal than it initially looks.
It's stuffed with the emotional bric-a-brac that leaves permanent scars on children, splits husbands from wives and tests lifelong friendships.
Under Mr.
Mamet's direction, "The Cryptogram" had its American premiere here on Wednesday night at the C. Walsh Theater.
Though the American Repertory Theater's home is the Loeb Drama Center in Cambridge, it's presenting the play at the smaller theater in Boston, just behind the State House, as part of its New Stages '95 series.
"The Cryptogram," which has three characters and runs a scant 75 minutes without intermission, should be something of a coup for the group, which presented the first production of Mr.
Mamet's "Oleanna" in 1992.


Give Lower West Side A Green Waterfront
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 4 news article on Roland W. Betts, the developer of the Chelsea Piers, on the Hudson River between 17th and 23d Streets in Manhattan, makes for an entertaining read.
Unfortunately, it misses the point, which is not personalities but the future of the waterfront.
The waterfront is the last open space in Manhattan.
It is on one of the great rivers of the world.
To use this precious space for a glorified gym and shopping mall is shortsighted.
There are many places in our city to build gyms and malls.
There is only one waterfront.
One hundred fifty years ago, when New York had another large open space, it was not developed.
Instead, a great park was built.
Not only did Central Park become one of our cherished landmarks, a green sanctuary for millions of New Yorkers and visitors, but its presence also served as the engine for the development of the Upper East and West Sides for the next 100 years.
An all-green waterfront park with views of the Hudson would make the Lower West Side bloom and provide far more permanent jobs than dozens of Chelsea Piers.
Like Central Park it would be an esthetic, social, environmental and economic boon.
It would be real and lasting urban planning.
STUART WALDMAN  New York, Feb. 6, 1995 The writer is president of the Federation to Preserve the Greenwich Village Waterfront &amp; Great Port.


Punitive Damages Curb Outrageous Acts
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis exposes the lie behind the "Common Sense Legal Reform Act," the Orwellian name for the section of the Contract With America that would, under the banner of legal reform, restrict the ability of citizens to recover from wrongdoers in the courts (column, Feb. 3).


J. William Fulbright, Senate Giant, Is Dead at 89
J.
William Fulbright, the Arkansas Democrat whose powerful mind and eloquent voice helped to rally opposition to the Vietnam War, died at 1:15 this morning at his home here.
He was 89.
The cause of death was a stroke that he suffered three weeks ago, said his wife, Harriet Mayor Fulbright.
He had suffered an initial stroke that weakened his right side in 1988 and another, more severe one in 1993.


A Famous Victory
Once again, Moscow has declared premature victory in secessionist Chechnya.
If Pyrrhus were a Russian, he would recognize the landscape.
In the ninth week of Moscow's offensive, the Russian military has claimed that the capital city, Grozny, is finally taken; Defense Ministry officials say they are ready to withdraw the army and hand over to Interior Ministry troops.


Bonds Slip As Refunding Auctions End
Prices of Government securities fell yesterday, even though some dealers and traders cited good investor demand at the bond auction that finished the Treasury's quarterly refunding.
Analysts say that with the refunding now over, the market's focus has shifted to the next round of economic reports, with traders bracing for today's release of the Producer Price Index for January.
The data will provide a picture of price pressures at the wholesale level and clues about future inflation.


Mexico Leader Sends Force To Arrest Rebels in South
In a dramatic move to break the year-old peasant uprising in the south, President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon today sent hundreds of army troops and federal police agents to arrest the guerrilla commanders.
Identifying for the first time the leader known previously only as Subcommander Marcos, Mr.
Zedillo offered amnesty to the Mayan Indian rebels in Chiapas state who agree to give up their arms.
But no amnesty was offered for the mysterious, articulate Marcos, whom he identified as Rafael Sebastian Guillen Vicente. (His family name is pronouned ghee-YEHN.)


Market Place; Literary factors may be driving Berkshire Hathaway's surge.
CAN a best-selling book send a stock zooming?
Apparently, the answer is yes.
The stock of Berkshire Hathaway Inc. has leaped 20 percent so far in 1995, rising despite reports of some insider selling late last year and in the face of mediocre performance from many of the stocks that Berkshire Hathaway owns.
Berkshire Hathaway, as every owner of the stock knows, is run by Warren E. Buffett, who does not believe in stock splits.
That fact, plus the excellent record Mr.
Buffett has compiled, explains why Berkshire Hathaway trades at levels never seen before in this country.
The stock closed at $24,550 a share, down $275, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.
When Mr.
Buffett took over the company 30 years ago, the price was less than $20.


No Headline
"I have been accused of being a zealot in a number of areas lately. But if George Marlin described himself, I would say that he is a common-sense zealot." GEORGE MARLIN The new head of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.  [ B4:5. ]


Congressional Roundup: Term Limits; The Problem Is How Far to Go
The Senate Judiciary Committee today approved a measure that would limit terms of Senators to 12 years and members of the House to 12 years.
But even as several Senators praised the measure, they sent mixed messages about what they had accomplished.
At a news conference, many said they preferred a tougher measure that would limit House members to six years.
And they agreed that the measure they approved today, 11 to 6, would probably not pass the full Senate.


Assembly Will Try to Override Pataki's Veto on Pension Issue
The Democrats who control the Assembly will seek to override the first veto by Gov.
George E. Pataki, who rejected a bill on Wednesday to raise pensions for state and municipal workers.
The vote, scheduled for Monday, will put the Assembly Republicans in the awkward position of abandoning either the new Republican Governor or their support for government retirees.
And, in fact, forcing the Assembly Republicans into a tight political corner may be the most concrete victory the Democrats will get in seeking the override.
Even if the measure were to pass the Assembly and move to the Republican-led Senate, that body's leader said today that he was not inclined to pursue an override.


Executive Changes
CEL-SCI CORP., Alexandria, Va., a developer of treatments for cancer and AIDS, named Geert Kersten, its chief operating officer, to the additional position of chief executive, succeeding Maximilian de Clara, who continues as chairman and president.
WALT DISNEY CO., Burbank, Calif., appointed David Hendler, senior vice president of finance and administration for Disney's Buena Vista Home Video and Pay Television operations, senior vice president of its new interactive entertainment organization, called Disney Interactive.


Murray Perahia Cancels
The pianist Murray Perahia has canceled his appearance with the Israel Philharmonic on Monday evening at Avery Fisher Hall because of illness.
Yefim Bronfman is to replace him as soloist in Beethoven's Fourth Piano Concerto.
Information: (212) 875-5656.


Arafat Asks U.S. to Rescue Israeli Talks
Frustrated by the lack of progress in Middle East peace talks, the P.L.O.  leader, Yasir Arafat, called for United States intervention today to rescue his negotiations with Israel from stalemate.
Mr.
Arafat, who heads the Palestinian self-rule authority in the Gaza Strip, made a similar appeal to Russia and Norway, both of which have been brokers in getting the long-struggling enemies to talk to one another.


Democrats Call Republicans Too Lenient on Welfare
House Democrats today criticized the work requirement in the Republicans' latest welfare proposal as too lenient, and they said the plan should put more emphasis on finding jobs for poor people.
But the House Democratic Caucus refused to take a stand on one of the most important issues in the debate: whether poor people should have a right to cash assistance as an entitlement.


Jordan S. Lasher, 48, an Author Of Innovative Crossword Puzzles
Jordan S. Lasher, a chemical engineer whose childhood hobby of doing crossword puzzles led him to become an innovator in designing puzzles that emphasize creative themes and word play, died on Jan. 31 in his home in Novato, Calif.
He was 48.
The cause was a brain tumor, said his mother, Madeline Lasher of the Bronx.


Campus Drinking Problem Hasn't Gone Away
To the Editor:
Binge drinking is the most serious health and social problem on college campuses today.
"Tradition on the Wane: College Drinking" (front page, Feb. 5) paints an incomplete and misleading picture.
Based largely on a few student interviews, the article leaves the false impression that college students are moving away from excessive drinking and there is no longer a serious alcohol abuse problem on college campuses.


Dr. Eli Robins, 73, Challenger Of Freudian Psychiatry, Is Dead
Dr.
Eli Robins, a former chairman of the department of psychiatry at the Washington University School of Medicine in St.
Louis, and a leader of the movement to apply traditional medical and scientific standards to psychiatric research and treatment, died on Dec. 21 at Barnes Hospital in St.
Louis.
He was 73 and lived in Clayton, Mo.
The cause was complications from his 35-year battle with multiple sclerosis, a university spokesman said.


Religion Journal
In recent days, commemorations of the 50th anniversary of the liberation of the Auschwitz death camp have provided many people an opportunity to reflect on the horror of the Holocaust.
But for some, the remembrance has begged certain transcendent questions, not simply how could people have allowed the Holocaust to happen, but how could God?
The question was posed in a ceremony last month at the United States Holocaust Museum, by a member of the council that oversees the museum.


Street Smartness in 'Huoah'
The New York City Ballet's brilliant dancers dance as if there were no tomorrow in "Huoah," a fast-moving, slightly sinister new work by Kevin O'Day that is one of the season's most successful novelties.
Graham Fitkin, the 31-year-old British composer who was guest conductor at the ballet's premiere on Thursday night at the New York State Theater, has explained that "Huoah" is a phonetic title for his score, meant to evoke its repeated dragging brassy sounds.


Kashmir Still Awaits Promised Plebiscite
To the Editor:
Re "Kashmir Solution Exists Within India" (letter, Feb. 3) by Raju G. C. Thomas:


John H. Young, 82, A Business Lawyer
John Hendricks Young, a business and tax lawyer for more than 50 years in New York, died on Tuesday at his home in Bal Harbour, Fla.
A former resident of Manhattan and Whitehouse, N.J., he was 82.
The cause was lung cancer, his family said.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A New Member Completes a Foursome  Shanghai Quartet Walter Reade Theater


Campus Drinking Problem Hasn't Gone Away; Graduate School Masks
To the Editor:
In "Safety School Blues," (Op-Ed, Feb. 4) Brooke Norman complains that college admission systems encourage high school students to misrepresent themselves to gain acceptance to prestigious schools.
As a survivor of the admissions game at both an elite college and an elite law school, I have to warn her that after high school the situation only gets worse.


Holiday on Monday
President Lincoln's birthday is observed on Monday.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal and state offices open.
Municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICE Regular home delivery.
BANKS Open.
PARKING Alternate-side street cleaning regulations suspended.
SANITATION No pickups or street cleanings or recycling.
SCHOOLS Open.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Open.
TRANSPORTATION Subways, buses, the Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North on regular weekday schedules.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal offices open.
State and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICES Regular home delivery.
BANKS Some banks may be closed.
SCHOOLS Some school districts may be closed.
TRANSPORTATION N.J.
Transit buses and trains on regular weekday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal offices open.
State and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICES Regular home delivery.
BANKS Open.
SCHOOLS Some school districts may be closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on regular weekday schedule.


War in Russia Clouds Pact By Former Soviet Republics
The leaders of 12 former Soviet republics that make up the Commonwealth of Independent States agreed today to promote "peace and stability" among themselves despite ethnic and economic tensions.
But the agreement, which was intended to be a binding pact, ended up as a nonbinding "memorandum," and it was silent on the question of Russia's war in the breakaway region of Chechnya.


Three Last Poems
james Merrill, winner of the Pulitzer Prize for poetry and many other awards, died Monday at the age of 68.
These poems will appear in "A Scattering of Salts," to be published in March


Top Dog of 1994 Named
A 7-year-old German shepherd bitch, Ch.
Altana's Mystique, was honored last night for the second straight time as the top winning dog of the year, earning a $5,000 prize at the Hill's Science Diet Winners' Circle Awards dinner at the New York Hilton.
Mystique, who beat out 112,439 other dogs her 1994 competitions, was owned by Jane Firestone until she died of a heart attack on Dec. 22.
The shepherd is now owned by Jim Moses, his handler.


JAZZ
From 'Oh's' and 'La-La's' To Aggressive Hard Rock  Magnapop Mercury Lounge


Putting a Perfect Spin on the Title


A Sentence, Polished to a Shine?
Nobody knows how many Hazlet police cars Thomas Smith may have waxed.
And that's why a Monmouth County grand jury wants the state's Attorney General to tighten supervision of court sentences that require community service.
Mr.
Smith, a former Keansburg councilman, was convicted two years ago of a disorderly persons offense related to a gambling charge.
His punishment: 50 hours of community service, waxing cruisers in Hazlet for three weeks.


Corrections
A television review on Thursday about the PBS program "On Values: Talking With Peggy Noonan" described a guest on the program incorrectly.
Michael Lerner, the editor of Tikkun magazine, is not a rabbi.


At Track Meet, Reno Style, Joyner-Kersee Is Winning Bet
They were not betting on the No. 2 horse here today; they were betting on the No. 2 man.
Athletes arrived for these Reno Air Games carrying spikes, Ben-Gay and odds.
If gambling can turn thoroughbred racing into an institution, perhaps it can do the same for track and field, which usually only sneaks out from behind its bush in Olympic years.


Sailing Into Motherhood
In 1993, when the United States Navy reversed its policy of banning women from serving on combat ships, it moved into uncharted territory.
The questions flew: Would women and men living in close quarters for long stretches lower or lift morale?
Would they distract each other from their duties and interfere with readiness?
Then a seeming epidemic of shipboard pregnancies, beginning with a 10 percent pregnancy rate among the women on a supply ship during the Persian Gulf war, set off more alarms.
Some guidelines were clearly needed.


Discussing the Budget: Zzzzzz-z-z-z
No, the national budget is no O. J. Simpson.
Still, one might assume it has enough significance as a news story to sustain upscale interview programs.
But like other economic matters, budgets give television the shakes.
Everyone takes a shot at the subject, but it keeps confounding the pros.
On Sunday, "Meet the Press" brought on two masters of Senate and tube: Robert Byrd, the West Virginia Democrat who is leading the resistance to a balanced-budget amendment, and Bob Dole of Kansas, the Majority Leader, to discuss "Balanced Budget: To Be or Not to Be?"


Stocks Rise Modestly, With Consensus Absent
Even a report showing only modest inflation was not enough to inspire the listless financial markets yesterday, sending the leading stock indexes up only modestly.
After rising as much as 14 points, the Dow Jones industrial average closed at 3,939.07, up 6.39 points, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 stock index rose 1.27 points, to 481.46.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index rose 4.99 points, to 790.43.


Sailing Into Motherhood
In 1993, when the United States Navy reversed its policy of banning women from serving on combat ships, it moved into uncharted territory.
The questions flew: Would women and men living in close quarters for long stretches lower or lift morale?
Would they distract each other from their duties and interfere with readiness?
Then a seeming epidemic of shipboard pregnancies, beginning with a 10 percent pregnancy rate among the women on a supply ship during the Persian Gulf war, set off more alarms.
Some guidelines were clearly needed.


Repeating Grades 1-12: Do the Daiquiris Help?
The latest moron to hit the movie screen is Billy Madison (Adam Sandler), a goofy, daiquiri-swilling loafer who is forced to repeat grades 1 through 12 by his millionaire father (Darren McGavin) if he wants to take control of the father's Fortune 500 hotel chain.
Reducing his schooling to Education Lite, Billy devotes two weeks to each grade, spends most of that time ogling a teacher (Bridgette Wilson) and has final exams set up like rounds in a television game show.
Jim Carrey could win a Rhodes scholarship under conditions like these.
On the dumb-dumber-dumbest scale, Mr.
Sandler doesn't match Mr.
Carrey's cunning or good cheer, but he's well up the food chain from Pauly Shore.
This "Saturday Night Live" regular is at his most bearable in "Billy Madison," which is to say that the random idiocies and squeaky-voiced singing are kept under control.
Even if this film doesn't live up to the absurdist, "Groundhog Day"-type potential of its premise, it succeeds as a reasonably smart no-brainer.
If you've ever had a yen to relive the third grade, this must be the next best thing.


With Pain and Guilt, Dresden Marks Firebombing
From his position as navigator of a Lancaster bomber, Colin Campbell said, the city seemed a "carpet of fire" glimpsed between the clouds.
Eighteen thousand feet below, in what Germans called "Florence on the Elbe," Helga Siewers, a young German Red Cross nurse, knew that part of the fiery carpet was woven from the 1,000 straw mattresses she and others had spread in a school as beds for 750 refugees fleeing the advancing Soviet Army.
She knew, she said, because the mattresses were burning directly above them, threatening to roast them in the basement where she and the refugees had taken shelter.


Nynex Says Caller ID Problem Is Resolved
Nynex said yesterday that it had finished correcting a problem in which 30,000 customers who had been promised a privacy feature that blocks Caller ID had not been receiving the protection.
Mark Marchand, a spokesman, said that by Tuesday all customers who requested Caller ID blocking would get a letter from Nynex telling them whether they have always had the block, or whether they are in the group that just got it.


Rebounding in Japan, Toyota's Profit Is Up
In a sign that the worst may be over for Japan's slumping automobile industry, the Toyota Motor Corporation today reported sharply improved earnings for the first six months of its fiscal year.
Citing both the recovering Japanese market and its success in cutting costs, Toyota said that its parent company's net income for the six months that ended on Dec. 31 jumped 73.8 percent, to 68.5 billion yen ($685 million).
Sales grew 2.1 percent, to 4.07 trillion yen ($40.7 billion).


INSIDE
Airlines vs. Travel Agents
Two airlines, American and Northwest, plan to follow Delta in limiting commissions for domestic air fares, angering travel agents.
Page 33.
A Corporate Kingdom Lost
William Agee resigned as chief executive of Morrison Knudsen, closing a difficult chapter for the giant construction company.
Page 33.
Support for Head of Rutgers
The board of Rutgers affirmed support for the university's president, who is under fire for remarks about disadvantaged students.
Page 21.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press on Monday about Florida's decision to suspend the license of Dr.
Steven Chase Brigham, the medical director at a Pensacola abortion clinic, described disciplinary action against him in New York and New Jersey incorrectly.
He was accused of performing an illegal third-trimester abortion in New Jersey.
He has denied that accusation, and the matter remains under investigation.
His license to practice medicine in New York was revoked because of findings that he had injured two patients during abortions.
The New Jersey complaint played no role in the loss of his New York license.


Republicans Agree to Soften A Bill to Curb Investor Suits
In a compromise with conservative Democrats, House Republicans agreed today to soften a bill that would make it more difficult for investors to sue publicly traded companies in securities fraud cases.
Convinced they have enough votes to push ahead, Republican sponsors said they planned to bring the bill to a vote by the full House Commerce Committee by the end of next week.


A President-Turned-Patton Directs Peru's Jungle War
Alberto K. Fujimori, known to many on Wall Street as the President who gave his country the world's highest economic growth rate last year, is now reveling in a new role, as Peru's Patton.
"Today, we bombed Tiwintza with 17 planes -- it was a saturation bombing," Mr.
Fujimori said in an interview Thursday night.
He was recounting his order to have Russian-made Sukhoi 22 bombers "soften up" an Ecuadorean military redoubt on an Amazon hilltop near the border.
"Our Mirages gave cover in case enemy planes appeared," he said, referring to Peru's French-built fighter planes.


Sports of The Times; Baseball Is The Business Of Congress
AMONG the many unconscionable aspects in the major league players-owners clash is the failure of Congress to act when it has been called upon to do so by, among others, the President of the United States.
The mealy-mouthed utterings by our honorable representatives -- "We don't want to set a precedent every time there's a problem, they come to the U.S. Congress," said House Speaker Newt Gingrich, Republican of Georgia -- ring false.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Three Aspects of Brahms, Three Complementary Artists  Bargemusic Under the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn


Topics of The Times; Mr. Pataki Sends a Message
Gov.
George Pataki of New York has temporarily set aside whatever lingering grudge he may hold against Mayor Rudolph Giuliani.
As the Mayor had hoped, the Governor rejected the State Legislature's ill-timed attempt this week to raise pensions for state and municipal workers.
His veto sends a strong warning against increased spending -- even for politically influential pensioners -- as Albany begins to grapple with next year's $5 billion budget gap.
In better times, there would be a case for an increase; pension levels have not been raised since 1988.
But not now.
The bill would have imposed an unaffordable burden, especially on New York City.
The city, which has its own retirement system, has no reserve fund to pay the added costs for the first few years.


After 311 Consecutive Games, Graves Is Forced to Sit One Out
For the first time since he joined the Rangers in 1991, Adam Graves won't be in the lineup for a regular-season game when the team visits the Tampa Bay Lightning on Saturday night.
Graves, who had played in 259 consecutive regular-season games for New York, checked into a hospital tonight to be treated for an infection in his left elbow.
The problem began about 10 days ago when Graves was cut in a game.
Because of the location of the cut and the rigors of hockey, the wound hasn't healed.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies  Two more airlines plan to reduce travel-agent commissions for domestic air fares.
American and Northwest said they would follow Delta in setting limits.
A unit of the Russian natural gas giant will invest $4 million and take a 15 percent stake in SI Diamond Technology.  [ 35. ] Cigna has averted a reduction in ratings by reorganizing its property and liability insurance operations.  [ 35. ] Revlon merged its North American and international divisions in an effort to bring global consistency to its operations.  [ 35. ] The Economy  Producer prices rose a modest three-tenths of 1 percent in January.
For many critics, last month's earthquake in which few were covered showed how well Japan's regulated and highly profitable insurers have managed to evade risk.  [ 33. ] Markets  Stocks drifted higher in listless trading.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index increased 1.27 points.  [ 34. ] Bond prices fell as the market digested $40 billion in new notes and bonds.
The producer price data drew a mixed reaction.  [ 43. ] The dollar followed United States bonds lower.  [ 44. ] Copper prices climbed on a report that showed a drop in inventories.
Coffee and crude oil prices rose.  [ 44. ] Your Money  John B. Neff is doubtful about the stock market in general.
Mr.
Neff, manager of the Windsor Fund since 1964, discussed stocks, interest rates and natural gas in a recent interview.  [ 31. ] Mutual funds are growing too big for some small investors.
Some funds are raising the minimum amount required to open an account.
And Fidelity Investments and other funds are increasing fees for maintaining very small accounts.  [ 31. ] Lenders and builders are trying new incentives to lure home buyers, as mortgage rates rise and home sales fall.
Early rate locks, small cash payments, warranties and discount financing are among the extras being offered.  [ 31. ] The I.R.S. would appraise donated art for $3,000 under a proposal.
The plan is aimed at reducing taxpayer uncertainty and the delay between the time donors submit an appraisal and the time they are assured that the I.R.S. does not disagree.  [ 32. ]


The Neediest Cases; Donors Repay the Kindnesses of Others
Donations to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund might be dwindling as the campaign nears an end, but the letters that come with them are no less interesting.
Now that the holiday season is well past, contributions are more spontaneous.
Several donors have offered unusual explanations for their last-minute gifts.
Last week, the fund received $20 from Alexandra Acosta, a reward her husband received after finding a wallet and mailing it to the owner.


Cable Company Brings Education to Students
To the Editor:
Frank Rich in "PBS -- Better Than Nothing" (column, Feb. 5) stoops to tabloid journalism in castigating Jones Intercable as a "circling vulture."


Performance Systems Buys Pipeline Network
The Pipeline Network Inc., a popular New York City-based Internet service and software company, has been sold to one of the country's largest Internet service companies, which plans to expand it into a national service next month, executives of the two said yesterday.
Peformance Systems International Inc., a privately held company based in Herndon, Va., said it would use Pipeline's consumer software and technology as the basis for a consumer-oriented service on the Internet.
Unlike many other companies that charge an hourly fee for access to the Internet, Performance Systems said it would offer unlimited access for a flat monthly fee, which has not yet been set.


JAZZ
A Three-Night Showcase Of Orchestral Works  Anthony Braxton, composer Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea


Agee Is Out at Morrison Knudsen
After an emotional six-hour board meeting here that ended late Thursday night, the Morrison Knudsen Corporation announced early today that William Agee had resigned from all of his positions at the giant construction and transit equipment company, effective immediately.
Mr.
Agee, 57, left this morning to return to his home south of here in Pebble Beach and was unavailable for comment, a company spokesman said at a news conference.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Another Species Of Mezzo-Soprano  Jard van Nes The Frick Collection


Donald Collier, Museum Curator And Chicago Anthropologist, 83
Donald Collier, a former curator at the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago and a leading figure in the anthropology of North and South American Indians, died on Jan. 23 at Highland Hospital in Oakland, Calif.
He was 83 and lived in Oakland.
His family said he died of injuries from a fall.
For more than half a century, Dr.
Collier specialized in making anthropology come alive in museums and writings, particularly at the Field Museum, where he was curator of South and Central American archaeology and ethnology from 1941 to 1976 and chief curator of anthropology from 1964 to 1970.
Dr.
Collier taught at the University of Chicago from 1950 to 1970 and instilled a generation of anthropologists with strong ethical standards, which many museums throughout the world now apply.
For example, he helped stop museums from acquiring illicitly recovered antiquities.
He also helped organize and teach one of the earliest courses in training anthropologists how to create museum exhibits.
He also had a strong interest in the concerns of American Indians, particularly the maintenance and display in museums of human remains and personal artifacts.
In 1947, he was co-author of "Indians before Columbus," for many years a basic reference on archeology in North America.
He organized numerous exhibitions, including "Indian Art of the Americas" at the Field Museum in 1959, and "Ancient Ecuador," which was shown in five cities from 1975 to 1977.
Dr.
Collier came from a family steeped in anthropology.
His father, John Collier, was United States Commissioner of Indian Affairs in the Franklin D. Roosevelt Administration and a central figure in creating the subdiscipline of applied anthropology.
Dr.
Collier's late wife, Malcolm Carr Collier, was an anthropologist who studied the Navajo and was director of the anthropology curriculum study project of the American Anthropological Association.
His brother, John Collier Jr., was a leading visual anthropologist and his brother-in-law, Rene d'Harnoncourt, was the first chairman of the Indian Arts and Crafts Board in the New Deal and for many years director of the Museum of Modern Art in Manhattan.
Dr.
Collier was a founding trustee of the Council on Museum Anthropology, chairman of the Institute of Andean Research and president of the Central States Anthropological Society.
He was born in Sparkill, N.Y., and graduated from the University of California at Berkeley in 1933.
He received a Ph.D. in anthropology from the University of Chicago in 1954.
He is survived by two sons, Bruce, of Lexington, Mass., and David, of Berkeley, and four grandchildren.


Writer Arrested After Sending Violent Fiction Over Internet
A University of Michigan student who was jailed after publishing a sexually violent work of fiction about a classmate on the global Internet computer network was denied bail yesterday.
Magistrate Thomas A. Carlson of Federal District Court in Detroit said that although the student, 20-year-old Abraham Jacob Alkhabaz, who uses the name Jake Baker, had never physically approached or spoken with the classmate, the writing suggested that Mr.
Baker was "disturbed" and "dangerous," and that he was "a ticking time bomb waiting to go off."


Eric Q. Bohlin, 85; Led a Pencil Maker
Eric Q. Bohlin, who was president of Eberhard Faber Inc., a maker of pencils, died on Jan. 24 at Morton Plant Hospital in Clearwater, Fla.
He was 85 and lived in Palm Harbor, Fla.
The cause was complications of pulmonary and heart disease, said his son, Peter, of Wilkes-Barre, Pa.


A Looser Tie Can Mean Less Job Security
To the Editor:
Why is everyone so ebullient over the change in fashion at the International Business Machines Corporation (news article, Feb. 7)?
Does I.B.M. and everyone else really think clothes make the corporation?
I.B.M.'s loosening of the tie signifies just that -- loosening of the unspoken tie between corporate parent and employee.
No longer can obedient workers expect to stay on Daddy's good side, that is, his payroll, simply by dressing the way he says to.


G.O.P. Senator Says Democrats Obstruct a Death Penalty Bill
Frustration with the slow pace of negotiations over the death penalty boiled over today as the Republican Senate majority leader accused Assembly Democrats of trying to block the legislation.
In a news conference, Senator Joseph L. Bruno, a Brunswick Republican, charged that the Democrats had stalled talks for so long that he now thought they were seeking to prevent reinstatement of capital punishment altogether.
Mr.
Bruno said the Senate would approve its own bill on Tuesday, a modified version of death-penalty legislation that passed both houses of the Legislature last year.


Nazran Journal; Mothers Act to Save Their Sons From War
Acting a little like a suburban clubwoman, Vera Semifragova was cheerily purposeful as she shuffled through lists of names of captured soldiers, counted heads for a bus trip into Chechnya and scolded stragglers.
It was only when she spoke the name of her 20-year-old son, Yevgeny, that she began to cry.


More Foes for Surgeon General Nominee
Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, usually an ally of the Clinton Administration, today called the President's choice for Surgeon General "a political blunder in the extreme," and said he would oppose it.
But in a sign that the White House is still committed to the nomination of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. for Surgeon General and can flex some muscle to preserve it, Mr.
Biden retracted his statement several hours later after Administration aides urged his office to do so.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 2 about flooding in the Netherlands misidentified Marijke Brunt.
She is a biologist with the Foundation for Nature and Environment, not the Dutch Environment Minister.
The article also misstated the length of the country's network of dikes.
The Dutch Government says they stretch 1,750 miles, not 1,500 miles.


'Herodiade' Cast Change
The baritone Yuri Mazurok and the bass Philip Kang, both of whom are ill, have canceled their appearances with the Opera Orchestra of New York in Tuesday night's concert performance of Massenet's "Herodiade" at Carnegie Hall.
Eduardo DelCampo will sing the baritone role of Herode, and Frank Barr, the bass role of Phanuel.
Renee Fleming, Grace Bumbry and John Keyes remain as Salome, Herodias and Jean le Baptiste, respectively.
Eve Queler conducts.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Planning Battle Is Settled
What began six years ago as a plan to help the township pay for state-ordered low-income housing turned into a rancorous legal battle that threatened to burden residents with a $4.5 million penalty.
The battle ended this week under a court-approved settlement between Berkeley Heights and its adversary, the Connell Realty and Development Company.


No Headline
"The bombs had thrown people into the trees. The streets had broken up. The water mains had broken. The gas pipes were on fire. It was how you would imagine hell." -- MATTHIAS GRIEBEL, recalling the bombing of Dresden, when he was 8 years old.  [ 3:1. ]


2 Airlines Join Delta In Fee Cap
A day after Delta Air Lines said it would lower travel-agent commissions for domestic air fares, two other carriers, American and Northwest, followed suit yesterday.
And some travel agents, whose anger over Delta's decision has given way to embittered resignation, said they would start charging some customers a fee for writing tickets.
The fees will mostly affect leisure travelers and small-business travelers, not corporate customers, who have contracts with travel agencies.


A Shabby Welcome Mat; Harlem Hotel Is a First Home for Hundreds of Africans
The West Africans have a jaunty phrase for their rite of passage in the new land, like the name of a dance step: "doing the 110."
Hard smiles accompany the words.
America doesn't present itself as a jolly dance to these French-speaking migrants, but as "cent-dix," 55 W. 110th Street, the Park View Hotel, a forbidding gray hulk at the edge of Harlem.


JAZZ
Broadening Folk Songs Beyond Tradition  A. Leroy, composer Bessie Schonberg Theater


Sentence in Hurley Case
The man convicted of slamming into the car of Sacramento Kings guard BOBBY HURLEY was sentenced to three years' probation yesterday in Sacramento, Calif.
DANIEL WIELAND was also given a $300 fine after he was convicted of misdemeanor reckless driving in a retrial.
The first trial ended in a hung jury.


Top Bratton Aide Quits in Anger And Tensions With Mayor Grow
Months of subterranean friction between City Hall and Police Headquarters -- much of it involving the Police Commissioner's high profile -- burst to the surface yesterday with the resignation of one of the Commissioner's closest aides, the man in charge of public relations.
The emotional and teary resignation of the aide, John Miller -- after his refusal to follow orders to reorganize his staff -- came on a day when the city government was rocked by the surprise dismissal of at least two dozen more mid-level managers the Mayor felt were not serving his agenda.


Indian Point Nuclear Plant May Be Restarted in Spring
New York Power Authority officials said this week that they plan to reopen a nuclear power plant in Westchester County this spring, two years after shutting it down because of safety concerns.
Before the authority can reopen the plant, known as Indian Point 3, it needs approval from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the Federal agency that regulates the nuclear industry.


Thieves in the Idea Marketplace
"I can't deal in my mind with ROM's," Beverly Sills confessed.
"My children are better at computers than I am."
But Miss Sills, the chairman of Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, retired soprano and former New York City Opera director, said she had caught on fast when she walked the streets of China and Japan and saw "thousands, literally thousands, of my CD's with covers I had never seen before."


Junxia Coaching, Too
The Chinese women's long distance running star WANG JUNXIA and a teammate have taken over coaching responsibilities of their team, which has been battered by problems in recent months, according to a report in the China Sports Daily yesterday in Beijing, China.
The report did not mention the former coach, the controversial MA JUNREN, who catapulted to fame in 1993 when Wang and her teammates broke several world long-distance records.


Medical Examiner Appointed
A former New York City medical examiner has been hired to do the same job for Cape May and Cumberland counties.
The official, Dr.
Elliot Gross, 60, will be responsible for investigating deaths in the two counties, which have merged services.


Flawless Routine Adds to Leader's Rare Qualities
Tonia Kwiatkowski had two things none of the other leaders had today in the women's short program at the United States figure skating championships: a clean performance and a college degree.
At a time when youth is threatening to overwhelm the amateur side of the sport, a 23-year-old with a double major in psychology and communications finished unexpectedly ahead of the teen-agers Nicole Bobek and Michelle Kwan with a presentation that, if not inspiring, was at least free of mistakes.


In America; Lawrence Must Go
When Al Campanis made a similar comment he was fired by the Los Angeles Dodgers.
If Newt Gingrich ever dared to express such a thought there would be furious demonstrations from coast to coast (and glee in the hearts of liberals everywhere).


Civics for Spenders
Under an agreement with a bank and two long-distance telephone companies, the township will offer a civic-minded Mastercard.
For all purchases made with the card, the township would receive 1 percent of the purchase price, as well as 10 percent of the cost of all long-distance calls made with the card.
The township administrator, Joseph Verruni said Wall will use the proceeds to preserve park land and avoid tax increases.
South Orange has a similar agreement.


Christian Right Issues a Threat To the G.O.P.
The head of the Christian Coalition warned today that religious conservatives would not support the Republican Presidential ticket in 1996 unless both candidates opposed abortion rights, threatening to divide the party on the very issue many had hoped to keep out of the next campaign.
Ralph Reed, executive director of the coalition, which counts 1.5 million members in 1,200 chapters, drew cheers when he said at the Conservative Political Action Conference here that "pro-life and pro-family voters, a third of the electorate, will not support a party that retreats from its noble and historic defense of traditional values and which has a national ticket or a platform that does not share Ronald Reagan's belief in the sanctity of innocent human life."


Preventing Teen Pregnancy Results in Praise for Nominee
Ideals that are not propped up with practical solutions do not stand much of a chance in the John Henry Hale housing project here.
Young women who live in and around the neighborhood say morality alone has seldom saved anyone from the cycle of teen pregnancy.
Amelia Turner, 18, is a five-year veteran of I Have a Future, an after-school program that teaches teen-agers to delay sex and childbearing, allowing them to build careers and lives.
The program, started in 1987 by President Clinton's nominee for Surgeon General, Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr., combines job training, tutoring, medical services and family planning.


METRO DIGEST
AS TENSIONS RISE, TOP BRATTON AIDE QUITS Months of subterranean friction between City Hall and Police Headquarters -- much of it involving Police Commissioner William J. Bratton's high profile -- burst to the surface with the resignation of one of the Commissioner's closest aides, the man in charge of public relations.
The emotional resignation of the aide, John Miller, followed his refusal to follow orders to reorganize his department.
Page 1.


Corrections
A brief report in the On Stage, and Off column in Weekend yesterday about the closing of "Nunsense" on Feb. 26 misstated the theater at which the musical is playing.
It is the Douglas Fairbanks Theater, not the John Houseman.


A Lifeline to the Music of Times Sq.
THE jazz men started trickling into the weekly jam session around 7:30 P.M.
Some exchanged hugs as they entered the union hall on 48th Street off Eighth Avenue, and some just sat by themselves in the well-lighted room.
There was no smoke, no booze, just coffee and cookies laid out in the back.
On this night, Vishnu Woods, a bassist who teaches music at the State University at Purchase, was directing traffic.
"Let's get some people up here," he said.


Bill to Curb Antitrust Exemption On Way
If any optimists remain, if anyone believes a negotiated settlement with the owners will propel striking baseball players back to work, developments in Washington and New York yesterday served as a sharp reminder that the best hope still lies with Congress or the National Labor Relations Board.
Although Congress is not prepared to pass President Clinton's binding arbitration bill, it will get a chance to endorse a bipartisan bill that, if adopted, would prompt the players to end their strike, which today completes its sixth month.


Indian Point Nuclear Plant May Be Restarted in Spring
New York Power Authority officials said this week that they plan to reopen a nuclear power plant in Westchester County this spring, two years after shutting it down because of safety concerns.
Before the authority can reopen the plant, known as Indian Point 3, it needs approval from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the Federal agency that regulates the nuclear industry.


Record Pact for Irvin
MICHAEL IRVIN signed a five-year, $15 million contract yesterday that will make him the highest-paid receiver in N.F.L. history, surpassing the Los Angeles Raiders' TIM BROWN.
"It's important we understand the direction this team is going," Irvin said.
"We are determined to keep everything together and win the championship again."


Good Girl in a Bloody Greek Legend
You probably don't remember Chrysothemis.
Unlike her relatives in "Iphigenia and Other Daughters," Ellen McLaughlin's revisionist take on the House of Atreus, she has had no famous plays, operas, ballets or complexes named for her.
But at least according to Sophocles, she was part of the most famous and bloodiest family of Greek legend.
She was a good girl: she didn't kill anyone, and no one ever paid much attention to her.
In this self-conscious meditation of a play, directed by David Esbjornson at the Classic Stage Company, Ms.
McLaughlin lets Chrysothemis (Deborah Hedwall) have her say about "this pallid little female life we run out together." Women are not, she observes with dull resignation, "part of history." Forever on the edge of the greater drama, and largely unaware of its significance, she is the Rozencrantz and Guildenstern of a monumental story.


Deal Collapses for Sports Store At Chelsea Piers Development
A dispute over plans to open a gigantic Herman's Sporting Goods store in the Chelsea section of Manhattan came to a sudden halt after developers of the site failed to reach terms with the retailer.
Facing the threat of a lawsuit, officials of Chelsea Piers management, which is converting four piers between 17th and 23d Streets into a sports and entertainment complex, said they reached agreement with Herman's officials to cancel plans for a 42,000-square-foot store at the site.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ARMCO INC., Pittsburgh, a maker of stainless and specialty steel, will sell its unprofitable Baltimore-based Eastern Stainless Corp. unit to Avesta Sheffield A.B., Stockholm, for cash and the assumption of certain liabilities.
FULTON FINANCIAL CORP., Lancaster, Pa., a bank holding company, has agreed to acquire Delaware National Bankshares Corp., Georgetown, Del., in a stock deal valued at about $17.1 million in stock.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.95
3.14
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.78
5.75
3.24
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.10
6.06
3.38
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.60
7.57
5.87
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.67
7.68
6.40
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.53
8.50
7.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.53
6.51
5.53
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


No Sympathy Card From Wall Street
Shares of Gibson Greeting Inc. tumbled yesterday after the company, a maker of greeting cards and gift wrap, said it expected to report losses for 1994 and the first two quarters of 1995.
It also hired CS First Boston to "develop strategies for noncore assets."
In recent months Gibson has cut its work force, reported a fourth-quarter charge, lost the head of its card division, dismissed its auditors and suffered an embarrassing $3 million loss from derivatives.


Plans for Bombings Left by Terrorists, Authorities Assert
A computer disk and documents left in a Manila apartment by a gang of Middle Eastern terrorists provide details of an airliner bombing and a plot against the Pope that authorities suspect were planned by Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the man accused of masterminding the World Trade Center bombing, law-enforcement officials said today.
Federal agents suspect that Mr.
Yousef supplied the financial backing, organizational know-how and technical expertise for the plots, in much the same way that prosecutors say he orchestrated the Trade Center bombing in February 1993.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  REBEL LEADER UNMASKED
The leader of the Mexican rebels, whose identity was revealed this week, is a Jesuit-trained former college professor who quit his job 11 years ago and who was considered an idealist. 1


Sex Offender Admits to Attack
Edmund M. Croteau served eight years of a 30-year sentence for the 1977 murder and attempted sodomy of an 8-year-old Nutley boy.
Yesterday, he acknowledged another sex attack.


I.R.S. Plans a Sideline: Appraising Donated Art
FOR people who donate valuable works of art, the Internal Revenue Service is proposing a new deal: For $3,000 it will tell you before you file your income tax return exactly how big a tax deduction you can take.
Is this a case of no good deed going unpunished?
Not at all, specialists say.
Most of the philanthropic minded will probably consider the offer a bargain.


Cecil H. Roy; Voice for Animated Films, 94
Cecil H. Roy, who supplied the voices for innumerable radio and animated film characters, died on Jan. 26 at Englewood Hospital in Englewood, N.J.
She was 94 and lived at the Actors' Extended Care Facility in Englewood.
Ms.
Roy was born in St.
Paul and reared in Oklahoma.
She began her acting career with a stock company in Chicago, but soon turned to radio work, where her vocal versatility quickly made her known as "The Girl of a Thousand Voices." Able to imitate anyone from a crying baby to a cranky octogenarian, she frequently performed more than a score of character roles during a single hourlong radio program.


The Dropout
When it comes to withdrawal announcements, politicians are under no obligation to practice full disclosure.
Few can muster the candor of the late Marvin Griffin when he announced that he was retiring from gubernatorial politics in Georgia because of "health problems." Exactly what health problem? he was asked.
"The voters are sick of me," quoth Mr.
Griffin.
We welcome former Vice President Dan Quayle's assurance that his physical health is good and had nothing to do with his decision.
But his political problems were obvious to any seasoned eye, and his purported reason for dropping out of the Republican Presidential race -- an unwillingness to disrupt his family's life -- was the least of them.
Campaign consultants in both parties knew Mr.
Quayle's central disability.
A majority of American voters and many leaders in his own party regard him as a lightweight who lacks the intellectual substance to lead the nation.


Rangers Bring Out The Best In the Devils
The Devils had every reason to be upbeat the day after Thursday's 4-1 victory over the Rangers.
Of course, it could not be compared with winning a playoff series; it was a game the Devils needed much more than the defending Stanley Cup champions did.
"This was nothing like the playoffs, but it was still a win against the Stanley Cup champions and our biggest rivals," Bobby Holik said.
"It was like a fight for territorial rights."


Oregon's Brooks Picked As the Rams' Head Coach
RICH BROOKS, who capped an 18-year career at Oregon with the school's first Rose Bowl trip since 1958, was hired yesterday as coach of the Los Angeles Rams.
Brooks said he signed a four-year contract with the National Football League team.
Terms were not disclosed.
"After 18 years here, I felt a change would be good for me," Brooks said.
"I really believe the ultimate in the coaching profession is the N.F.L. The challenge of being a head coach in that league is very intriguing."


An Old Hand Takes a Look At the Market
John B. Neff, who will step down at the end of this year as manager of the Windsor Fund, has compiled an admirable record over the years with a value-oriented approach -- finding underpriced stocks -- and a willingness to hold shares for the long haul.
The fund, which he has managed since 1964, is the largest stock fund in the Vanguard family, with $11 billion in assets, and has turned in annualized returns of 16 percent over the last 15 years.


Jam Session: All-Star Weekend Is Here
The song is "Nobody." It was written by a very big somebody, Shaquille O'Neal, who will perform it for everybody tonight at a bash held by MTV.
"It's about being yourself," O'Neal said.
"It's about not letting anyone else influence who you are."


Mitigate the Death Penalty
Gov.
George Pataki and New York State Assembly leaders have been huddling in secret to draft a death-penalty bill that the State Legislature will then pass with little debate or scrutiny.
That is the usual way Albany does business.
It is an unacceptable way to deal with an odious measure of great consequence.
Any bill the leaders compose must be fully aired in legislative hearings, with experts and lay witnesses testifying about its constitutionality, the practice of other states, the costs and the procedures needed to insure fairness.


CHRONICLE
IRIS LOVE, the socially prominent archeologist, knew something had gone awry when the invitations to her annual dachshund party began coming back in the mail this week.
"A friend of mine, Skip Little, had kindly said he would help me address them on the computer," she said yesterday.
"Either he had difficulty reading my writing or he inverted numbers, but they came back, first in a trickle, then en masse."
As a result, Ms.
Love has been running around town, personally delivering the invitations to the party, to be held at Tavern on the Green on Monday night.


Producer Price Index Up 0.3% Last Month
Despite sharply accelerating costs for many basic materials, inflation remained at bay in January as American producers obtained only modest price increases on goods at the stage just before they reach consumers, Government figures showed today.
The Producer Price Index for Finished Goods -- what companies receive for items ready for sale to the final business or individual user -- rose three-tenths of 1 percent, as the biggest jump in energy prices since August was offset by the biggest decline in food prices since May.


JAZZ
In Energetic Pursuit Of Anything but Serenity  Thomas Chapin, Saxophonist Iridium


Hartford Veterans Agency Nominee Assailed for Remarks
In his 18 years in the State Legislature, Eugene A. Migliaro, Gov.
John G. Rowland's nominee to head the State Veterans Affairs Department, established a reputation for blunt language that tested the limits of acceptable speech.
For instance, after referring to homosexuals as "lollipops," Mr.
Migliaro, a Republican, was formally reprimanded by his colleagues in the state House of Representatives.
Seven years later, he still refuses to apologize for his remarks.


Holy Bull Burns Up the Track in Workout
Holy Bull, the Horse of the Year and the man of the hour, stopped traffic this morning when he spun three-eighths of a mile in 353/5 seconds in his dress-rehearsal workout for Saturday's Donn Handicap.
The performance even drew raves from his owner-trainer, Jimmy Croll.


2 ANTI-CRIME BILLS CLEARED BY HOUSE BY LARGE MARGINS
With strong bipartisan support, the House passed two more bills today in the Republicans' anti-crime series that supporters said would jam the revolving door of justice and keep criminals from going free.
One bill, approved 265 to 156, would provide extra money for states to build prisons on the condition that they make inmates serve longer terms.
The other, passed 380 to 20, would crack down on illegal aliens who commit crimes, including deporting them promptly after their release.


Finding a Sideline that Pays and Satisfies
As Marjorie Bride entered her 50's, business dried up for her as a real estate broker in Portland, Me.
She wanted a sideline business that would provide both an income and some flexibility to care for her family.
Furthermore, she wanted to cultivate her love of travel, art and the outdoors.
She hit on a travel tour business and began Experience Maine.
The tour company specializes in creating packages for groups and individuals with specific interests - sports, arts or history - who want to see Maine through the eyes of the locals.
Someone interested in art may get an opportunity to have dinner with local artisans instead of just visiting galleries, for example.


New Orange County Official
Orange County, struggling with bankruptcy, took a leap into the unknown today by announcing that it was retaining a corporate turnaround specialist and banker as its new chief executive.
The county's Board of Supervisors said after a series of meetings that it had decided to hire William J. Popejoy, the former chairman of American Savings and Loan, to rework its budget and lead it out of bankruptcy.


CHRONICLE
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON came to New York yesterday and announced that the United States will sign an international convention on children's rights in honor of the late James P. Grant, the former head of Unicef.
She addressed a memorial service for Mr.
Grant at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
The United States would be the 177th country to sign the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.
"We owe it to him and to the children, to whom he dedicated his life," Mrs.
Clinton said.


Fort Worth Journal; Group Is 'Dead Serious' About Killing Thugs
"We are tired of being afraid," proclaims the leaflet for Dead Serious Inc., an anti-crime group here.
"So we are doing something about it."
For $10 in annual dues, members get two "Dead Serious" stickers, plus an occasional newsletter.


Mexican Troops Seize Rebel Base but Don't Find Leader
Heavily armed Government troops swept into rebel territory in Chiapas state today, taking control of the rebels' forest headquarters in Lacandon without firing a shot, officials said.
But they apparently missed their prime target, the leader known as Subcommander Marcos, who was publicly identified on Thursday night as a 37-year-old former professor of communications named Rafael Sebastian Guillen Vicente.


'Jihad' Gives No Proof Of Muslim Terrorism
To the Editor:
Re A. M. Rosenthal's "Jihad in America" (column, Feb. 3): Once again Muslims and their charitable organizations are accused of supporting terrorism overseas through fund-raising, military training and logistics.
No real evidence of these activities has been offered by any credible source.
Mr.
Rosenthal merely cites the work of Steven Emerson, the producer of the PBS program "Jihad in America."


Kobe Chinatown Booms As Post-Quake Market
Hiroshi Izuni's grocery store is still a mess, with puddles of congealed honey on the floor where jars shattered after the devastating earthquake last month, and his appearance is as frenetic and chaotic as his shop's.
"I've got to open, I've got to," Mr.
Izuni mumbled, casting a vicious glance at a competitor's grocery store across the narrow street.
"Look at him -- he's already open. I'm behind!"


Interest Rates Rule the Utilities Group
Utilities funds, traditionally viewed as low-growth, high-yielding investments, rallied with the bond market when interest rates fell in 1992 and 1993, producing unusually high returns.
The flip side came in 1994, when the Federal Reserve pushed up interest rates six times.
The bond market fell, and so did utilities funds.
The average utility fund lost 8.3 percent, compared with a more modest loss of 1.7 percent for diversified domestic stock funds.


Eleanor Goff-Doerfler, Dancer, 71
Eleanor Goff-Doerfler, a modern dancer in the 1940's and 50's and a physical therapist, died last Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 71.
The cause was AIDS, said her daughter, Trina Doerfler.


Incentives Growing For Buyers Of Homes
WITH interest rates rising and home sales slipping, bankers and builders are trying to entice home buyers with such goodies as small cash payments, warranties, locked-in interest rates and discount financing.
The inducements come on top of a substantial easing in credit terms early last year.
To assist low-income home buyers, many lenders started permitting borrowers to have higher levels of debt, to have less than two months of cash after closing and to put just 3 percent down when the Federal National Mortgage Association agreed to begin buying such loans.


The Subject Is Roses


REVLON MERGES UNITS IN EFFORT AT CONSISTENCY
The Revlon Consumer Products Corporation, the investor Ronald O. Perelman's sprawling cosmetics empire, has merged its North American and international divisions in an effort to bring global consistency to its operations.
George Fellows, the former Colgate-Palmolive executive who was hired by Revlon in 1993 to wrest order out of the chaos that was then reigning in the North American unit, has been named president and chief operating officer of Revlon Consumer Products Worldwide, which will encompass about 85 percent of the corporation's sales.
He will report to Jerry W. Levin, president and chief executive of the corporation.
Both men were unavailable for comment yesterday because, the company said, they were en route to Europe.
Revlon has been working for the last four years to impose consistency on its packaging, marketing and computerized management systems around the world, and the consolidation of the two units formalizes those efforts.


Fraud Charged in South Africa
Harold and Caroline Thomas say their financial plan would have helped to rebuild the South African economy.
But a judge in Johannesburg was skeptical yesterday and ordered the Thomases, who are from Hackensack, jailed on charges of trying to defraud a South African bank of $700 million.
A South African banker who is serving a prison term for fraud told the court that the Thomases had promised him money and a Lamborghini sports car if he guaranteed millions of dollars for the purchase to underwrite unsecured foreign bonds.


Subway Crash In Brooklyn Is Investigated
The subway operator whose train rammed another train in Brooklyn Thursday afternoon was not under the influence of alcohol or drugs, transit officials said yesterday, as local, state and Federal investigators began poring over physical evidence from the crash and interviewing witnesses.
The motorman, identified by the Transit Authority as Anthony R. DeRosa, 28, of Brooklyn, was questioned yesterday by investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board, but it was unclear whether he offered any clues as to what led to the crash on an elevated stretch of track in Sunset Park.


He Must Be Handsome to Another Brussels Griffon


Dykstra's Compromise Call Seems to Be Wrong Number
The first major crack in the wall of player solidarity appeared little more than a rhetorical fault yesterday as Lenny Dykstra's surprise call for considering a compromise with major league owners failed to open a visible vein of support.
Dykstra, a Philadelphia Phillies outfielder, made the suggestion in an interview with ESPN Thursday night.


Unions and Giuliani Agree
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the leaders of New York City's municipal labor unions emerged from a morning meeting yesterday and pledged to work together to find union concessions the Mayor needs to balance the city's budget.
Over breakfast at Gracie Mansion, Mr.
Giuliani laid out his administration's plan to extract $600 million in savings in health benefits, pensions and work rules, in exchange for a pledge to avert broad layoffs of municipal employees.


Shilton, 45, Returns
PETER SHILTON is making a comeback at age 45.
The former England goalkeeper, whose 125 international appearances is second on the career list, signed a short-term contract yesterday with the Premier League club Wimbledon.
"I am looking forward to continuing my playing career and I hope to be playing regular football," Shilton said.
"People may say (I'm too old), but look at GEORGE FOREMAN. He did it and he is a world champion now."


An Upbeat Musical With Darker Inflections
"I Sent a Letter to My Love," a new chamber musical at Primary Stages, is a show that is far too nice for its own good.
This Freudian fable about a lonely hearts correspondence that skids out of control heaves with incestuous undercurrents and a barely repressed rage.
But these darker inflections never break through the surface of a musical that is determined to convey a reassuring 1950's nostalgia.
The show, which has a richly romantic score by the pop singer and composer Melissa Manchester and a book and lyrics by Jeffrey Sweet, is based on a novel by Bernice Rubens that was adapted into a memorable film starring Simone Signoret.
The novel is set in Wales, the movie in France and the musical in a small Ohio town in 1954.


Corrections
An article in Weekend yesterday about art gallery openings misstated Lauren Wittels's status.
Although she has opened her own gallery, she remains the director of the Luhring Augustine Gallery in SoHo.


Russians Invest in High-Tech U.S. Venture
Gazprom, the giant Russian energy company, is plunging into a high-technology venture in the United States.
Through a subsidiary, Gazprom is investing $4 million in SI Diamond Technology Inc., a small Houston-based company that wants to develop a new generation of computer screens, the companies said yesterday.


American Insurers Seek More Business in Japan
When an earthquake devastated parts of western Japan last month, the AIU Insurance Company rented a boat, 100 hotel rooms, 50 mobile phones, 20 vans and trucks and a fleet of motorbikes and bicycles.
Then the American company sent in claims adjustors, who distributed food, water and blankets as they tried to reach 3,000 policyholders to assess damages.
This approach may have been the right one, not only from a humanitarian standpoint, but also from a business standpoint for AIU, a subsidiary of the New York-based American International Group Inc., which is trying to expand its share in Japan's $400 billion insurance market, the largest in the world outside the United States.


A Family Spirals Downward In Waiting for Agency to Act
On Aug. 19, 1992, Al B. Tatum called in sick and took his bottled-up fury over co-workers' taunts and slurs to the Milwaukee office of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Mr.
Tatum, who is black, filled out Charge No. 260920645, alleging racial discrimination by his employer, Cooper Power Systems.
The torrent of slurs was so unrelenting, he has said, that he eventually quit his job.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in the Metro Section on Wednesday misstated the number of felonies in the New York subway system for 1993 and 1994 in some editions.
There were 11,767 reported felonies in 1993, not 6,830, and 9,213 in 1994, not 5,618.


Mexico's New Offensive: Erasing Rebel's Mystique
Stripped of the myth that went with his ever-present mask, the leader of the peasant rebellion in southern Mexico is a bearded former college professor, the Jesuit-trained son of a provincial furniture salesman, a voracious reader who resigned from his teaching job here 11 years ago and fell out of touch with his family and friends.
After months in which the leader, known as Subcommander Marcos, captivated, angered and sometimes bored Mexicans with a stream of literate communiques from Chiapas state, Government officials said today that they hoped the disclosure of his identity would by itself help to break a rebel movement that has never been militarily strong.


Getting From La Guardia to Midtown for $2.50
To the Editor:
While waiting for the $3 billion rail line from Manhattan to La Guardia and Kennedy Airports to be built -- if it ever is -- there is much that can be done at little or no expense to improve public transit connections to the airports.


Perpetrators of Algiers Car Bomb Not in Doubt
To the Editor:
"Jailed Algerian Issues Warning About Election" (news article, Feb. 2) plants doubts as to the actual perpetrators of the murderous car bomb at Algiers.
You refer to a Jan. 27 letter by Ali Belhadj, co-leader of the banned Islamic Salvation Front, who reportedly warned against holding a presidential election this year and predicted a dramatic increase of violence and confrontation only three days before the car bombing.


Massachusetts Governor Signs Bill Overhauling Welfare
Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts today signed into law a measure establishing one of the most restrictive welfare systems in the nation, legislation that cuts benefits, stops payments after two years and requires many recipients to work or perform community service.
While dozens of states have enacted some of these principles in one form or another, Massachusetts is the first to incorporate all three into an overhaul of its welfare system.


General Magic Stock Surges on First Trading Day
The stock of General Magic Inc. nearly doubled from its initial offering price of $14 today, its first day of trading on the Nasdaq market.
On Thursday, General Magic, a communications software maker, said it had sold 5.5 million common shares at $14 a share in an initial public offering that exceeded original plans.
The company had expected to sell four million shares at $13 each, but the size and price of the offering were raised because of strong demand, the company said.
Today, the first day of market trading, the shares rose as high as $32 in early trading before closing at $26.625.


More Heat on Nominee


By Dividing Operations, Cigna Averts Ratings Downgrade
The Cigna Corporation has staved off what could have been a damaging downgrading of the ratings on its property and liability insurance operations by reorganizing that business into one group of profitable companies with a high rating and another group of unprofitable companies with a lower rating.
New ratings for the two groups were announced yesterday by the A. M. Best Company of Oldwick, N.J., the leading rating concern for insurance companies.
In December, Best reduced ratings for all of Cigna's property and liability companies to B++, a level that the rating agency describes as secure, but one that is below the minimum required by many large corporations that buy Cigna policies.
At that time, Cigna said it would reorganize the companies.


JAZZ
Evoking the 1950's and 60's, But With Added Ingredients  Antonio Hart, Saxophonist Sweet Basil


The Americans vs. the British on QE2 Cruise Refunds
Maybe this is all because of a grudge left over from when those upstart Yanks won the Revolutionary War: a passenger who traveled on the Queen Elizabeth 2's problem-plagued shakedown cruise last year is accusing the Cunard Line of giving British customers bigger refunds than it offered Americans who took the same trip.
The passenger, Andrew K. Coad of Upper Montclair, N.J., said the difference could total $5,000 to $10,000 for some travelers who sailed on the ill-fated cruise from Southampton, England, to New York in December.
Some passengers complained of unfinished cabins, exploding toilets and debris-filled decks as workers struggled to finish a multimillion-dollar renovation while the ship was under way.


Nets' Sinking Ship Is a Crowded Boat
Where it all went wrong, no one can say.
How it can be made right in 32 games, everyone wants to know.
This much is certain: when General Manager Willis Reed spoke last summer, he sounded like a man at the crossroads, pointing his thumb over his right shoulder and holding a cardboard sign high above his head:
"Second Round of the Playoffs, or Bust."


Rutgers Board Gives Support To President
After five draining hours of angry speeches about racism, sympathetic testimonials and raucous student demonstrations, the governing board of Rutgers University today backed its president.
"We reaffirm our support for continued service by Francis L. Lawrence as president," the 12-member board said in a statement after a two-hour closed-door meeting at the Rutgers campus on Mr.
Lawrence's future.
"Rutgers University seeks by its teachings and its example to establish the highest standards and equity. Therefore, we must apply the same standard in this case also."


Alfred Edwards, 89, Former Chairman Of Holt, Rinehart
Alfred C. Edwards, a former president and chairman of Holt, Rinehart &amp; Winston, died on Feb. 4 at his home in Natick, Mass., where he moved in 1993.
He was 89 and had lived in New Canaan, Conn., for nearly 50 years.


Peru Rejects Truce in Border War With Ecuador


Bridge
Every bridge teacher who plans deals for a large class knows that he or she will sometimes be surprised by an outcome: a student will uncover a variation or nuance that will substantially modify the expected course of play.
There were two such nuances on the diagramed deal played on Tuesday in Hobe Sound, Fla., in a class focusing on careful discarding.
South was required to play in six no-trump, an apparently hopeless contract, after an overbid by his partner.
Since North's diamonds lack any quality, he should have been content to raise two no-trump to four no-trump, a natural slam invitation that South would have passed.


Maloney Eases Trade Stance
After watching his team lose its third consecutive game Thursday night, the Islanders' general manager, Don Maloney, spoke of the need for "some surgery" to remove whatever it is that has been plaguing the Islanders.
Maloney would not name names today, but Derek King said: "Maybe there is cancer on this team. I don't know what it is. Maybe it's me." King has two goals and an assist in 10 games and has not scored in the last six.
"I'm ticked off that I'm not scoring goals because that's my job," the wing said.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Agassi in the Semifinals  Andre Agassi said he didn't feel as if he was playing somebody ranked 374th.
"To me, he's a much better player than his ranking shows," said Agassi, who held off the wild-card entry, Brian MacPhie, 6-4, 6-3, last night in the quarterfinals of the San Jose Open.
Agassi, ranked No. 2, will face fifth-seeded MaliVai Washington, who earlier beat Bryan Shelton by 6-2, 6-1, in today's semifinals.
Michael Chang fought off serves by Greg Rusedski that reached 137 miles an hour, holding on to win a pair of topsy-turvy tie breakers, 7-6 (8-6), 7-6 (10-8).
A tournament official said Rusedski's serve was the fastest ever recorded since the ATP Tour started clocking them in 1989. (AP) RAYMOND BEATS FRAZIER: Lisa Raymond continued her role as spoiler yesterday, upending fifth-seeded Amy Frazier, 6-4, 6-3, in a quarterfinal match of the Ameritech Cup in Chicago.
Raymond, ranked 44th in the world, knocked off the tournament's top seed, Natasha Zvereva, on Thursday night.
In the most spectacular match of the afternoon, fourth-seeded Brenda Schultz and No. 7 Zina Garrison-Jackson battled through three sets lasting two and a half hours before Garrison-Jackson prevailed by 6-7 (7-4), 6-3, 7-6 (7-4).
Garrison-Jackson will face Raymond in the semifinals. (AP) N.H.L.
Tampa Bay Holds First  Petr Klima's power-play goal with 2 minutes 35 seconds remaining last night gave the Tampa Bay Lightning a 4-3 victory over the visiting Hartford Whalers and sole possession of first place in the National Hockey League's Atlantic Division.
Klima controlled a rebound of Shawn Chambers's shot from the high slot and wristed the puck over the right shoulder of Sean Burke of the Whalers (2-6-2). (AP) MAPLE LEAFS 2, RED WINGS 1: Making his first start this season, Damian Rhodes turned aside 34 shots to lead Toronto to a victory over host Detroit.
Terry Yake scored the winning goal at 4:45 of the second period, snapping a 1-1 tie. (AP) OILERS 5, SHARKS 1: At Edmonton, San Jose goalie Arturs Irbe tried to clear the puck with one second left in the second period but bounced it in the net off his own man.
It turned into the go-ahead goal for the Oilers, who were paced by the stalwart goaltending of Bill Ranford (20 saves). (AP) GOLF  Costly Mickelson Error  Phil Mickelson took a two-stroke penalty for hitting the wrong ball, costing him a share of the lead after two rounds of the Buick Invitational yesterday in San Diego.
Brandel Chamblee eagled his final hole for a six-under-par 66 and a 36-hole total of 12-under 132.
Chamblee was one shot ahead of Steve Stricker (66) and Peter Jacobsen (65), who also ended his round with an eagle.
Mickelson's mistake left him with a three-under 69 for a two-round total of 134.
He was 10-under at the turn yesterday on the 7,000-yard South Course.
But Mickelson took a double bogey on the the 447-yard, par-4 No. 1 hole when he and Brad Faxon hit the wrong ball. (AP) TWO SHARE THE LEAD: Harry Toscano putted well and Bob Murphy used less conventional methods as both ended yesterday tied for the lead with five-under-par 67's in the Senior PGA Tour's IntelliNet Challenge in Naples, Fla.
Toscano fashioned his round on the strength of 11 one-putts over the Vineyards Country Club course.
Murphy made his mark by pulling off his shoes, rolling up his pants and saving par out of a water hazard on the sixth hole.
They shared a two-stroke lead over Raymond Floyd, Jay Sigel, Jim Albus, Bob Charles, Robert Gaona and Marion Heck. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Princeton Beats Columbia  Princeton used a balanced scoring effort and 10 3-point baskets to roll past Columbia, 76-48, in their first Ivy League home game yesterday.
The Tigers (9-9, 3-3) were led by Mitch Henderson, who scored all of his game-high 11 points in the second half. (AP) PENN 101, CORNELL 71: Matt Maloney scored 20 points to lead five Pennsylvania players in double figures as the Quakers (14-3, 6-0) defeated visiting Cornell to extend their record Ivy League winning streak to 35. (AP)


Topics of The Times; 'An Invisible Troupe of Women'
Thirteen years ago, when the novelist Marguerite Yourcenar became the first female ever admitted to the Academie Francaise, she described herself as "surrounded, accompanied by an invisible troupe of women who perhaps should have received this honor long before, so that I am tempted to stand aside to let their shadows pass." A similar but highly visible troupe watched last week when Air Force Lieut.
Col.
Eileen Collins, at the helm of the shuttle Discovery, became the first woman to pilot an American spaceship.
In 1960 and 1961, 26 female pilots underwent the same rigorous training as the Mercury astronaut candidates.
Thirteen passed the preliminary tests.
But the so-called Fellow Lady Astronaut Trainees program was canceled.
Why train females, NASA reasoned, when they lacked test-pilot training (then forbidden to women) and there were already more than enough men to fill the available slots?
It may be, too, that the NASA official who is reported to have said he would "just as soon orbit a bunch of monkeys than a bunch of women" was not alone in his thinking.


McCall Is All Business as He Trains for Bout Against Holmes
Oliver McCall, the sparring partner who became champion, was chortling.
Now he has sparring partners of his own.
"Ooh, you're going to take some punishment," he said to them last week before flying to Mexico City.
In that mile-high atmosphere, McCall will train for the first defense of his World Boxing Council title, the one that isn't held by George Foreman.


Firm Grip Of a Mayor
With a wave of staff dismissals and a showdown with the Police Department, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani made clear last week that he wanted to consolidate control over his government.
But his method has even some of his high-ranking staff members saying that he has sent a chill through the government, hurting morale and creating the impression that professionals were being called on to proclaim their loyalty.


Streetscapes/The Ehrich Brothers Store; Restoration for the Final Stretch of the Ladies' Mile
THE change on lower Avenue of the Americas in the last decade has been like the resuscitation of a graveyard of giants -- one by one, the collection of huge emporia between 17th and 23d Streets that once constituted New York's big-store district has been revived, usually by a new cadre of retailers.
Now the cast-iron Ehrich Brothers store, on the west side of the avenue between 22d and 23d Streets, is being renovated for the Burlington Coat Factory, making it the last of the "big store" buildings to emerge from obscurity.


Flat-Tax Proposal Rewards Go-Getters
To the Editor:
Robert Kuttner's "Instead Close Loopholes" (Op-Ed, Feb. 8) concludes that "the very idea of a flat tax is a reversal of the well-established principle of taxation based on ability to pay." That "principle" has been employed to justify marginal tax rates of up to 90 percent, although that confiscatory level has dropped to approximately 42 percent.
But the notion that ability to pay should guide taxation is morally bankrupt.


HOT HOUSE
The West Indian island of Nevis is not yet the sanitized vision of paradise that is the rest of the Caribbean.
The mountains -- where the natives live because there are fewer bugs -- are often inaccessible to trucks, and drinking water is still collected from peaked roofs.
Donato Savoie and Antonio Morello, the New York architects who designed this sleek villa for a Manhattan couple, took these stark realities in stride.
The nine-roomhouse is both open and closed, inviting and shielded; the spectacular ocean is 1,200 feet below.


Human Rights Reporting Makes a Difference; Valuable to Lawmakers
To the Editor:
"Tidings of Abuse Fall on Deaf Ears" (Week in Review, Feb. 5) questions whether anyone in Congress or anywhere else, except for the offending governments, cares about the reports of human rights groups.


Modern Knights Meet for Culture, Fun and Ceremony
SCHLARAFFIA is unlike most other all-male international fraternal organizations.
Members, or "knights," dress up in robes and silk helmets and meet in halls filled with medieval paraphernalia.
Addressing one another with humorous titles, the members carry on all conversation in German.
Meetings are often devoted to cultural discussions, with members reciting poems they have written or performing their own works on musical instruments.
Any mention of religion, politics or business is forbidden.
Humor and friendship and an appreciation of the arts -- not necessarily Germanic -- are stressed.
Rivalry and jealousy have no place at the club's meetings.


Washington Talk; Pentagon Bargain Prices* (*An Additional Cost for Wars)
For the low, low price of $264 billion, the Pentagon's budget this year trains and equips 1.6 million troops, buys new warships and fighter jets and builds new barracks.
Wars?
Sorry, those are extra.
In a financing quirk that has existed for years but is only now drawing many lawmakers' attention, the American military does not budget for battle, humanitarian missions or peacekeeping operations.


Bitter Harvest
To the Editor:
Sad as it is to see PBS fall prey to the current mania for transforming one of the world's richest nations into one of its most culturally impoverished, I can't help feeling that public television is reaping the fruits of its own bad programming karma.
Just how many reruns of "Yanni Live at the Acropolis" and "Are You Being Served?" does the typical PBS affiliate think it can air before alienating its supporters entirely?
PAUL MELOCCARO  Brooklyn


THE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
I was disappointed to learn that when Hillary attended Wellesley, female gym students were being photographed partly clothed.
An attempted cover-up?
MILDRED BARKER Stone Ridge, N.Y.


The Magic Has Left The Persian Carpet
IN the Middle East, a good carpet has always been more than an image of splendor woven in fabric; it is an asset, an under-your-foot or on-the-wall savings account meant to preserve the value of money for years -- an insurance policy to be handed down and, in hard times, sold.
Now it is something else as well; alongside the price of oil and the volatility of currencies, the market in Persian carpets provides a special window into the economic dislocations caused by a decade and a half of upheaval in the Middle East.


A Winter More Suited to Golf Than Skis
IN the late afternoon on Friday, Feb. 3, Ray Hetherington and his son Chris, a junior at Yale and the starting quarterback on the football team, played 11 holes of golf at the Sleeping Giant golf course in Hamden.
The weather was crisp, with the temperature in the low 30's, but there was no wind and the course was in relatively good shape.
Twenty-four hours later, Mr.
Hetherington, like most others in the state, was shoveling snow and the Sleeping Giant course was buried under a foot of the white stuff.


THE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
The college posture photo is a subject that has haunted me since I was one of a freshman class of shivering, uncomfortable young women herded into a gym where nude photographs were taken at Radcliffe in the 1950's ("The Great Ivy League Nude Posture Photo Scandal," by Ron Rosenbaum, Jan. 15).
It would be interesting to follow up on what happened to the small number of women -- I was one of a group of about seven -- who were told, after the photo session, to attend "posture classes" once a week for a semester; the reason I was given was that my spine was badly out of line, although no one previously had commented on this, and it did not seem to be true when I compared myself with my classmates.
The class, as I remember it, was humiliating, and involved odd exercises I've never encountered since.
The effect on my posture, as far as I could tell, was nil, but the effect on my self-confidence was disastrous.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
98.93
99.85
107.00
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5197
1.5168
1.7545
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.4013
1.4010
1.3435
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5627
1.5639
1.4620
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$375.75
$375.90
$380.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


High Hopes, Mixed Fortunes And the New Promised Land
FROM THE DEPRESSION TO the years of the civil rights movement, a desperate river of people barely noted by the mainstream transformed the American North.
They were sharecroppers and domestics and other put-upon products of Southern segregation who rebelled in their own iron way, heading north on trains and buses in what came to be known as the Great Migration.
They fled to Harlem and Detroit and Chicago and elsewhere for work and the vote -- and to see what freedom tasted like.
Soon the strong backs that had picked cotton and tobacco for the South were instead butchering hogs and bending steel for the North.
Their cheap labor helped feed a postwar boom.
They had children, and their children had children, but when the rules of manufacturing changed, the jobs went away.
For many, the promised land seemed not to live up to its promise anymore, and drugs and violence took hold as the opportunities that had brought the people there vanished.


Fitness Club Gets Budget Ax At St. Bart's
In its 1970's heyday, more than 2,000 young adults belonged to the Community Club at St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church.
They enjoyed its tea parties, lectures, dances, movies and fitness center with indoor pool, weights and basketball and squash courts.
But as the church and social scene changed, membership dwindled to barely 200, and the church drifted into the red.
Last year, the club and fitness center were separated from each other.
Though the center was renovated, not enough people enrolled to cover overhead.
Now the church will use volunteers at the social club and close the fitness center on Feb. 28, a move that has upset some of the center's 263 members, most of whom who are not parishioners.


THE NATION: When Bad Things Happen To a Logical Nomination
ON most points, Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr., the man President Clinton would have as the next Surgeon General of the United States, the minder of the nation's medical health and frequently its morals, could be called a font of family values.
On sex education in the schools: "I think that these issues have to be addressed at the family level. I do not feel schools or the health department can unilaterally do this without the involvement of parents."


Anne Julia Siegel, Jerry Lynn Watson
Anne Julia Siegel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Siegel of Weston, Conn., and Dr.
Jerry Lynn Watson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Watson of Colorado Springs, were married yesterday in Jamaica.
Daniel Haye, a civil registrar, officiated at the Jamaica Grande, a resort in Ocho Rios.
Ms.
Siegel, who is 30 and is keeping her name, is the client services coordinator for Frank Horton Associates, employee assistance and behaviorial health consultants in Raleigh, N.C.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University, as did the bridegroom, and received a master's degree in social work from Hunter College.
Her father is the vice president and counsel of University Science, Engineering and Technology Inc., a research and development concern in Westport.
Her mother, Suzanne Kreisman Siegel, is a freelance journalist and writing teacher.


Death Penalty Affirms Rights of Victimized
To the Editor:
Re "What Prosecutors Won't Tell You" (Op-Ed, Feb. 7):


Paying The Price For Blowing The Whistle
FOR three years, Arnold Gundersen was awakened by harassing phone calls in the middle of the night.
He became so concerned about his family's safety that he bought a large dog for protection.
The problem?
He was a whistle-blower, one of those who take on the dismally unpopular role of exposing what they find to be unsafe or unlawful practices in the workplace, especially the nuclear workplace.
"It feels like you're in a fort surrounded by Indians, and you send for help," Mr.
Gundersen said.
"You hear the hoofbeats of the cavalry in the distance as it finally comes toward you. But they start shooting at you."


For Team New Zealand, Route Is Steadily Onward
In "The Wind," a 1992 Francis Ford Coppola film about a fictitious America's Cup campaign, a secret sail saved the United States from losing the cup to an international challenger.
The sail was called the Whomper.
Now there is another Whomper.
But this one belongs to Team New Zealand, and it's for real.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tues.
Retail sales, Jan., pct. chg.
-0.1
0.4
Wed.
Industrial production, Jan., pct. chg.
1.0
0.5
Capacity utilization, Jan., percent
85.4
85.6
Consumer prices, Jan., pct. chg.
0.2
0.3
Thur.
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
318
325
Housing starts, Jan., mils., ann. rate
1.53
1.50
Fri.
Trade balance, Dec., $ bils.
-10.5
-10.5
*4*This Week's Developments
Tues.
Atlanta Fed January business outlook survey
Thur.
Philadelphia Fed February business outlook survey


Ifs, Ands and Rebuts
To the Editor:
Surely Robert Getchell's letter is a plant to get us to write to say that the author letters are the best part of the Book Review, a fascinating balance to the smart-aleck, lazy, mistaken, dumb, partisan or otherwise wrongheaded reviewer -- sometimes, we suspect, callow youth dismissing years of labor with a smooth sentence or two.
If there's a reviewer reply, we have an actual exchange of ideas, or at least opinions.


Lead Paint: New Rules, Old Questions
CLAUDE N. LIMOGES thought he recognized the threat of lead paint.
When a 2-year-old boy living in an apartment building that Mr.
Limoges owned was diagnosed with an elevated blood lead level, Mr.
Limoges sent a work crew into the building to replace the windows, doors and woodwork, all of which were covered with lead paint.
But before the workmen had finished, they had spread so much lead around the four-unit building that the boy's blood lead-levels went even higher, and his 6-month-old brother was also poisoned.


Look Who Wants U.S. As a Leader
WHEN the 1990's began, intellectuals in New Delhi, which thought of itself as the capital of nonalignment, were deep in gloom, fearing that now everybody would have to take orders from an unfettered Uncle Sam.
Half a decade later, it is all but impossible to find a hegemonistic bone in any body in Washington -- Republican or Democrat -- and a new batch of critics from the developing nations is complaining that the United States isn't interfering enough.


New York City Subway Accidents
Last Thursday's accident involving two subway trains in Brooklyn came after a serice of similar accidents over the last few years in the transit system.
The deadliest was the Aug. 28, 1991, crash of a southbound Lexington Ave.
No. 4 train at the Union Square station, in which five people died.


Q and A
Sumo-Watching  Q.  Is it possible for tourists in Tokyo to watch a sumo practice session?
We will not be in Japan at the time of any scheduled matches but we would love to watch the wrestlers work out. -- J. Olson, Washington


Come and Get It!
Soup was on at the Four Seasons, as guests lined up in the kitchen to support the Irvington Institute for Medical Research, Feb. 5.


Keeping a Frigid Vigil for Geese
An east wind raged across the brown, stubbled field as Larry Hepler and I slogged to our hay bale goose blind in the pre-dawn murk on the last day of the hunting season.
We unloaded our shell decoys from where we had stashed them in the blind several days before and went to work setting them out in the field.
It was blowing so hard that we had to nail each decoy to the frozen earth with a 16-penny spike, and when that was accomplished we hustled to the shelter of our hideaway and waited for what we believed would be the best day of goose hunting we'd had all fall and winter on Martha's Vineyard.


Ifs, Ands and Rebuts
To the Editor:
Robert W. Getchell complains that too much space is granted to "disgruntled authors" rebutting reviewers, and then to the reviewers rebutting right back.
I respectfully disagree with him.
I always turn first to the Letters column, looking precisely for this sort of comic relief.


Editorial Notebook; Learning to Batter Women
We kid ourselves that we can dismiss the past and create ourselves anew through weight loss, divorce or a snappier haircut.
Then comes the spectral moment of recognition that the past is never really gone.
What we learn as children speaks through us indefinitely, often in dramatic fashion.
Wife-battering may be just such a thing.
The idea that battering might be "inherited" would have remained an abstraction for me but for the recent news that a young man whose family I've known for a long time has been jailed for pistol whipping his wife.
The couple had been married less than a year.
Theirs was clearly a rare, fundamentalist version of an Islamic marriage, not typical of Islam as a whole.
Some in the wedding party said they were shocked that the marriage ceremony made reference to the husband's right to beat his wife.
The section in question specified that the beating stick be no thicker than a finger.
A woman I know said she left the room when the passage was read.


What Playwrights Miss As Their Own Producers
To the Editor:
Until I read the article, I had always taken Off Off Broadway productions for granted and attended them as an affordable alternative to movies and Broadway.
Although they are not usually as polished, the original material and fresh faces of the actors add sparks and a rawness that makes the work seem genuine and sincere.


Valentine's Splurge: Chocolate Desserts
CHOCOLATE has strange properties.
Studies have shown that it contains phenylethylamine, a chemical stimulant, which is released by the brain in a passionate love affair.
Perhaps that explains why so many people eat chocolate on Valentine's Day (conversely, those who fall out of love have lower levels of phenylethylamine, which may explain why they often go on a chocolate binge).
In any event, there are few better ways to end a Valentine's Day dinner than with a dessert made from chocolate.
I like chocolate desserts that are fairly straightforward, and not too sweet.
A dark, moist chocolate cake, unadorned by creams or icings, is one of my favorites.
I also love a hot chocolate souffle, something I like to order in French restaurants when they have it on the menu.
Making a hot souffle at home, however, is not difficult if you have a reliable oven.
It is important to use egg whites at room temperature, since they will expand more when they are beaten and help the souffle rise.
They should be whisked until they form glossy peaks, not over-beaten or over-folded, or the souffle will be flat.
Care should also be taken when melting chocolate.
It turns into a solid lump if the heat is too high.
Melt it in a slow oven or a double boiler.


For Bobek, The Desire Translates Into a Title
No one doubted the talent of Nicole Bobek as a figure skater, but almost everyone questioned her desire, her dedication to training and willingness to be coached.
If she would only work hard, she could become national champion.
How many times had she heard that?
In the past six months, she has been working hard and tonight her performance finally caught up to her potential.
At age 17, on her fifth try, Bobek won her first national figure-skating title, filling the vacancy left a year ago when Tonya Harding was stripped of the crown.


The Local Forces That Helped Shape Gingrich as a Foe of Regulation
In the 1970's, Newt Gingrich, an assistant professor who taught environmental studies and an unsuccessful Congressional candidate, criticized a local manufacturing company.
The company, Southwire, was a powerful force.
It was also, Mr.
Gingrich asserted, a polluter.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Gov.
George E. Pataki's selection of George J. Marlin to head the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey misstated the number of previous executive directors the agency has had.
It is five, not four.


Rutgers Can't Escape Protests, or Defeat
In its first game since a student protest halted its matchup with Massachusetts at the half, Rutgers could neither escape the controversy that has engulfed its campus nor win a basketball game.
Before the Scarlet Knights took the court in what would turn into a 92-86 loss, members of George Washington's Black People's Union took up positions behind their team's bench and unfurled a large blue banner that read: "We Support the Rutgers Movement." They held the banner up throughout the first half, then moved it to a lobby at halftime, where students were invited to sign it and letters to Rutgers President Francis Lawrence.


[ APPEARANCES ] ; MR. CLEAN
Years from now, when historians are analyzing the great male identity crisis of the late 20th century, exploring the text of "Iron John," freeze-framing scenes of Liam Neeson in "Nell," hoping to uncover the inspiration for what was to become the male ideal for the 21st century, I trust they will not overlook the crucial role played by the men's fragrance industry.
As the debate and confusion persist over what a man should be, the toilers in ambergris and musk have succeeded in realizing -- not in a 200-page tome, or two hours of celluloid, but in the whiff of a scent strip and the flick of a photo, or at best, in a 30-second spot run back to back with breakfast cereal -- the archetype for our times: the ideal man, fully formed (if not necessarily fully clothed).
It is their unique mandate to cull the mostly inarticulate desires of fragrance buyers and distill them into scent and image.
Because at least 50 percent of the customers are women, this creation, this Adonis, must be the hero every man longs to be and every woman longs to be with.
This didn't use to be a problem.
In the 50's, men wore after-shave, not fragrance; they were all dads who received this after-shave on Father's Day.
The captain of a sailing ship was an appropriate image for just about everyone.
In the 60's, we began to admit what we'd known all along, that smelling good is linked to being sexually attractive.


What Playwrights Miss As Their Own Producers
To the Editor:
The Jan. 29 article, "One Man's Tale," by Jesse McKinley, underscores the state of playwriting in New York and, I suspect, all across the country: new playwrights are forced to produce their own plays as a way of developing their craft.
This is largely because small theaters lack the finances and the dramaturgs, artistic directors and experienced stage directors who often help to shape and guide a play toward eventual production.
New playwrights, therefore, miss out on readings, workshops and work-in-progress productions of their work.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


College Protest Brings Course Changes
AFTER students at Westchester Community College mounted a campaign for a black studies department last year, Dr.
Joseph N. Hankin, president of the college, formed a task force to study the issue.
He also approved the addition of several courses in Latin American and Caribbean history and continued what he called an ongoing effort to hire more full-time black faculty members.
Two more black teachers were hired, bringing the number to 8 out of a total of 168 full-time professors.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Unbeaten Penguins Stop the Canadiens  The Pittsburgh Penguins remained the National Hockey League's only unbeaten team, improving to 10-0-1 last night with a 3-1 victory over the visiting Montreal Canadiens behind two goals by Jaromir Jagr.
The Penguins moved closer to the N.H.L. record 15 games without a loss at the start of a season, set by the Edmonton Oilers in 1984-85.
Pittsburgh's Ken Wregget, the only N.H.L. goaltender to play every minute this season, has allowed 3 goals or fewer in 9 of the 11 games.
The unbeaten streak is his career best and he has notched 10 victories for the ninth consecutive season.
The Penguins' only non-victory was last Sunday's 3-3 tie at New Jersey. (AP) WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  Texas Tech Rebounds With Team Effort  Alicia Thompson came off the bench to score 21 points in 16 minutes, and No. 4 Texas Tech rebounded from its first Southwest Conference loss this season to defeat Baylor, 100-48, yesterday at Lubbock.
The Lady Raiders (22-3, 8-1), whose 18-game winning streak was snapped Wednesday, took a 45-25 halftime lead then cruised to victory as all 12 players scored. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Jackson Returns to Form in Hurdles  Colin Jackson rebounded from his first defeat in 18 months by posting the fastest 60-meter hurdles time of the year yesterday, clocking 7.39 seconds at a Britain-France dual meet in Glasgow.
Beaten by an American, Allen Johnson, Thursday at Madrid for his first loss in 45 races, Jackson, a Welshman who is world champion and world record-holder over 110 meters outdoors, was quickest off the blocks and beat Tony Jarrett of Wales, the world championship silver medalist.
Meanwhile, the world and Olympic 100-meter champion Linford Christie of Britain clocked the second-fastest 60-meter time this year, 6.56. (AP) QUEENS, BRONX SCHOOLS WIN TITLES: St.
Francis Prep of Queens and Cardinal Spellman of the Bronx won team titles yesterday in the Catholic High Schools Athletic Association girls' sectional indoor track and field championships at the West 168th Street Armory.
In a boys' indoor meet yesterday at Stony Brook University, Chaminade ended St.
Anthony's six-year reign as champion of the Nassau-Suffolk County/Catholic High Schools Athletic Asssociation.
The Flyers rallied from a 44-7 deficit to upset St.
Anthony's, 97-84, in the six-team competition.
TENNIS  Agassi Going for San Jose Open Title  Andre Agassi's march to the top of the tennis world took another strong turn yesterday when he defeated MaliVai Washington, 6-4, 6-2, in the semifinals of the San Jose Open in California.
"Right now, I'm not struggling at all," Agassi said.
"It's a joy to be out there and a joy to be playing." Agassi will play the winner of last night's Jim Courier-Michael Chang match in today's final. (AP) BECKER REACHES MARSEILLES FINAL: Top-seeded Boris Becker needed only about an hour to win his semifinal match in the Marseilles Open yesterday, beating Olivier Delaitre, 6-4, 6-2.
Daniel Vacek beat Lionel Roux, 6-1, 7-5, and will face Becker in today's final. (AP) YACHT RACING  Iceberg Sighted During BOC Challenge  Jean Luc Van den Heede, holding second place aboard the 60-foot Vendee Entreprises in the 13-yacht fleet and on a course deep in the Screaming Fifties, yesterday became the first competitor to report an iceberg sighting in the 1994-95 BOC Challenge single-handed round-the-world race.
"The iceberg measured about four miles in length, two miles in width, and was about 30 meters high," the French solo sailor radioed in from sailing on the third leg from Sydney, Australia, to Punte del Este, Uruguay.
Christophe Auguin of France leads the 27,000-mile race by 116 miles.
SPEED SKATING  Ritsma Leading at World Championships  The favorite, Rintje Ritsma of the Netherlands, took the lead halfway through the men's world speed skating championships at Baselga di Pine, Italy, even though his best showing in two races yesterday was a third-place finish.
Ritsma, the Olympic silver medal winner and European champion, placed third in the 500-meter event and fifth in the 5,000 meters to earn 80.72 points.
Hiroyuki Noake of Japan toughed snow and fog early in the day to win the 500-meter event in 37.91 seconds.
Later starters benefited when the snow stopped.
Frank Dittrich of Germany took advantage of the change and skated an exceptional 5,000-meter race (6:56.66) and broke the track record by more than 40 seconds. (AP)


Happy Ending?
To the Editor:
Having seen the film version of Alan Bennett's play "The Madness of King George III," I confess that I was shocked by the ending of the movie, which is not only different from that of the play but sufficiently so to compromise the entire point.


Problems for Bodine
Nascar barred BRETT BODINE from qualifying yesterday for the Daytona 500 and levied a record $45,000 fine against the owner of his car, JUNIOR JOHNSON, after inspectors discovered an illegal engine piece that would have made the car faster.
A Nascar spokesman, KEVIN TRIPLETT, said a pre-qualifying check of Bodine's Ford Thunderbird found that the insert portion of the intake manifold was simply attached to the engine and not welded, as the rules require.
"Not being welded would allow more air into the intake, which would give the engine more horsepower, which would increase speed," Triplett said.


Corrections
An article in the Viewpoints section on Jan. 29, about the corporate presence in American schools, incorrectly attributed a statement to Keep America Beautiful, a nonprofit education organization that provides materials for use in classrooms.
The group never published the statement, "incinerating plastics is a form of recycling."


The Passage Theater Is Reborn
AFTER two unproductive seasons, which included the coming and going of two different artistic directors, the announcement of several projects and premieres and the presentation of none, the Passage Theater in Trenton is proclaiming its rebirth.
The leadership of the company has changed, and what might be called its second passage will get underway tomorrow with a staged reading of "Signature," a new play by Beth Henley, who wrote "Crimes of the Heart."


In Defense of Heart Transplant Device
To the Editor:
As a recipient of the left ventricular assist device -- the product discussed in John Bray's essay on health-care costs ("Health Care: One Product's Story," Viewpoints, Jan. 15) -- I can vouch for its value.


A Watery Theme Park
Most water parks are fairly straightforward, with thrills provided by the tube slides, speed slides and wave pools.
But theme parks rule these days.
And when Six Flags Hurricane Harbor, a 22-acre amusement park adjacent to Six Flags Magic Mountain in Valencia, Calif., opens this summer, it should qualify as a themed water park on a grand scale, with more than 14 attractions built to evoke a pirate's world or a tropical jungle.


AIDS Patients and the S.R.O.'s: Two West Siders Debate
In December, the city imposed a cap on the number of homeless AIDS patients in single-room occupancy hotels on the Upper West Side.
Social service and civil rights groups are preparing to challenge the cap in the courts, on the ground that it is discriminatory.
But many residents welcome the new policy, saying it will cut down on crime and drugs in their neighborhood.
The City put a supporter and an opponent of the new policy on a conference call to debate its merits.
Douglas Lasdon is executive director of the Legal Action Center for the Homeless, one group preparing to file suit against the cap.
Mr.
Lasdon lives on the Upper West Side on 95th Street near Central Park West and is the chairman of Common Ground Community, a social service group that runs the Times Square Hotel, a 650-room S.R.O.
Miki Fiegel, a member of the 99th Street Block Association who lives on West End Avenue, favors the cap.
Ms.
Fiegel is on the board of a 72-bed residential treatment center for mental patients at 2643 Broadway, run by the Volunteers of America and the Institute for Community Living.
She also works as a real estate broker on the Upper West Side.
Jennifer Kingson Bloom of The New York Times moderated the discussion.
Below are excerpts.


From Wicked Witch to 'Magic Flute,' a Day of Operatic Matinees
ALL manner of musical events brighten the Sunday music calendar today, with no less than three operatic matinees.
First up, at 1:30, the Wicked Witch gets hers in Crystal Opera's "Hansel and Gretel" at Stamford's Ethel Kweskin-Sterling Barn Theater, with repeat performances of the Humperdinck favorite at 8 P.M.
Saturday and 2 P.M. next Sunday afternoon.
Those performances will be in Norwalk at the Roosevelt Senior Center.
The numbers for more details are 849-1730 and 847-4850.
At 2 P.M. today, Fleet Bank sponsers Rossini's "Barber of Seville" at the New Haven Shubert in a fully staged production by the New York City Opera National Company (624-1825).
At 3 o'clock, student artists of the Hartt School Opera Department play Mozart's "Magic Flute" in Millard Auditorium at the University of Hartford in West Hartford (768-5566).


The Lasting Edge Of Diane Arbus
ALONE among her colleagues, Diane Arbus has found immortality.
Robert Frank and Lee Friedlander may have racked up as many honors, and Richard Avedon may have gained wider name recognition, but none of them can claim to possess her black-crepe glamour as the Kafka of American photography.
A quarter century after her death, the wave of attention around Arbus's life and work shows no sign of cresting.
Patricia Bosworth's unauthorized biography from 1984, the basis for much of the current activity, was reissued last week, just as Stuart Greenman's new play, "Silence, Cunning, Exile," went into previews at the Public Theater.
The play has as its main character an intense, enigmatic photographer similar to Arbus.
In a program note, Mr.
Greenman has acknowledged his debt to Ms.
Bosworth's book, still the only full-length biography of the artist.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 12, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
TOM CLANCY'S OP-CENTER,
created by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik. (Berkley, $6.99.) The operations of a secret Government agency.
2
3
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Warner, $6.99.) A doctor stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
3
3
ICEBOUND, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The world's future is threatened by a tidal wave, storms and a psychopathic killer.
4
2
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $6.50.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her late son creates familial tension.
5
3
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $6.99.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a Vermont town.
6
4
LOVERS, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $6.99.) Romance, rivalry and fun as experienced by half a dozen couples.
7
3
PRINCE CHARMING, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $6.50.) A lady in Victorian London discovers the man of her dreams, a Montanan.
8
22
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
9
35
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
10
12
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young student's mysterious drowning in Victorian England.
11
24
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's death.
12*
1
FOR MY DAUGHTERS, by Barbara Delinsky. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) A wealthy, social-climbing woman retires to the country.
13*
3
LITTLE WOMEN, by Louisa May Alcott. (Pocket, $5.50.) The 1868 novel about four sisters in New England.
14
6
NATURAL CAUSES, by Michael Palmer. (Bantam, $5.99.) A physician is accused of being responsible for the deaths of pregnant women.
15
2
DESIRED, by Virginia Henley. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) In the 14th century, a Knight Templar pursues a young lady who is already betrothed.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
21
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
8
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of "Seinfeld."
3*
5
CONTRACT WITH AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich, Dick Armey, et al. (Times Books/Random House, $10.) A Republican program for reshaping the Government.
4
20
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
5
57
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
6
588
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
7
9
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
8
16
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
9
30
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
10
24
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
11
14
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.
12
102
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
13*
3
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Vintage, $13.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
14
39
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
15*
10
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) Thoughts on 44 years of marriage.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
20
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
3
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Pocket, $6.99.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
3
198
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
4
2
WHAT TO EXPECT THE TODDLER YEARS, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $15.95.) For parents of children in their second and third years.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 28, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


A Generation's Heritage: After the Boom, a Boomlet
Once again, it's the invasion of the stroller people.
Chappaqua, a quiet Westchester County suburb that a generation ago was a haven for young families, is seeing history repeat.
The World Cup Gymnastics and Nursery School added nine new classrooms last summer and recently voters approved a bond issue to expand the primary schools.
The kiddie pools at the swim clubs spawn 3-year-olds like tadpoles.
And when the Ragamuffin Parade turned off Greely Avenue last Halloween, dozens of MacLaren strollers were parked in the eddy, holding next year's marchers.


Survivors of Negro League Reaping the Benefits
There was more than a little historical irony last week when Major League Baseball presented checks worth $143,248 to benefit surviving Negro League players and their legacy.
The money came from sales of Negro League merchandise by M.L.B.
Properties, the sport's licensing arm.
Barely two years ago, John (Buck) O'Neil, one of the most prominent former Negro League players, and now chairman of the Negro League Baseball Museum in Kansas City, Mo., told baseball to steer clear of licensing the names and logos of teams such as the Baltimore Elite Giants and Cuban X-Giants.


Hearts And Flowers And History
THERE was a time when sending a valentine meant asking for a woman's hand in marriage.
If the gentleman had poor penmanship, the father of the lady who received it could refuse consent, on the ground that the suitor lacked diligence.
"There was so much more romance in the valentines of the past," says Megan Brewster, a spokeswoman for the Museum of the City of New York, where 60 valentines dating from the 1700's are displayed through Feb. 28.


Heroes Make Good Opera; Icons Don't
THERE ARE NO POLITICAL HEROES AROUND today, conventional wisdom suggests.
The public that once idealized and worshiped leaders of intelligence and vision, like Winston Churchill, Franklin D. Roosevelt and John F. Kennedy, now searches out warts and flaws, and finds all too many.
Not even the pedestals of yore are left standing.
But heroes are having their revenge in the opera house, where political worship has found a home.
The last 15 years have seen dramas about the saintliness of Gandhi (Philip Glass's "Satyagraha"), the black nationalism of Malcolm X (Anthony Davis's "X") and the radical idealism of Frida Kahlo (Robert Xavier Rodriguez's "Frida").
The current operatic veneration of pop cultural figures also has a political content; at least two works recently attacked entertainment industry moguls and a voracious public for destroying precious heroes and heroines (Dominick Argento's "Dream of Valentino" and Ezra Laderman's "Marilyn").


The End Is Near
To the Editor:
John Gray's brilliant review of "Democracy on Trial," by Jean Bethke Elsh tain, "The Revolt of the Elites and the Betrayal of Democracy," by Christopher Lasch, and "Making Democracy Work," by Robert D. Putnam (Jan. 22), is, arguably, one of the most important analyses of its kind to appear in recent years.


Selling Geek Chic
Several years ago, computer geeks hid both their identities and propeller beanies when they went out in public.
But when both Congress and the White House dream of being Big Kahuna on the Internet Beach and Bill Gates's Seattle house-in-progress is a tourist draw, the programmers who got there first can flaunt it.


Popular Conversions: Empty Space to Common Rooms
In the late 1980's, New York developers came up with a new set of amenities they hoped would improve the real-estate market: they began building gyms, community rooms and children's playrooms in new luxury high-rise buildings.
It worked so well that residents and managers of older buildings are jumping on the bandwagon.
To compete with the newer buildings, a growing list of older ones -- rental, cooperative, condominium -- are installing common rooms.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
HEPWORTH AT YALE
A half-century retrospective of 75 carvings and bronzes and 30 drawings by Barbara Hepworth may be seen at the Yale Center for British Art in New Haven through April 9.
One of England's most distinguished contemporary artists, along with Henry Moore who was a classmate at the Royal College of Art in London, and the painter Ben Nicholson, who was her second husband, she helped bring British art out of provincialism and into the international 20th-century mainstream.


The Cradle To the Grave
Each year, Crib Diaper Service of Crystal, Minn., recycles a ton of lint (from laundering seven million cloth diapers).
It donates the material to a nearby Hudson, Wis., casket manufacturer for stuffing casket pillows.


Different Drummers
100 YEARS ON THE ROAD The Traveling Salesman in American Culture.
By Timothy B. Spears.
Illustrated. 300 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $35.


February 5-11: Baseball Blues; Clinton Bats Zero in Arbitration
For a moment, it seemed that the coming baseball season might be saved.
Or at least that's the way President Clinton saw it.
But his hopefulness quickly collapsed.
Having summoned owners and players to the White House for a late-night summit, Mr.
Clinton found that the majesty of his office could not compel the warring parties to set aside their differences and let the games begin.


On the Subway, Too Much of a Good Thing?
Subway alert: The Transit Authority has determined that the Upper West Side receives too much local service and it's about to correct the error.
Starting Feb. 26, the Transit Authority will run fewer No. 1 and No. 9 trains -- which travel the west side of Manhattan and a small part of the Bronx -- from 7 to 8 A.M. and from 4 to 6 P.M.
On the East Side, service on the local 6 train into the Bronx will also be reduced from 7 to 8 A.M.


THE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
In the 1990's, elite universities feature countless "scientists" who ascribe to genes exactly what W. H. Sheldon ascribed to physiognomy.
As a society, we simply cannot afford to wait until a Ron Rosenbaum of the 21st century unearths the racist and misogynistic horror of the paradigm of behavioral genetics.
JOSHUA C. KENDALL Baltimore


Singular Programming
To the Editor:
In his article about the mission of the Public Broadcasting Service  [ "We Interrupt This Program . . . Forever?," Jan. 29 ] , Warren Berger implies that PBS's fatal flaw is a failure to live up to its educational mandate.
Mr.
Berger cites programs such as a special about Julie Andrews on Broadway, reruns of "I'll Fly Away," a biography of Rod Serling and the series we produced, American Cinema, a historical overview of movie making in this country, which is currently being shown.


Human Rights Reporting Makes a Difference
To the Editor:
"Tidings of Abuse Fall on Deaf Ears" (Week in Review, Feb. 5) picks one of the most intractable and hopeless situations -- Afghanistan -- to suggest that human rights reporting makes no difference.
But dozens of other cases might have been cited in which tough and consistent reporting, coupled with aggressive advocacy in Washington, Europe and other centers of influence, generated powerful pressure for change.
To cite several recent examples:


Mistake Raises Ire in Yorktown
THE citizen tax rebellion that transformed the political landscape last November should find ready recruits among the residents of the Yorktown School District.
Although it may not be on a par with Watergate, a series of cover-ups has embittered residents and further eroded faith in government at the local level.


Leonard Silk Dies at 76; Times Columnist Helped the Public to Understand Economics
Leonard S. Silk, a columnist and editorial writer for The New York Times and for Business Week, who set a standard for a generation of journalists as a pioneer in making complex economic issues understandable to general readers, died Friday night at his home in Montclair, N.J.
He was 76.
The cause of death was liver cancer, members of his family said.
The disease struck last summer, two years after Mr.
Silk wrote his last Economic Scene column for The Times.


Using Valentine's Day For a Worthy Cause
WHY not celebrate Valentine's Day by eating and drinking for a good cause?
On Tuesday, what is billed as a "romantic Valentine's Day wine-tasting dinner" -- five courses of Valentine's specialties from hors d'oeuvres like heart-shaped croustades to desserts like chocolate-lover's truffles, accompanied by a list of international wines -- will be held at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, beginning at 6 P.M.
The proceeds will benefit the "You Can't Live on Love Alone" campaign of Food-People Allied to Combat Hunger, known as Food Patch.


Where the Dots Came From
There are plenty of stylish, if by now overly familiar, images in THE PRINTS OF ROY LICHTENSTEIN: A Catalogue Raisonne 1948-1993 (National Gallery of Art/Hudson Hills, $95).
There are also plenty of surprises.
What is familiar is the artist's signature themes: consumerism, recycled imagery from comic books and 1960's advertising and a penchant for ironic quotations from other artworks.
What is surprising is how profoundly the graphic work has fed -- and in some instances proved a catalyst to -- the artist's innovation on canvas.
Most startling are Mr.
Lichtenstein's pre-Pop prints from the early 1950's, which provide an unusual look at some of his earliest artistic sources.
Here, quirky images of knights in armor, damsels in distress and tomahawk-wielding Indians look to Paul Klee and Picasso as their inspiration, rather than to contemporary culture.
Here, too, the reader sees foreshadowings of the artist's later visual language: the Ben Day dots, artificial wood grain, parallel stripes and black outlines of his hallmark Pop pieces.
The prints, which Mary Lee Corlett, a research associate at the National Gallery of Art, has arranged in chronological order, are divided into three sections: prints made by the artist, prints made in conjunction with events at the Leo Castelli Gallery and prints and related objects that were mass produced.
Ruth E. Fine, the National Gallery's curator of modern prints and drawings, has provided a plodding, though fact-filled, essay examining the symbiosis between Mr.
Lichtenstein's graphic works and his paintings, as well as the artist's seminal role in the print renaissance of the 1960's.
This is an eye-opening book, unusual for the light it sheds on aspects of Roy Lichtenstein's career that were previously unexamined.
ANDREA BARNET


Seaport's Blemish: Old, Not Quaint
Guests of the Best Western Seaport Inn pay up to $205 a night for a room.
But when they look out their windows, they see debris-strewn lots and abandoned buildings.
"One guest even sent me a Polaroid of the view," said David Werber, co-owner of the 65-room hotel.
He and owners of several stores and restaurants in and around the 13 buildings, which honeycomb Front Street and Peck Slip, contend that the derelict properties have hurt their business.
All but two are vacant.
Those house, temporarily, two wholesalers and an ice company from the Fulton Fish Market.


Hey, It's Not Sondheim, but Adults Don't Care
THE OWNER OF MARCY'S department store is furious.
"Maybe they let chickens play Santa in Arkansas," he shouts, "but that's not how we do things in New York City."
There has been no previous reference to Arkansas in this holiday cartoon, nor will there be a subsequent one.
There will be, however, a reindeer (actually a pigeon with antlers) named Pesto and a musical number, "Slippin' on the Ice," sung to the tune of "Singin' in the Rain."
This is "Animaniacs," the second most popular children's series on television (outranked only by "Mighty Morphin Power Rangers"), now in its second season on Fox.
What's unusual is the animated show's popularity with adults.
More than 21 percent of the weekday audience (4 P.M., Monday through Friday) and more than 23 percent of the Saturday morning (9 A.M.) viewers are adults 25 or older.
The show has a large and loyal Internet news-group following, with fans exchanging thoughts electronically on laundry tips for fading "Animaniacs" T-shirts, the latest parody lyrics and concerns that Wakko, one of the main characters, seems withdrawn lately.
"I got hooked on the show immediately," says Jay Maynard, a 34-year-old systems programmer from Houston, who discovered it on a weekday when he was at home sick.
"The thing that caught me is that it's literally full of jokes that no 10-year-old would ever get." Then why do 10-year-olds, not to mention 4-year-olds, watch?
"There's enough slapstick physical comedy to keep them happy."
Now Mr.
Maynard tapes the show daily.
"I have developed a crush on Dot," he says.
"Her personality is everything I'm looking for in a woman -- witty, intelligent, outspoken, assertive."
The Warner brothers (Yakko and Wakko) and the Warner sister (Dot) are the series stars, but the 30-minute show includes cartoons starring other characters (almost all animals), who exist in their own separate comic universes just as Bugs Bunny, Porky Pig and Daffy Duck always have.
The Warner siblings are the favorite characters of many viewers, but not all.
Jean MacCurdy, president of Warner Brothers Animation, professes a preference for Pinky and the Brain, two laboratory mice who plot nightly to take over the world.
"And they're Steven's favorites," Ms.
MacCurdy adds.
That would be Steven Spielberg, the show's executive producer.
"We're really pleased with the broad demographic appeal," says Ms.
MacCurdy.
"There's a feeling that even the older kids kind of like the fact that there are some jokes their younger brothers and sisters don't understand. It's an empowerment thing."
The nature of the humor is clear from the opening theme song, in which the word "animaniacs" is rhymed with, among other things, "the President plays the sax," "pay-for-play contracts" and "baloney in our slacks." Zany is rhymed with "Citizen Kane-y."
Yakko, Wakko and Dot, who apparently were locked away in the water tower on the Warner's Burbank lot many years ago because of misbehavior, escape periodically to have adventures that are a combination of visual gags so old they reek of homage (that's just what they are, says Ms. MacCurdy) and wordplay.
IN ONE EPISODE, SET IN A CANDY store, the owner asks the trio what they'd like.
"Well, world peace would be nice," one answers.
"And a Chevrolet in every driveway." In terms of candy, they insist on the jelly beans on the highest shelf (this is one of those candy stores with 30-foot ceilings).
After the owner climbs a very tall ladder to get the candy and bring it down, the kids (there is some debate about what kind of animals the Warners are) change their mind.
And there is an invasion by a band of five nuns wielding rulers.
Sometimes the humor is all verbal, and somewhat insiderish.
Yakko: "It's that time again." Dot: "To make fun of the Disney Channel?" Yakko: "If you can't say something nice, you're probably at the Ice Capades."
The Brain, of Pinky and the Brain, is stopped by a police officer and unable to produce a driver's license or registration papers for the mini-van he stole from the lab.
So he admits his world-conquest plans but promises to include "new funding for law enforcement" when he controls the universe.
The cop lets him go.
Skippy Squirrel, another character with his own segments, always wants his Aunt Slappy, who says things like "Oh, for the love of Al Gore" and "All right already, Mr. Story Editor," to read him a bedtime story.
When she takes Skippy to see the classic movie "Bumbie, the Dearest Deer," he is so upset by the death of Bumbie's mother that Aunt Slappy takes him to visit the actress who played her.
The actress is quite old now, lives in a trailer park and brags about having dated George Jetson in her youth.
And there is Mindy, the baby girl who insists on calling her mother Lady, and Mindy's dog, Buttons.
Mom leaves the two alone, entering the house with the line "Now to call Mary Beth and gloat about my new apron."
Music is an important part of the mix.
There have been parodies of the "Gilligan's Island" theme song, a song about the unimportance of humans in the big universe ("We're tiny little specks about the size of Mickey Rooney," which is rhymed with puny) and the series' claim to educational value, Yakko's operettalike recitation of the name of every nation on the globe.
As Rita the cat singing about her move by boxcar to Monterey, Calif., says: "Hey, it's a cartoon. What'd you expect? Sondheim?"
Tom Ruegger, the show's senior producer, swears that "Animaniacs" was born one day when he drove onto the Warner lot and looked up at the water tower.
"We needed a marquee name," he recalls.
"So we thought, what if we made the Warner Brothers into cartoon characters?" Yakko, Wakko and Dot's personalities, he says, are based on "real kids, with that creating-havoc-in-the-back-of-the-car energy." Mr.
Ruegger's own children were 8, 6 and 4 at the time.
About 25 sets of characters were presented to Mr.
Spielberg for approval.
He seemed to really like four or five; he killed several on the spot.
"Some family members of his dropped by," says Mr.
Ruegger.
"Mindy and Buttons survived the cut that day because one of his kids pointed to Mindy and said, 'Yes. Mindy is good.' "
Characters that never saw the light of day include Nipsy and Russell (either two possums or two raccoons), Bossy Beaver and Doyle ("sort of the Ed Asner of beavers and his moronic sidekick") and the amoeba stars of "As the Petri Dish Turns."
No one, it seems, objected to "Animaniacs" carrying on the tradition of cartoon violence.
Characters get blown up by Fourth of July fireworks and by chemistry sets, squashed by various vehicles and hit over the head by objects five times their size.
As Ms.
MacCurdy says, "Warner Brothers cartoons from the beginning have been based on classic comedy -- Buster Keaton, Laurel and Hardy -- and the physical nature of that."
Mark Madrilejo, a 22-year-old computer engineering major at the University of Michigan, couldn't agree more.
"There are plenty of anvils being dropped," says Mr.
Madrilejo, an unabashed fan of the show.
"But there's an understanding that all the horrendous things that happen to some of the characters is all make-believe. No one dies. They just experience a moment of perhaps excruciating pain."


California's New Desert Parks
I WAS wandering around the Mojave Desert in the dead of winter, looking for some clue to the essence of a place once dismissed as a poor excuse for hell.
It was not an easy task.
As a native of the Pacific Northwest, where it can rain 150 inches a year on the coast, and evergreen forests are so thick they create their own climate, I was raised on a sylvan image of natural beauty.
The desert, bald and arid, was like a foreign language.
There were knockout views, a moonrise over the purple-hued Panamint Range in Death Valley, late light on the rock slabs of Joshua Tree, and odd-shaped freaks of dry-country evolution darting in and out of burrows.
The winter sun, a breakfast of palm dates and fresh scones, fuschia-colored cliffs -- all of it was memorable.
Still, the desert of southern California, the nation's largest single expanse of parkland and wilderness in the contiguous 48 states after an act of Congress last fall gave most of it protected status, remained something of a stranger.
Then I went to the Kelso Dunes, a wind-sculptured sand monument in the middle of the Mojave National Preserve, which is sandwiched between the two new national parks of Death Valley and Joshua Tree.


Washington Buckling Under Home Rule
Two decades after winning its long-sought quest for home rule, the city's government is a shambles, its cash is expected to run out sometime this spring, and its autonomy is threatened by its old ruler and nemesis, Congress, now led by conservative Republicans.
Mayor Marion Barry, the dominant power for 12 of those years, back in office from a jail cell, is proclaiming the limited home rule a failure.
Throwing the city on the mercy of Congress, he declares the nation's capital cannot survive "half slave and half free."


A City Built on $4.25 an Hour
IN Washington people talk a lot about the minimum wage these days, but few try to live with it.
This is a place where people actually do.
Jacksonville is a one and two-story, asphalt-coated city of trailer parks and pawnbrokers, where the residents eat $4.89 soup to Jell-O meals at the Golden Corral restaurant and buy blue jeans for $11.84 at the Wal-Mart.
It's close to the sea but remote, an hour's drive from an interstate and two-and-a-half hours from Raleigh, the closest big city -- and a world apart from North Carolina's high-tech, high-wage economy.


Volunteers Cast Light in a Modern Heart of Darkness
AT 11 o'clock on a cold night last month, nine men and women from a northern Westchester church climbed into the back of a silver truck parked in front of 97 Main Street in downtown Dobbs Ferry.
On the side of the truck, the words "Midnight Run" were stenciled in black.
Ranging in age from 14 to almost 80, the group formed into a kind of family, but several of the men and women were meeting for the first time.
They would have to depend on each other all night, until their mission was accomplished.
They were warmly dressed, and they joked quietly to keep up their spirits.
What they were doing was important, and maybe a bit dangerous.


Jaspers First To Win 20
Manhattan, with its second leading scorer, Hershimu Evans on the bench with a strained foot, gained revenge with a 84-67 home victory over Iona yesterday.
The Jaspers (20-2) became the first Division I team with 20 victories this season.
"They were the last team to beat us," said Manhattan Coach Fran Fraschilla of Iona, which handed the Jaspers their lone Metro Atlantic Athletic Association loss on Jan. 4, "and that got our players' attention."


Heroin From Burmese Surges as U.S. Debates Strategy
Myanmar has become the largest supplier of heroin sold in the United States, Clinton Administration officials have concluded, and diplomats and drug officials are struggling over how to respond to the sharply increased flow.
Administration narcotics experts say heroin production in Myanmar, formerly known as Burma, has doubled since 1988 and now accounts for 60 to 70 percent of the American supply.


Judge Tries to Guard 6 Daughters' Privacy in Sex-Assault Case
A sex-abuse case in which a father is accused of infecting six of his daughters with syphilis is pitting prosecutors who have charged the man with sexual assault against health officials who are reluctant to testify for fear of violating the daughters' privacy rights.
In a compromise on Tuesday, Judge Victor Musleh of State Circuit Court here ruled that the officials could testify but that the hearing would be closed to all but court officials and, eventually, a jury.


Correction
An article on Jan. 29 about the Corporation for Public Broadcasting used an outdated name for a new PBS series.
The title, originally "Peggy Noonan on Values," has been changed to "On Values: Talking With Peggy Noonan."


Informers in Bomb Arrest Were S. African Neighbors
The tip that led to the arrest this week of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the accused mastermind of the World Trade Center bombing, came from a South African Muslim couple living in a walk-up apartment across the street from his rooming house, senior officials of the Pakistan government said today.
The couple, who Pakistani officials said are in their late 20's, appear to be the likely beneficiaries of a reward of up to $2 million that the State Department had offered for information leading to the arrest of Mr.
Yousef.


Shall We? A Photographic Tour of How We Dance


Storm Finally Puts One in Victory Column
St.
John's at last found a team it could beat -- Boston College.
The Red Storm defeated the Eagles last night, 81-71, at Alumni Hall in a messy match between mediocre teams battling for eighth place in the Big East Conference.
St.
John's (10-10, 3-9) had lost nine straight games to Big East foes, the last victory coming against Providence on Jan. 4.
Brian Mahoney, the St.
John's coach, felt a sense of "relief," he said, adding, "It's nice to win a game after six or seven weeks."


Reducing Taxes on Property
YOU can't fight city hall?
Every year tens of thousands of property owners do just that -- and quite successfully -- by challenging their property tax assessments.
"It's a win-win situation," said John Berczuk, vice president of the New Bedford Management Corporation, a Manhattan-based property management company.


Fashion Past And Present, And a Benefit
Parties celebrate the men's shows, a retirement and a museum.


4-Wheel Drive: Not Created Equal
SPORT utility vehicles have become mobile status symbols, and a large part of their appeal continues to be the all-weather security of four-wheel drive.
Prospective purchasers may think all four-wheel-drive systems are basically the same, but there are significant differences.
Depending on the brand, the model designation and the options checked on the dealer's order form, a sport utility may not be intended to run in four-wheel drive on dry pavement, it may not be able to be towed if it is damaged, and its driver may have to stop, or even back up 15 feet, to shift between two-wheel and four-wheel drive.


The Next Environmental Threat
The Democrats who ran Congress in President Clinton's first two years routinely massacred good environmental legislation.
They defied Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt's efforts to reform grazing and mining laws.
They blocked efforts to rewrite demonstrably bad law like Superfund, the toxic-waste cleanup program.
Could things get worse?
Under Newt Gingrich, they already are.
The Democrats never set out to destroy 25 years of legislative history aimed at making America's air breathable and America's waters drinkable, swimmable and fishable.
But that is what the House Republicans seem bent on doing -- not by flat-out repealing basic laws but by making it almost impossible to put them into effect.


A Way to Get Rid of Cars The City Won't Tow Away
To the Editor:
In reference to the abandoned cars on private property in Bay Ridge that the city refuses to tow away ("Tug-of-War Over 2 Eyesores," Jan. 29), I offer an approach that worked for me some years ago.
Get a few guys together and push the cars by hand out onto a city street. (I can see in the accompanying photograph that they still have wheels and tires.) Then call the Sanitation Department, and the city will tow them. away.
JESSE BRYANT Manhattan


Valentine's Splurge: Chocolate Desserts
CHOCOLATE has strange properties.
Studies have shown that it contains phenylethylamine, a chemical stimulant, which is released by the brain in a passionate love affair.
Perhaps that explains why so many people eat chocolate on Valentine's Day (conversely, those who fall out of love have lower levels of phenylethylamine, which may explain why they often go on a chocolate binge).
In any event, there are few better ways to end a Valentine's Day dinner than with a dessert made from chocolate.
I like chocolate desserts that are fairly straightforward, and not too sweet.
A dark, moist chocolate cake, unadorned by creams or icings, is one of my favorites.
I also love a hot chocolate souffle, something I like to order in French restaurants when they have it on the menu.
Making a hot souffle at home, however, is not difficult if you have a reliable oven.
It is important to use egg whites at room temperature, since they will expand more when they are beaten and help the souffle rise.
They should be whisked until they form glossy peaks, not over-beaten or over-folded, or the souffle will be flat.
Care should also be taken when melting chocolate.
It turns into a solid lump if the heat is too high.
Melt it in a slow oven or a double boiler.


The Counter Counterculture
IT WAS COCKTAIL HOUR ON THE OPENING DAY of the new, Republican-dominated Congress, and the long, chandelier-lighted parlor of David Brock's town house in Georgetown was filling up with exuberant young conservatives fresh from events on the Hill.
Brock is a 32-year-old journalist who has taken the 60's counterculture credo that the personal is political and given it a whole new meaning -- describing Anita Hill as "a little bit nutty and a little bit slutty" and interviewing Arkansas state troopers about Bill Clinton's sex life.
He'd invited to his place perhaps two dozen men and women in their 20's and 30's and early 40's who, like him, made their living trying to tear down the liberal establishment, or what remains of it.
There were editors from The American Spectator -- the country's most raucous journal of conservative opinion.
It was in The Spectator that Brock published his savaging of Hill (later expanded into a best-selling book) and his "troopergate" allegations about the President.
To judge by his elegant French-cuffed shirt, let alone the town house, his association with The Spectator hadn't hurt him.


On Sunday; Back to Sports, O.J. Forecaster And Weather
THE trial lawyer was right on time for his next case.
The limo was waiting curbside for the trip uptown to his makeup appointment and his place on the anchor desk where the O.J.
Simpson trial television monitor had been looming daily like an eerie California harvest moon, the irresistible focus for the mass bayings of the nation.
While the images dance upon the glass live each day, the lawyer, Brian O'Dwyer, far off as he is in New York, has been managing his familiar passion and wiliness in debate as he performs as an expert commentator on this singular tale of crime and punishment.


LEONARDO DiCAPRIO
THE BOY WITH THE MOST beautiful name in Hollywood was once told by an agent to change it to Lenny Williams.
More recently, producers have advised him to star in movies about demonic teen-agers who strangle their girlfriends, or in tacky, fast-money Westerns like "The Quick and the Dead," which opened Friday.
And it has not been uncommon for strangers to offer him cocaine and heroin at industry parties.
In his short career -- he just turned 20 -- Leonardo DiCaprio has seen all the twisted ways people respond to a prodigy's gift: change it, own it.
Shooting "The Basketball Diaries," due out in April, he was trailed by flocks of pubescent girls, who recognized him from the sitcom "Growing Pains." A mother who spied him blowing bubbles between takes on location in New Jersey ordered her barely ambulatory toddler to go up and hug the famous young man.
It's not that DiCaprio is magnetic or studly: a growth spurt two years ago left him more gangly than statuesque, and his eyes, though piercing, are vacant.
Idling on a playground set, he's unremarkable, an empty vessel; his co-star Mark Wahlberg (formerly Marky Mark of underwear fame) has a far more electric physical presence.
But when rehearsal begins, it's DiCaprio you watch: his movements are smallest, his stillness is deepest, his lines are tossed farthest away.
His acting is effortless and, in the best way, unschooled -- which may be what makes people behave oddly around him.
It's as if he were a talisman, imbued with dark magic.
How else to explain his unnerving affinity for troubled characters?
Plucked at 17 from the insipid "Growing Pains" to play the abused stepson in "This Boy's Life," he stole the movie from Robert De Niro.
Then, as the retarded brother in "What's Eating Gilbert Grape," he transformed a grab bag of schoolyard stereotypes into an achingly lyrical portrait of a misfit.
The resulting Academy Award nomination made it official: DiCaprio was being groomed for one of Hollywood's classic scripts, the one in which talent equals torment and youth is public domain.


Cyberights
ABOUT 20 YEARS AGO, WHILE answering an intrusive telephone poll, I stumbled on a bit of legal philosophy that could serve the planet for at least a century.
I am assuming (a) that the 21st will be the Information Century, (b) that there will be no World War III to distract humanity from its lust for trade and profit and (c) that post-Marxist China will by then have stopped selling goods based on copyright theft.
That telephone pollster called, naturally, in the middle of dinner.
He asked what kind of car I dreamed of owning next.
Fortunately, I was annoyed.


Communication by Gunpowder
THE FALL OF THE ASANTE EMPIRE The Hundred-Year War for Africa's Gold Coast.
By Robert B. Edgerton.
Illustrated. 293 pp.
New York:  The Free Press. $23.


Corrections
An article on page 13 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the documentary "A Great Day in Harlem" misidentifies the theater at which it will be shown.
The film opens on Friday at the Quad Cinema, not the Village East.


UP AND COMING: Randy Becker; A Broadway Baby at 24
ALTHOUGH Randy Becker SPENDS 20 minutes on stage in Terrence McNally's "Love! Valour! Compassion!" lying nude on a raft, he auditioned for the part fully clothed, says Joe Mantello, the director.
It was just a lucky break that Mr.
Becker turned out to have a muscular, well-toned body.
The considerable male nudity in the play has been much talked about since it opened in November at the Manhattan Theater Club.
But Ramon, whom Mr.
Becker plays, is more than an object of lust to the other characters -- seven gay men who consider love, friendship, happiness and mortality in the course of three holiday weekends at a house in Dutchess County, N.Y.
They may show disdain when Ramon doesn't understand their musical theater references, but each wants something he has: if not his favors, his youth, his talent, his good health.


In the Wings: A Film With Few Clothes and No Regrets
HIGH OVER MALIBU, THE FULL MOON is so perfect it could have been installed by lighting technicians.
Aloof, it casts a cool light on the seething movie scene below, a show-biz party on the patio of a preposterously vulgar beach-front mansion.
The partygoers, who include a more than healthy sprinkling of leggy young women in very short, very tight spangly dresses, mill around a swimming pool.
Off to one side, a Lucullan buffet table bends under the weight of 10-pound lobsters on beds of seaweed, innumerable super-shrimp, heads of broccoli and cauliflower, bunches of grapes, and mega-loaves of bread.
Neon pink flamingos near a classical colonnade provide a subtle touch of class.
Paul Verhoeven, behind the camera for the first time since "Basic Instinct" in 1992, fusses over a small detail in the scene.
It is a key moment in "Showgirls," a drama that ventures, untentatively, into the sex-saturated world of Las Vegas lap dancing, strip clubs and top-of-the-line topless revues.
A smarmy Vegas singer, played by William Shockley, is supposed to breeze past two men in togas, Roman sandals and gilded laurel wreaths who will announce his entrance with a trumpet blast.
"The left trumpet a little lower, yeah?" says Mr.
Verhoeven.
"Good. That looks silly enough."


In the Region/Westchester; How a Co-op in Yonkers Staved Off Foreclosure
FOR two years, Joyce Parker and other members of the co-op board of Bryn Mawr Ridge here have been trying to turn around the troubled financial condition of their 528-unit, 19-building garden apartment complex, which was facing foreclosure.
In August, they turned to an attorney, who specializes in rescuing failing co-ops.
They now believe they are only a few weeks away from restoring the co-op's fiscal health.


A Dowager Learns How to Party
LISBON has often been deemed a dowager among European capitals, charming in its shabby gentility but not a particularly lively place.
Yet beyond the vestiges of extraordinary colonial wealth and the impressive art collections in this gracious hill-top city is a downtown scene that is as stylish as it is unexpected.
It is a scene that goes on 24 hours a day, with some bars opening at 10 or 11 at night, and music in many of the clubs starting well after 1 A.M.
Restaurants set their hours accordingly, and a whole crop of new places to eat has sprung up to cater to the night owls who move back and forth between the bars and dance clubs in Alcantara, the waterfront area, and those in the Bairro Alto, one of Lisbon's oldest quarters and the rallying point for the city's all-night club scene.


Wall Street; At CBS, the Shows Are Bad but the Stock Is Good
The ratings stink, earnings are off, and a key executive is reportedly shopping for a new job.
So what's with shares of CBS Inc., which have popped up 10.38 percent -- from $57.875 on Jan. 30 to $63.875 at Friday's close?
CBS said on Wednesday that fourth-quarter revenues were down 18 percent on a year-over-year basis.
That day, in a market in which even companies reporting good news suffered stock declines, CBS shares actually rose slightly, up 12.5 cents to $62.875.
Just the day before, the company had endured the rotten news that it ranked third of the three major networks in the ratings.
For this, investors salivate?


When 57 Jazz Artists Were Asked to Say 'Cheese'
IN 1989 JEAN BACH, A JAZZ FAN AND longtime radio producer, decided to put together a film documentary about the most famous photograph in the history of jazz, Art Kane's 1958 shot of 57 musicians posing outside a Harlem brownstone.
She did it because most people in the jazz world have an attachment to the photograph.
And she had heard that Mona Hinton, the wife of the bassist Milt Hinton, who is in the photograph, had filmed the proceedings with an 8-millimeter camera, making it possible to add movement to a seemingly static image.
The resulting documentary, "A Great Day in Harlem," which opens on Friday at the Village East Cinema, examines the making of Mr.
Kane's now-classic photograph.
This image, shot for Esquire magazine, shows a great cluster of musicians assembled on East 126th Street.
The film includes performance footage from the 50's television show "The Sound of Jazz" and from other sources, all designed to complement the still photograph.


Abuse Panel Sees Encouraging Sign in Lower Child Death Figure
Thirty-seven children whose families had troubled histories that were known to New York City child protection officials died in 1993, the lowest number of such child deaths since 1985, according to a city report issued last week.
An additional 56 children who were not known to the city's Child Welfare Administration died of suspected abuse in 1993.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 The headmaster of Brooklyn Poly Prep navigates his way through the 1990's.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Volleyball is great exercise, but it can also be profitable.
LETTERS 5  PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 12  A history of Valentine's Day cards; a celebration to romance at Fulton Ferry.
MOVIE CLOCK 13  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 14  The scene below Canal Street; a quiet oasis at the Duane Park Cafe, the warmth at Barocco.
SOAPBOX 15 Councilman Antonio Pagan of the Lower East Side defends himself against his critics.


REWRITING THE END
I do not object to the main theme of Jonathan Rosen's article "Rewriting the End" (Jan 22); Elisabeth Kubler-Ross does make death too easy for us.
The evidence is inconclusive that there is enough goodness and love in the cosmos to spare reflective creatures like ourselves from permanent annihilation.
Either way then, one must make a leap of faith.
Such a leap does not have to be religious in the formal sense.
Toward the end of his life, William James said he had come to believe in life after death because it was intolerable that he should never see his family and friends again.
Wish fulfillment?
Because we wish something to be true, it does not follow that it is not true.


Is It Magic Or Mania for Tech Stocks?
JUST when you thought the initial public offering market was dead, up leaps evidence of speculative fervor that just won't quit.
These days, that emotion is in technology.
Just using words like semiconductors, software and the information highway can get investors salivating.
The offering last week that caught investor's eyes was General Magic.
It is not, as you might think, a purveyor of apparatus for magicians.
Instead, it is a company that is working on software for such things as communicating on the information highway and searching for selected slices of data in the mounds of material available.
Its current holders include Apple, Motorola, Sony, Matsushita, Fujitsu and AT&amp;T.


February 5-11; The House's Gift to the President
Since the beginning of the Republic, the only way the President has been able to block legislation passed by Congress has been to veto the measure in its entirety.
This has been the essence of Congress's power over the purse.
It has also been the foundation of the pork barrel.
Last week, the Republican House of Representatives voted to change the venerable system by giving the Democratic President a line-item veto -- the power to revoke particular parts of spending bills without having to veto the whole legislation.


Erica Ventley, Thomas Fiorita
Erica Anri Ventley, a managing director at Veronis, Suhler &amp; Associates, an investment bank in New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Ralph Fiorita, a founder of U.S.
Mobilcomm, a wireless communications company in New York.
The Rev.
Gary Fertig officiated at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York, and Msgr.
Thomas P. Guinan also took part in the ceremony.
The bride graduated from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Aleena Dasha of New York and Henri Ventley of Munich, Germany.


Racial Wrongs Have Continued Since Slavery
To the Editor:
Senator Bob Dole proclaims that because of affirmative action, "the people in America now are paying a price for things that were done before they were born" (news article, Feb. 7).
He acknowledges that "slavery was wrong" and that "we did discriminate."


State College: Graduation Now Takes 5 or 6 Years
CHERI BUNGUARD is a business major at Rowan College in Glassboro, a senior who is president of her sorority and of the student government association.
But what really sets her apart from her classmates is that she expects to graduate in May, after only four years of undergraduate education.
According to the State Department of Higher Education, fewer than one out of five students at New Jersey's state colleges can say the same.
Phillip Beardsley, director of research for the department, said that 19.1 percent of first-time students who entered state colleges as freshmen in 1987 graduated in four years.
After five years, 41.4 percent had graduated, and after six years, 48.8 percent had obtained degrees.
"It must be understood," he added, "that this is a national phenomenon."


Amanda Gimble, Myron Glucksman
Amanda Lynne Gimble, a director of corporate strategy and planning at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York, is to marry Myron Samuel Glucksman, a vice president at Citicorp Securities in New York, today at the St.
Regis.
Rabbi Daniel Mehlman is to officiate in New York.
The bride, who will keep her name, graduated from Hunter College and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
She is a daughter of Maimie Gimble of North Miami Beach, Fla., and the late Michael Grant, and is an adopted daughter of Milton Gimble.


THE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
I, too, participated in that odd exercise, at Yale.
We were told that the purpose of the photos was, believe it or not, the improvement of our posture.
Those who "passed" went on to elective gym activities.
Those who didn't were given a course of "remedial" exercises, at the end of which another series of pictures was taken.
Of course, prior to the second picture, Delaney Kiphuth, the brother of Yale's famous swimming coach, showed us how to stand properly, so photographic evidence of our "improvement" could be obtained.


At Work; Stalking the Useful Career Guide
Which is better?
Surprise!
It depends.
Cyberspace might just as easily be called hyperspace in honor of the bombast that accompanies every great technological leap forward.
As successful purveyors of nostrums and lozenges, high-tech visionaries are bested only by people -- we won't say what sort of people -- who say you can cut taxes and keep entitlements.
Using his system, writes the "Companion" author, James C. Gonyea, you can put your resume up for consideration by some 21 million people.


Diagnosis: Treatment Pending
NEARLY every man over age 50 should have an annual blood test to detect prostate cancer, said Dr.
Joseph E. Oesterling, chairman of the urology department at the University of Michigan.
The test has been shown to be reliable in detecting aggressive tumors years before symptoms appear.
And prostate cancer is a major killer of men, second only to lung cancer.
So why should anyone turn down a chance for early detection and treatment?
Dr.
Charles Hennekens, professor of medicine at Harvard University School of Medicine, begs to differ.
He directed a recent study showing that the blood test, known as P.S.A. (for prostate specific antigen), is highly effective in finding cancer early, so he might be expected to be one of its biggest boosters.
His study found that the test detects nearly 90 percent of aggressive prostate cancers five years before they cause symptoms and that it finds more than half of them a decade before they would otherwise be noticed.


New Musical Headed For American Stage
UPON the dawning of a musical comedy at American Stage, commercial producers listen for the serious sound of money.
Out of six new song-filled shows that have had premieres in the company's nine seasons, four (most famously, "Forever Plaid") with significant signs of life after Teaneck have been sighted.
Now, James Hammerstein is counting on making it five.
Standing by for the preview on Wednesday of "I Love You, You're Perfect -- Now Change," Mr.
Hammerstein as producer expects to "lift this production and move it to Off Broadway," said James Vagias, the theater's executive producer.


Vietnamese Open Office To Improve U.S. Ties
When Hanoi opened its first diplomatic office here last week, the chief of liaison was met with angry shouts from protesters.
In the days that followed, however, the downtown suite of offices has filled up with flowers from American companies eager to do business with the former foe.
As Vietnam and the United States move gingerly toward full diplomatic ties, the strains of the past and the hopes for the future overlap awkwardly.


Small Businesses, Global Markets
AS a partner in a small but expanding manufacturing business, Herbert Schwartz sometimes sweeps the floors, makes the morning coffee for his 20 employees and answers the phones.
At the same time, he monitors the fortunes of the peso's rise and fall in Mexico, keeps close tabs on politics in the former Soviet republics and stays abreast of the latest trade policies in India -- countries where the engineer-turned-businessman markets temperature-resistant, ceramic-based products.
Aremco, Mr.
Schwartz's Ossining-based firm, sells adhesives used in assembling everything from B-2 Stealth bombers and women's hair dryers to factory equipment in developing markets.
One of the products, called Pyro-Putty -- a glue that can be used to repair steel machinery and car manifolds -- has become a hot-ticket item in recent years at automotive centers throughout the world, especially in countries where replacement parts for older vehicles are not available.


POSTINGS: Plan for Randalls and Wards Island Parks; A Workshop And an Exhibit
It has 27 softball fields, 11 tennis courts, 7 soccer fields and a 22,000-seat stadium.
It also has a psychiatric hospital and a 1,000-bed men's shelter.
These and more are all part of the Randalls and Wards Island Parks, a 406-acre complex on the two islands in the East River that is the focus of redevelopment efforts by the private Randalls Island Sports Foundation and New York City.
The city has pledged $20 million to the first phase of a projected $250 million development project that will begin next month with the drafting of a master plan.


THE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
In the fraternities at Dartmouth (1952-1956), where hazing trips were all the rage, pledges were frequently sent out in search of posture pictures, particularly those rumored to be held in a specific secure location at Wellesley.
Nearly 40 years later, so many pleasant and entertaining memories came rushing back as I read your story.
The ending wasn't quite as I had anticipated.
The fact that it ended up in The New York Times Magazine, well, I should have known!
WILTON S. SOGG Cleveland


Unesco Chief Builds Links To Americans
The Director General of Unesco, which the Clinton Administration has decided not to rejoin, is building unofficial bridges to Americans as a way to insure their involvement in the organization.
"The United States cannot be absent from Unesco, and in fact it is not," said Federico Mayor, who has run the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in Paris since 1987.


For Families, Friends Fade Away
CLOSE friends suddenly stopped calling and sending Christmas cards.
Others avoided her when they saw her in the stores.
"It's as though we have a cancer," said Margherita Del Core, whose husband, Donald, says he was fired from his job at the Millstone nuclear power station for his whistle-blowing activities.
The United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which regulates the nuclear industry, maintains that Mr.
Del Core was fired for disruptive behavior.
The friends, the majority of them met through the job at Millstone, faded away as the talk got tougher and tougher.


Church Finally Listens on Abuse by Priests
To the Editor:
James Cardinal Hickey's involvement of The Washington Post in the disposition of the case of four Roman Catholic priests of the Washington Archdiocese who admitted molesting the same altar boy over a period of some 20 years was a painful but enlightened approach (news article, Feb. 7).
It differs from earlier efforts of church administrators to deny the offense, quietly transfer the offenders and safeguard the image of the church.


Industries Urge 2 Goals For Congress
Describing the Republican election victory as a "rare window of opportunity," officials representing the nation's manufacturers voted today to lobby hard for two laws and to push the rest of their goals to the back burners.
One law would reduce Government regulation and the other would limit lawsuits against businesses.
Just the existence of a Republican Congress, and particularly one that might enact such cherished goals, lifted spirits among the 150 top executives attending a directors meeting of the National Association of Manufacturers, their first gathering since the election.
Not surprisingly, many expressed relief at no longer having to defend themselves against Democratic Congresses favoring tougher labor legislation, for example, or more environmental rules.


Transactions
WEEKEND  Auto Racing  NASCAR -- Fined Junior Johnson, car owner, $45,000 after discovering an illegal engine piece in qualifying and barred Brett Bodine, driver, from qualifying; fined car owner Bill Davis $25,000, driver Randy LaJoie $10,000 and crew chief Chris Hussey $100 and placed Hussey on indefinite probation for having an illegal hydraulic pump in their car to raise or lower the rear spoiler.
Baseball  Texas-Louisiana League RIO GRANDE VALLEY WHITEWINGS -- Announced that David Klvac, pitcher, has signed with the Pittsburgh Pirates.
Hockey  National Hockey League HARTFORD WHALERS -- Signed Paul Ranheim, left wing, to a multiyear contract.
LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Acquired Randy Burridge, left wing, from the Washington Capitals for Warren Rychel, left wing.
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Acquired Paul Stanton, defenseman, from the Boston Bruins for future considerations and assigned him to Denver of the International Hockey League.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Sent Jean-Yves Roy, forward, to Binghamton of the American Hockey League.
PHILADELPHIA FLYERS -- Traded Mark Lamb, center, to the Montreal Canadiens for cash.
Claimed Jim Montgomery, center, off waivers from Montreal.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Recalled Craig Johnson and Patrice Tardif, forwards, and Terry Hollinger, defenseman, from Peoria of the International Hockey League.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Traded Warren Rychel, left wing, to the Toronto Maple Leafs for a 1995 or 1997 fourth-round draft pick.
Central Hockey League CHL -- Suspended Brian Wells of Wichita indefinitely for knocking a linesman to the ice by hitting him in the head and neck areas with his stick during a game against San Antonio on Thursday night.
Colonial Hockey League DETROIT FALCONS -- Signed Darren Banks, left wing.
UTICA BLIZZARD -- Signed Bill Gall, defenseman.
East Coast Hockey League DAYTON BOMBERS -- Announced that Paul Taylor, goaltender, has been assigned to Dayton by Peoria of the International Hockey League; Jason Downey, defenseman, has been reassigned to Dayton by Kalamazoo of the IHL; and Pat Cavanaugh, right wing, has been recalled by Peoria.
Waived Chad Black, goaltender.
Olympics  U.S.
OLYMPIC COMMITTEE -- Approved Skip Bertman, LSU baseball coach, as the U.S. baseball coach for the next two years, including the Olympic Games, and Ron Polk of Missisippi State; Ray Tanner of North Carolina State; and Jerry Weinstein of Sacramento City College, as assistant coaches.


Muslim Edicts Take on New Force
The earth is flat. Whoever claims it is round is an atheist deserving of punishment.
That is a well-known religious edict, or fatwa, issued two years ago by Sheik Abdel-Aziz Ibn Baaz, the supreme religious authority of Saudi Arabia.
The blind theologian's status gives his fatwas great weight, though his opinions have often raised eyebrows or embarrassed worldly Saudis.


Adoption and the Power Of Trust and Bonding
I was very pleased with the article written about me  [ "The Hidden Children of the Holocaust, From Their Point of View," Jan. 8 ] .
However, there was one sentence that caused me concern, and it related to adoption: "How can you learn to trust and bond if from day one your mother gave you up?"


February 5-11: Protest at Rutgers; Embattled President Backed by University's Board
"The crisis," is now the common campus shorthand at Rutgers University for the 11 days of turmoil and student demonstrations aimed at toppling the president, Francis L. Lawrence, for his remarks about the "genetic hereditary background" of students who do not perform well on college admissions tests.
On Friday, the university's governing board endured more than five hours of angry speeches about racism and testimonials about Rutgers's president, Mr.
Lawrence, a 58-year-old scholar of 17th-century French classics, before deciding to back him.


Last Governor Without Veto Could Get It
Finally shedding its fear of England's colonial governors, the North Carolina Legislature has approved a constitutional amendment that would give the Governor the veto, a power denied the state's chief executive since the Revolution.
Because North Carolina has not allowed its governors to veto legislation -- the only state to do so -- bills adopted by the General Assembly go directly into law without a Governor's signature.


Wall Street; When Paper Profits Are for Real
FOR everyone who dutifully separates newspapers, cans and bottles from other garbage and takes care to put office paper in the recycling bin, some good news: recycling is fast becoming an integral part of the paper industry.
For many years, the accepted wisdom was that paper made from reclaimed fiber was more expensive and inferior to paper made from virgin fiber from ground-up trees.
The argument was that reclaimed paper was dirtier and harder to handle than the trees that were typically close to most paper mills' rural locations.


Brandishing an Illustrative Brush
GUILFORD is the kind of town that might have been thought up by the editor of a glossy magazine.
It really blossoms in the tourist season but remains charmingly make-believe even in the dead of winter.
Not the least of its assets is a green with a white church on one side and, opposite, the enterprise of Richard Greene.
This includes a restaurant, an antique store, a photography gallery and, behind it all, a barn-size building housing the Greene Art Gallery, where currently the work of William Thomson is on view.


Holy Bull Is Retired After Injury To His Leg
In one of the most stunning and bitter moments in recent racing history, the superhorse Holy Bull broke down with strained ligaments in his left foreleg today in the Donn Handicap at Gulfstream Park and came to the end of his career.
The great gray horse was dueling for the lead with the eventual winner, Cigar, halfway down the backstretch when Cigar suddenly drew clear of Holy Bull, last season's 3-year-old champion and Horse of the Year.
As the eight other horses charged past and the crowd of 18,693 gasped, Mike Smith slowed Holy Bull, jumped out of the saddle and waited alongside him for the horse ambulance.


Bookshelf
FREDERICK DOUGLASS: In His Own Words.
Edited by Milton Meltzer.
Illustrated by Stephen Alcorn.
Harcourt Brace. $22. (Ages 12 and up) This eloquent selection of annotated writings not from his autobiographies can introduce Douglass, or supplement other readings.
Complete with helpful annotations, biographical sketches, sources and index.
Dramatic linocut illustrations.


Friends of an Enigmatic Artist See a Riddle in His Death
If Ray Johnson lived an enigmatic life, his death has proved to be the ultimate riddle.
In the weeks since the police fished his body out of an icy cove by this old fishing village, anguished friends and admirers of the eccentric artist -- a man largely unknown to the general public but considered a genius by many in the art world -- have been racking their brains, rereading his correspondence, even retracing his last steps as they try to uncover what many of them believe must be the hidden meaning of his strange death.


Behind Mexico's Harder Line On Rebels, a Political Shift
While former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari was still celebrating the election of his hand-picked successor last summer, he liked to tell visitors that the peasant uprising he faced in the southern state of Chiapas would not be so serious a problem for Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon.
With the political appeal of the rebels fading since the first months after their revolt against the Government on Jan. 1, 1994, the next President would be able to take his time in dealing with them, people who spoke with Mr.
Salinas said he had told them.


For Honor and Harrods
To the Editor:
I am not a member of the British establishment, nor do I aspire to be, but neither do I come from a background that is in the least bit murky ("A Brash Outsider, Yes, but He Has Harrods Hopping," Profile, Jan. 29).
My father was a much-loved professor of Arabic and since when was the duty of nurturing the young regarded as dark or dishonorable?


The Enigma of 'Quiz Show': No Crowds
A FILM IN RELEASE acquires a life of its own.
Robert Redford's "Quiz Show" began as an event in September and ended the year as an enigma -- one that puzzled even the film makers themselves.
When the movie had been in theaters for only a few months, Hollywood Pictures pulled it.
But the studio is certain that "Quiz Show" will get Oscar nominations on Tuesday for best picture, best director (Robert Redford) and best adapted screenplay (Paul Attanasio).
Whether the film gets those nominations or not, the next day "Quiz Show" will return to theaters, complete with a new television campaign and new print ads.
The Walt Disney Company, Hollywood Pictures' parent, would not reveal the new print ads in advance, but it has been spreading the word that Mr.
Redford has been nominated by the Director's Guild for best director and, in its television ads, has been describing the film as "much talked about."


Mets' Campers Will Start At the Minor League Park
The Mets' major league clubhouse will be empty when spring training opens Thursday.
The corner locker that has belonged to Dwight Gooden for years will have no new inhabitant.
The whirlpool will be silent, the training room unused.
Left to a spring of replacement players -- Mets executives do not expect any player on their 40-man roster to break ranks and report to camp this week -- the organization has decided to hold workouts at their minor league facility in Port St.
Lucie, Fla.
It just seems more fitting that way.


THE POSTURE PHOTO SCANDAL
In some remote places, I am told, there are primitive people who object to being photographed, on the grounds that they will thereby lose their souls.
Years ago, when I first heard of this belief, I thought it a curious superstition.
Now I am not so sure.
ROBERT B. RAMIREZ New Orleans


Risky Business
To the Editor:
Those who govern and those who bring about future change at PBS will do well to remember that like it or not, television remains the entertainment force it has always been.


A Much-Needed Pool Of Unskilled Labor
"Handicapped Workers Perform Needed Jobs"  [ Jan. 15 ] , on jobs for the disabled, opened up a much neglected need on Long Island and elsewhere.
Essential jobs go unfilled, because no real effort to enlist qualified workers has been made.
Highly trained displaced technical workers will not be happy with jobs' requiring a minimum of skills, offering minimum pay.
There are, however, potential workers among the numbers of handicapped and individuals who cannot be trained in technology.
As the article indicated, they offer commitment, reliability and willing acceptance of the unskilled jobs that go begging.
In return the worker qualified, willing and able to do the job gains self-esteem, earned income, social interaction and satisfaction from a job well done.


Museum Thumb Piano Program
CONCERTS marking Black History Month are providing a variety of music.
Bracketing the week are programs in the monthlong African Odyssey Series at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers.
Today at 3 P.M., Lubangi Muniania, curator at the Museum of African Art, leads a workshop in making mbiras, the traditional West African instruments called thumb pianos.
Next Sunday at 3 P.M., Christine Campbell offers a fusion of songs and stories from black communities in the Caribbean, Europe, Asia and the Americas.
For more details or driving directions to the museum, call 963-4550.
A free concert at the Warner Library in Tarrytown today at 3 P.M. brings together singers from several black churches, the chorus performing hymns, spirituals and gospel songs.
No tickets are required.
The library's information number is 631-2189.


February 5-11; A Natural-Gas Man Has a Certain Something
IN the energy world, the geeks are pushing out the sheiks.
OPEC ministers, old-line oil executives and Texas wildcatters are no match for the balding economists, scientists and engineeers, dripping with graduate degrees, who run the natural gas companies.
While Saudi Arabia wallows in debt, companies nobody has ever heard of are building multibillion-dollar pipelines across mountain ranges, deserts and seas, and multibillion-dollar liquefaction plants to ship gas where even the pipelines can't go.


Correction
A review of books of poetry by Stephen Dunn and Stephen Dobyns on Jan. 15 misstated the title of an anthology in which both poets appear.
It is "The Best American Poetry 1993," not "The Best American Poems of 1993."


In-Crowd's Bowery Bar Wins Its Battle
Foes of the Bowery Bar, a celebrity haunt at the corner of the Bowery and East Fourth Street, recently withdrew their yearlong challenge to the restaurant -- a day before the Board of Standards and Appeals was to rule on whether the proprietors, Eric Goode and Serge Becker, needed a special permit to operate.


Americana's Season of Renewal
IF BIG-TIME BUYERS ONLY listened to their financial advisers, they would have stayed home during this year's winter antiques season in New York.
The stock market was down from a year ago, investors had been burned as the bond market tumbled, and year-end bonuses on Wall Street were sharply lower.
Yet, with hundreds of collectors and dealers doing a brisk business in furnishings and folk art, Americana sales topped $35 million, making this the liveliest season since 1990.
"When Wall Street goes down, our sales go up," said Harold Sack, the 83-year-old dean of Americana dealers who has seen this pattern repeated many times since the record-breaking Americana sales of 1930, a year after Wall Street's most famous crash.
"Collectors with lots of money get tired of doing nothing and have to recharge their batteries."


Building Newt Inc.: Money and Politics
The relationship between House Speaker Newt Gingrich and a family with extensive holdings in his original Congressional district, casts light on how a powerful local force can influence the development of a young politician.
The family, which owns Southwire, the nation's largest maker of copper wire and cable, helped to bolster his struggling personal and political finances in his formative years, campaign aides, contributors and public records indicate.


Sports of The Times; First Off, Calm Down Noise and Mascots
NEVER thought I would see the day when Vernon Maxwell would be the spokesman for civility in the sporting arena.
The man they call Mad Max -- and not merely by accident of alliteration -- made his point by running into the 10th row of seats and popping some fan in the snoot.
"My mistake was going into the stands," Maxwell conceded after he was suspended for 10 games and fined $20,000.
He says he is appealing because he was provoked by ugly language.


A Homeless Mind
THE GATES By Chuck Wachtel. 405 pp. New York: Viking. $23.95.


A Grant Makes Daydreams Possible
When 10-year-old Chris Frye peers from his window to the parking lot of the dilapidated Queens public housing complex where he lives, his mind's eye often sees a skating rink, a playing field for football, soccer and track, and a swimming pool.
These are not just the daydreams of a youngster who has been chased by drug dealers from the playground where he used to shoot hoops.
Last month, the Beach 41st Street Houses in Far Rockaway, where Chris lives with his family, received a $48 million Federal grant, the largest ever given to a single housing project in New York City.


Genus and Species, It's All in the Latin
WHAT is it about the use of Latin names for plants that makes so many gardeners wince?
Those who use the Latin are often considered overbearing, while those who are neophytes are usually put off by it.
Many believe that Latin binomials are too hard to learn and they would rather stick with the common names, thank you very much.


A Watery Theme Park
Most water parks are fairly straightforward, with thrills provided by the tube slides, speed slides and wave pools.
But theme parks rule these days.
And when Six Flags Hurricane Harbor, a 22-acre amusement park adjacent to Six Flags Magic Mountain in Valencia, Calif., opens this summer, it should qualify as a themed water park on a grand scale, with more than 14 attractions built to evoke a pirate's world or a tropical jungle.


POSTINGS: Three-Year, $12 Million Project to Begin in December; Metro-North to Renovate Its 125th St. Station
When the New York Central and Hudson River Railroad completed the 125th Street station in Harlem in 1897, the station was called "one of the finest in the city, containing everything necessary to the comfort of the traveling public."
These days, 4,000 commuters get on or off a total of 392 Metro-North trains there each weekday.
The first train, en route to Grand Central Terminal, rumbles in at 5:38 A.M.; the last pulls out at 1:41 A.M.
The station, though, is showing its age.
The commuters pass under a leaky viaduct, crowd narrow platforms and buy their tickets in a dreary waiting room.
"The station is unattractive and uninviting," said Marjorie Anders, a spokeswoman for Metro-North.


Only Champions Allowed in Top Show
In the political arena, in 1877, Rutherford B. Hayes was serving his first year as President of the United States.
In the racing world, the Kentucky Derby had its third running, with Baden Baden winning a $3,300 purse.
In the dog show ring, the Westminster Kennel Club held its very first event.
Tomorrow and Tuesday, the nation's most prestigious canine meeting will be staged for the 119th consecutive time, with 2,500 champions from 46 states, the District of Columbia and Canada, representing all the 148 breeds or varieties registered with the American Kennel Club, striving to win the Best in Show award at Madison Square Garden.
Every dog at Westminster is a champion, for no entry was accepted unless it already had a Ch. title.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Discovery Zone Inaugurates Manhattan Site
The Discovery Zone, the indoor recreation center for children, recently opened its first site in Manhattan, 20,000 square feet on the second floor of 258-278 Eighth Avenue, at 23d Street.


Three Newest All-Stars Happy to Be at Party
There are times when the National Basketball Association's All-Star Game looks like the Academy Awards.
Limousines are lined up in front of the players' hotel.
Cameras and autograph seekers pack the lobby.
Members of the news media bump into each other trying to get interviews.


Jackson to Play in Japan
DARRIN JACKSON, unable to reach a deal with the Chicago White Sox, agreed yesterday to a $3.5 million, one-year contract with the Seibu Lions of Japan's Pacific League.
Jackson hit .312 with 10 home runs and 51 runs batted in last season.


Spring Flings: Buyer, Beware
LIKE vendors in a bazaar, tour operators who sell spring break trips have spread out their wares.
College bulletin boards are hung with gaudy fliers showing young people cavorting on beaches in Florida, Texas, Cancun, the Bahamas, Jamaica.
Also like vendors in a bazaar, some operators do not deliver what they promise.
An un-air-conditioned room sleeping 80 on the top floor of a hotel is not what students have in mind when they see a flier, but one student complained to the Government last year about being assigned to such quarters.


The Grabbing of the Green; Acquisitive Parks Dept. Is Wily Scavenger for Bits of Land
At a time of city budget cuts, Parks Commissioner Henry J. Stern is aggressively enlarging his emerald empire, even as he admits that his agency cannot adequately care for the parks it has.
From the salt marshes of Jamaica Bay and Staten Island to the vacant lots of Harlem and the Bronx, the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation last year acquired 416.2 acres, a total roughly the size of half of Central Park and the most land acquired since 1983.


Days of Reckoning: The Pros Test McNair
This is a day that quarterback Steve McNair began planning for, began yearning for, that he has been excited about for nearly two years.
Today he performs in drills here at the National Football League scouting combine for all eyes to see.
For all pro scouts.
For all pro coaches.
For all of his peers.
"Right after my junior year at Alcorn State, despite what had been accomplished, it was then that I began hearing all of the stuff about me being in an inferior league, about the Southwestern Athletic Conference being a step down and about how I couldn't do the same things against better players," McNair said.
"So, going into my senior year, I knew I had to have a good year for us to make the playoffs. And then I knew I had to have a good playoff to make an all-star game. And then I knew I had to have a good all-star game to get ready for the combine."


Habitats/17 East 75th Street; Grecian Marble -- and a Pay Phone
PIA ZADORA never lived there.
Millions of dollars, however, were spent converting the 1880's town house at 17 East 75th Street to her taste: Her private bath was outfitted with white Grecian marble walls and gold and brilliant green malachite-handled faucets.
Her 10-year-old daughter's bath has rose quartz and marble walls, and her husband's is paneled from floor to ceiling with wildly patterned brown and black geode-like polished stone.


For Actors, a Casting Call And a Cautionary Note
THEY had seen the posters for an open casting call for Francis Ford Coppola's "On the Road," and they had come, draining every Barnes &amp; Noble in the city of the so-titled Jack Kerouac novel along the way.
They came in loafers, bomber jackets and poodle skirts, with resumes, snapshots and one-minute audiocassettes of themselves reading Whitman, Allen Ginsberg, William S. Burroughs or another author specified on the poster.
They came bearing gifts -- poems, artwork, candy and clippings they'd saved about the director's hipster daughter, Sofia.
Someone even brought Mr.
Coppola (who discovered Matt Dillon and Rob Lowe at an open casting call for "The Outsiders") a Duraflame log.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
CAMPFIRE OUTING
The Sierra Club of Fairfield County will hold a ski-hike and cookout with a possible camp-out in lean-tos next Sunday at the Ward Pound Ridge Reservation in Cross River.
The meeting place will be the entrance to the reservation on Route 121 at 9:15 A.M.
Participants must bring cross-country skis and lunch.


When Dressing Down Is Like Dressing Up
Men's dress-down Fridays are having an impact on the rest of the week.
That became evident looking at the hundreds of men attending the fall men's-wear collections in New York last week, the first time the four-day event was held in one general area, in three spaces around 10th Avenue and 54th Street.
The show was produced by 7th on Sixth Inc., the same people who for the last two years have presented the New York women's collections in the New York Public Library at 42d Street and under tents in Bryant Park.
While designer fantasies often dominate the runways, the audience presented a clear view of today's men's wear.
They made it clear that the traditional overcoat belongs to another generation.


Barkley's Circle Refuses To Be Broken
Like Charles Barkley pulling a rebound off the defensive boards and bursting from the pack, the sun breaks out with remarkable consistency in this baked desert valley.
The forecast is too bright to let one dark day ruin pro basketball's version of "It's a Wonderful Life." Thus depression over Danny Manning's torn anterior cruciate ligament seems already to have come and gone, like one more atrocious round of Barkley's power golf.


Packers' Sterling Sharpe To Sit Out 1995 Season
The All-Pro receiver STERLING SHARPE, recovering from post-season surgery to repair a potentially career-ending neck ailment, will not play in 1995, Green Bay Packers Coach MIKE HOLMGREN said yesterday.
"He can't even begin to think about playing next season," Holmgren said in Indianapolis, as quoted in Sunday's editions of The Milwaukee Journal.
"He will not play in '95. As to anything beyond that, we don't know at this point."


I.B.M. Disputes Report on Supply Problems
To the Editor:
"A Kobe Aftershock Hits Laptop Industry" (Jan. 29) contains inaccuracies about the International Business Machines Corporation's supply of color screens for its Thinkpad line.
There has been no significant disruption to I.B.M.'s supply of these screens because of the Kobe earthquake.
Our main active-matrix display factory (a joint venture with Toshiba) is well outside Kobe, suffered only minor damage and resumed production after only a few days -- nine days before your article appeared.
I.B.M. continues to ship Thinkpad computers to customers in volume as planned.
PER B. LARSEN  Somers, N.Y., Feb. 6  The writer is I.B.M.'s director of worldwide brand management for Thinkpad.


February 5-11: Primary Dropout; Quayle Bows Out Of the 1996 Race
The Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary, traditionally the first tests of Presidential candidate strength, have been replaced by an even earlier contest: the money primary.
And last week, it claimed another defeat, that of former Vice President Dan Quayle.


Youthful Touch in Bistro Geared to 90's Trends
THE Nicholas James Marketplace and Grill at 2057 Merrick Road in Merrick (546-4805) is the quintessential 90's restaurant.
It is a casual spot with a light, modern, youthful feel.
Its harlequin floors, open kitchen, mirrors, spotlights, blackboard, counters, coolers, photos and Art Deco wall fixtures all say "today."
The menu at the gently priced shiny bistro is a bull's-eye sample of contemporary eating habits, with its pastas, pizzas, salads, grilled vegetables, poultry, fish and meat.
And at meal's end there is the now familiar 90's inconsistency, sinfully rich desserts.


All Veggies and Grain, and Tasty Too
FOR the novice, eating in a totally vegetarian restaurant can be as daunting as the first encounter with a foreign menu without benefit of English subtitles.
This may be why It's Only Natural in Middletown provides a glossary with its menu.
And it's very helpful when we encounter on the menu terms like T.V.P (textured vegetable protein, a soy product), arame/hiziki (delicate black threads with a fishy taste), kombu/wakame (members of the kelp family, in dried strips) or rice dream (rice milk, sweetened and frozen).


Gay Leaders Resisting Attacks Against Gains
Two years ago Representative Gerry E. Studds stood in the Capitol with his companion, Dean Hara, eager to greet the newly inaugurated President on whom they and many other gay men and lesbians had pinned their hopes.
"I was euphoric," Mr.
Studds, Democrat of Massachusetts, recalled.
"The sun had suddenly broken out with an intensity that none of us ever really expected to live to see."


Two Ways To Get Wired
America's answer to the French cafe is the coffee bar with an Internet link.
It's the meeting of two current obsessions -- coffee and information.
At the Icon Byte Bar and Grill in San Francisco, for instance, patrons inhabit a "digital forest" made of sculptures and computer-generated paintings as they tap away on a Macintosh Quadra.
At the Red Light Cafe in Atlanta, you can recline in an ergonomically perfect chair as you wend your way through the net.


Islanders Score Late and Not Much, but Win Anyway
It has almost become a given this season that the Islanders will fall behind early any time they play.
"We should be getting used to it by now," joked Coach Lorne Henning this afternoon after watching his team give up the opening goal for the 10th time in 11 games.


Iranian President Blames West for Hardships
Looking back on 16 years of Islamic fundamentalist rule, President Hashemi Rafsanjani, in an address today, strongly defended Iran's accomplishments and warned the West that its "poisonous campaign of lies" against Iran and Islamic militancy would fail.
Speaking to an estimated 150,000 people in Teheran's Freedom Square in state-orchestrated ceremonies commemorating the anniversary of the revolution, Mr.
Rafsanjani said that Islamic fundamentalism had become a nuisance to western interests.


F.D.A. Becomes Target Of Empowered Groups
Among the Republicans in Congress and their allies in conservative advocacy groups, the Food and Drug Administration has become the first and biggest target in the push for deregulation.
Conservative groups, in position papers and advertisements in newspapers, magazines and television, have sought to portray the agency as a prime example of what is wrong with Federal regulation.


Poetry and the Uplifting Of Civilization
Edward Butscher of our "once dynamic culture,"  [ "Poetry and the Decline of Civilization," Letters, Dec. 4 ]  deploring the malaise of our literary tastes as exemplified by the poetry of Ann Porter, is reflective of a poet deep in his own malaise.
Butscher's misplaced venom should be targeted to the National Book Awards Committee for their embarrassment of their rejection of Mr.
Butscher's multidimensional unsentimental wave of intellectualism and irreligiosity in contemporary American poetry.


Upside the Head
RIGHT FROM THE get-go, we're going to knock ourselves out by tracing the origin of upside the head.
Heath Shuler is the high-priced young quarterback for the Washington Redskins.
"He is now in the National Football League," David Aldridge wrote in The Washington Post, "and soon will have all types of men just waiting to crack a forearm upside his $19.25 million head."


Retooling Poly Prep
THE chapel at Poly Prep comes straight out of central casting (boys' school, old-line; jump-cut to summers in Quogue).
There's the dark woodwork, the stiff-backed pews, the framed black-and-white photographs of alumni killed on the battlefields of World War II.
One expects a plump and pink-faced chaplain, intoning something from the Book of Common Prayer.
Instead, one can hear the sounds, in twice-weekly assemblies, of student poetry, along with discussions about Ramadan, the monthlong Muslim fast, or Diwali, the Hindu festival of lights.


Last Refuge of Smokers: Very Small Restaurants
For travelers who want to combine dining and smoking, New York City's new smoking law provides a single loophole: go to a very small restaurant.
Fearing that small restaurateurs could not survive the city's stringent new rules, which take effect on April 10, the Mayor and City Council decided to exempt restaurants that seat 35 or fewer people.


Conservative Champion Arrives From Rust Belt
Pudgy, balding and a plodding orator, Gov.
John M. Engler has become an unlikely face of revolution.
Four years after winning office in an election many called a fluke victory for Republicans, John Engler came to Washington last week a conquering hero, winning salutes from both President Clinton and House Speaker Newt Gingrich.
When he arrived home, at the Michigan Republican Party convention, he was welcomed with placards that declared, "Engler for President."


Paul Monette, 49, Who Wrote of AIDS, Dies
Paul Monette, a writer whose autobiography, "Becoming a Man: Half a Life Story," a memoir of suppressing and then celebrating his homosexuality, won the 1992 National Book Award for nonfiction, died at home Friday at 7:30 P.M.
He was 49 and lived in West Hollywood, Calif.
Elisabeth Nonas, a close friend, said the cause was complications from AIDS.


8 Quit Art Center Board
THE upheavals continued last week at the Northern Westchester Center for the Arts here, which recently dismissed its founder and executive director, Bira Rabushka.
Eight members of the board of directors resigned several hours before a scheduled board meeting last Monday.
Among them were three members of the executive committee, including Dee DelBello, the board chairwoman.
Thirteen board members remain.
Bernard Mindich, one of the resigning members, said: "This has been four months of tremendous distress for all of us. Bira's situation was a major element in the whole experience, but it was only symptomatic of something really wrong there. We've been fighting a battle to rescue the center from forces we find inappropriate. The dream has been tremendously altered."


CLINTON PROMISES TO VETO MEASURE ON POLICE FUNDING
President Clinton today laid down his hardest line since the Republicans took control of Congress, vowing to veto an effort to alter a provision in last year's anti-crime legislation that was meant to put 100,000 additional police officers on the street.
It was the most forceful veto threat from Mr.
Clinton since the voters elected a divided Government last November.


A PC Elitist Turns Crowd Pleaser
FOR the first decade of the personal computer revolution, the Hewlett-Packard Company had the dubious distinction of being the most prestigious manufacturer consigned to that great wedge of market share charts dubbed "other."
Today Hewlett-Packard is the second-fastest-growing personal computer company, behind only Packard Bell Electronics Inc., and is ranked No. 9 in total worldwide sales and No. 3 in sales of PC-based servers, larger machines used on networks, according to the International Data Corporation, a market research firm in Framingham, Mass.
In large corporate accounts and in many European and Latin American countries, Hewlett-Packard ranks higher.


Visaless Taiwan Stays Increased to 2 Weeks
The length of time travelers from the United States and 11 other countries may stay in Taiwan without visas has increased from 5 days to 14.
The other countries affected are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and New Zealand.
Visitors from those countries should have up-to-date passports with at least six months remaining before expiration.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GRAMERCY PARK AREA  $520,000
112 East 19th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,850-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; dining area, high-ceilings, h/w floors, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,555, 44% tax-deductible, listed at $595,000, 21 weeks on market (Brokers: D.J. Knight; Halstead Property Co.)


White House Widens Effort On Behalf Of Its Nominee
The Clinton Administration continued its efforts this weekend to salvage the nomination of Dr.
Henry Foster Jr. as Surgeon General, scheduling an array of Administration officials for the Sunday television talk shows on his behalf and trying to rally support among physician and other medical groups.
But the White House also found itself responding to new reports: According to The Associated Press, Dr.
Foster wrote in a 1976 medical journal that he had performed hysterectomies to sterilize some severely mentally retarded women.


Greedy Owners
To The Sports Editor:
The sad thing about this whole messy affair is that fans don't count.
Teams appear to believe that we will go to games simply to watch player X hit a home run and Y strike out a dozen batters, forgetting that what fans really respond to are personalities.
I want to see a Gooden or a Canseco or a Mattingly, not some no-name.


February 5-11: Fighting Terrorism; World Trade Center Suspect, One of F.B.I.'s Most-Wanted, Is Captured in Pakistan
Ramzi Ahmed Yousef's angular face was familiar from his photograph on the F.B.I.'s Most Wanted List, but it was the hands, deeply scarred from explosive burns, that Government agents said confirmed their suspicion that they had caught up with the suspected mastermind of the World Trade Center bombing.
Mr.
Yousef was picked up at an Islamabad rooming house by Pakistani authorities on Tuesday morning and turned over to a 20-member team of F.B.I. agents who flew him back to New York City.


Genus and Species, It's All in the Latin
WHAT is it about the use of Latin names for plants that makes so many gardeners wince?
Those who use the Latin are often considered overbearing, while those who are neophytes are usually put off by it.
Many believe that Latin binomials are too hard to learn and they would rather stick with the common names, thank you very much.


'Dr.' Yoo, Target of Brothel Raids, Vanishes
Dong Keun Yoo may not be one of America's Most Wanted or the F.B.I.'s 10 Most Wanted.
But he is at the top of the fugitive list at the Mayor's Office for Midtown Enforcement, with a price tag on his head in the form of a $2.2 million court judgment against his assets.
For years, law-enforcement officials say, the elusive Mr.
Yoo carried on a highly irregular dual career.
His main occupation was owning several midtown massage parlors that authorities say had up to 30 prostitutes each, making him one of the city's biggest brothel operators.


Sports of The Times; Yes, Santa, There Is A Virginia
JUST asking.
Is baseball's proposed expansion franchise in northern Virginia connected to the club owners' lobby in Washington?
Just asking.


Without Portfolio: Wartime Art Daredevils
THEY WERE UNLIKELY heroes, Oskar Schindlers of art, sleuths and scavengers who stymied the Nazis to rescue Nefertiti and other looted statuary, master paintings, carved altarpieces and synagogue silver during and after World War II.
One had been the editor of a city planning magazine in San Francisco, another an architect from Ohio.
There was a prim French museum curator and a librarian from Prague's doomed Jewish community.
The ultimate fate of missing art continues to divide Russia and Germany and other former combatants 50 years after the collapse of the Third Reich.
Just last week, the Russians offered a preview of next month's controversial Hermitage show of 74 French paintings taken from Germany in 1945.


Yankees Are Walking Tightrope Into Spring
There are no signs outside Fort Lauderdale Stadium saying the circus is coming to town because that would be malicious.
But there is sure to be a circus-like atmosphere when the Yankees conduct their first spring training workout Thursday with the pitchers and catchers who will eventually comprise part of their replacement team.
This circus is not going to be fun; in fact, Manager Buck Showalter is dreading it.
This is not meant to depict the mostly unknown players as clowns, even though union supporters would.
But this odd setting could produce a surprise every day.
Expect it.


Childress's Lightning Hits Duke Yet Again
Wake Forest 62, Duke 61
Duke, which has lost on all sorts of shots since it lost its coach for the season, lost yesterday on a shot straight out of last season.


The End Is Near
To the Editor:
John Gray's review of three books on democracy prompts these thoughts:


The Executive Computer; Is Video Conferencing Coming of Age?
IF there were an official ranking of hype, somewhere on the list between low-fat junk food and the O. J. Simpson trial might be the term "video conferencing."
But if Apple Computer and other industry players are right, this could be the year video conferencing finally lives up to its promise.
At an industry trade show in San Francisco last week, Apple announced a new software technology that has the very real potential of driving down the cost of personal video-conferencing equipment, while solving some of the problems that have nagged this talking-heads technology since it first arrived on personal computers a few years ago.


Big Airlines to Monitor Safety at Little Ones
The Federal Aviation Administration and the airlines are exploring ways to restore confidence in air travel after a series of crashes.
A simple idea that is gaining momentum is making the big carriers supervise safety at the little commuter airlines that feed them passengers.
Those commuter lines have long been a source of confusion, according to some aviation officials.
Because the airlines have similar names, and the name-brand carrier sells tickets on the little planes, passengers, not surprisingly, tend to think that the commuter line is part of the big carrier.


Ifs, Ands and Rebuts
To the Editor:
I am alarmed that in the Jan. 22 Book Review you published a reader's complaint about the wonderful fights between authors and reviewers that you air in your Letters column, and hope you are not signaling your intent to close the wrestling pit.


March Winds in a February Sky


'Holding the Line'
To the Editor:
A companion to Jonathan D. Rosen blum's "Copper Crucible" (review, Jan. 15), giving another view of the Phelps Dodge 1983 Arizona copper mine strike, is "Holding the Line: Women in the Great Arizona Mine Strike of 1983," by Barbara Kingsolver (yes, the same Barbara Kingsolver who wrote "The Bean Trees" and "Pigs in Heaven").


A Big Test for UConn: Trip to Carrier Dome
The last time his team passed this way, and displayed a sense of vulnerability in the chaos of the Carrier Dome, Jim Calhoun did something that some coaches might consider giving up their shoe contracts to try.
"I shut it off," he remembered.
Calhoun did not turn the game off for long, and he would not like another opportunity.
He was back in Connecticut, in a hospital, coping with a frighteningly baffling case of pneumonia that caused him to lose 17 pounds.
The Huskies, on their way to a Big East regular-season championship by a record three-game margin, allowed Syracuse to score 108 points.
An undefeated conference record was gone, a No. 5 ranking was suddenly questioned and future opponents had some valuable tape to study.


Word for Word /The Dog Book; Self-Importance Can Be Important, But Hold the Pendulous Dewlaps
THE annual Westminster Kennel Club Show, the most prestigious event in dogdom, will be held tomorrow and Tuesday in Madison Square Garden.
A ribbon in Westminster is akin to an Oscar, or an Emmy, or a Pulitzer -- for the dog owners, if not the dogs.
The judges have much to guide them.
For instance, in evaluating Scottish deerhounds, the 1576 book "Of Englishe Dogges" by one Dr.
Caius is a must-read: "Some are of a greater sorte, some of a lesser; some are smoothe skynned and some curled, the bigger therefore are appointed to hunt the bigger beastes, the duck, the hart, the doe."


February 5-11; A Handshake in Peace


For French, Long Swim Is Not Enough
A 42-year-old French swimmer who crossed the Atlantic Ocean only to see his exploit ridiculed at home as a publicity stunt when he stepped ashore in Barbados said this weekend that he did it because he was heavily in debt.
"I have been caught up in an infernal grinding of gears," Guy Delage, the swimmer, told the French daily Liberation, referring to detractions that he had not really swum the entire way across the ocean and had tainted his achievement by doing it for money instead of pure adventure.
Mr.
Delage began his crossing from the Cape Verde Islands, off the west coast of Africa.


REWRITING THE END
I do not find it jarring or contradictory that, having championed humane care for the dying, Kubler-Ross now argues that death does not exist.
In fact, these two emphases seem to complement each other and offer important insight into the difference between "death" and "dying." The possibility that death may be something other than an evil and a subtraction might allow those who care for the dying to offer not only skillful palliation but also hope to allay fears.
VIRGINIA A. SHARPE Washington


THE NATION: The Greatest O.J. Show on Earth; Searching for Thrills, the Cheaper the Better
IT is a caravan of wooden trailers and satellite trucks, of gawkers and gewgaw merchants, and it moves like a circus from one high-profile, high Neilsen-rating tragedy to another.
It specializes in criminal trials and has already been through William Kennedy Smith, the Menendez Brothers and the Bobbitts.
Its latest stop is downtown Los Angeles, for what has become, quite literally, the Greatest Show on Earth.
Opinion polls show that the public is sick of People v.
Orenthal James Simpson.
But in the electronic village that has popped up outside the Hall of Justice, opposite the courthouse in which Mr.
Simpson sits, and extending to the Hollywood Freeway, one can make a different diagnosis: the sicknesses at work here are an insatiable hunger for titillation and a terminal case of voyeurism.


Officers Caught in Middle Of Giuliani-Bratton Feud
They rode in town side by side, promising to bring down the crime rate and restore order to New York City.
Now, the friction between City Hall and Police Headquarters has left some officers wondering: will they have to choose sides between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani -- a fierce supporter of the police -- and their Commissioner, William J. Bratton.
On Friday, John Miller, the Deputy Commissioner for Public Information, resigned, saying he could not follow the Mayor's order to reorganize his staff, which includes 28 uniformed officers and 7 civilians.
The Mayor wanted to move officers out of public relations and into crime-fighting jobs.


At the Repository of High School Memories
FOR some people, yearbook predictions can indeed be prophetic.
Take Michael Crichton, Roslyn High, Class of '60.
Mr.
Crichton's classmates voted him "most likely to succeed," "class writer" and "the tallest."
Today Mr.
Crichton is still writing and still tall.
As for succeeding, his best-selling novels-turned-movies, "Jurassic Park" and "Disclosure," place him in the stratosphere of success tales.


Paula Brown, Nathan Vogel
Paula Brown, a daughter of Jack and Edith Brown of Millburn, N.J., and Nathan Vogel, the son of Jacob and Rachel Vogel of South Euclid, Ohio, are to be married today.
Rabbi Tzvi Blanchard is to perform the ceremony at the Congregation Kehilath Jeshurun in New York.
The bride, 41, graduated from New York University and received a master's degree in library science from Rutgers University.
She is the information manager at the New York State Trial Lawyers Association in New York.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the Learning in Retirement Institute of Iona College in New Rochelle misstated the yearly membership fee.
It is $150, not $15.


After Kobe Quake Came a Trade War
To the Editor:
Re "Japan Reluctant to Accept Help From Abroad for Quake Victims" (front page, Feb. 5): Behind such reluctance lies a story not only of United States companies driven by humanitarian goals and hindered by Japanese bureaucrats.
But also it is a story about strategic moves by American companies trying to gain market share in the Kansai (Kobe-Osaka) region.


Amendment To Balance U.S. Budget Is Gaining
With a potentially decisive vote approaching early next week, supporters of a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution said on Friday that they had all but one of the 67 votes that they need to push it through the Senate and a half-dozen undecided senators from which to get it.
Amid the weaving and bobbing among Democrats who are hedging their support for the measure, that assertion was not easy to verify.
But supporters received a visible boost on Friday afternoon when Senator Max Baucus, a Montana Democrat who had opposed the amendment the last time it came to a vote, took to the Senate floor to say he will vote for it this time.


Gazans Get Own TV, Filtered By Arafat
Most nights now at 8:30, Bakir Radwan and his family sit in their bare cinder-block house in the Shati refugee camp watching a novelty that has begun to reach many living rooms here: Palestinian television news.
The Radwans, who installed a new antenna several weeks ago, watch with mixed emotions.
They are proud to see Palestinian television, originating from Gaza, after decades of only Israeli and Arab state broadcasts.
But they also know that their news is filtered by the Palestinian Authority, which controls programming.


Reporter's Notebook; Views Shift On Insanity In Killings On L.I.R.R.
Carolyn McCarthy and many of the other family members of the victims of the Long Island Rail Road shootings have changed their minds about Colin Ferguson.
They no longer think he's crazy.
"My attitude on him has changed completely," said Mrs.
McCarthy, whose 52-year-old husband, Dennis, was killed, and son, Kevin, 27, was critically wounded during the shootings on the 5:33 train from Pennsylvania Station on Dec. 7, 1993.


Sound Bytes; Let There Be Bytes!
DON'T look now, but Moses is about to meet the information age.
Charlton Heston, the man who brought the Bible to the movie screen in "The Ten Commandments" (as Moses) and "The Greatest Story Ever Told" (as John the Baptist), is going to do the same for the personal computer.
Later this year, Mr.
Heston, who won the 1959 Academy Award for best actor for Ben-Hur, plans to release his first software program: a CD-ROM offering of the King James Version, complete with readings by Mr.
Heston and film footage of the Holy Land.
The planned CD-ROM is based on a television miniseries Mr.
Heston made in 1992 for the Arts and Entertainment Network, "Charlton Heston's Voyage Through the Bible."


Traffic Jams Around Princeton Rekindle a Highway Debate
Drivers who live within a 30-mile radius of this university town keep a playbook on local roads that is often as complicated as the ones memorized by Super Bowl quarterbacks.
Reverses, buttonhooks, end-arounds and a lot of Hail Marys are called upon to get in and out of the area on roads so choked with traffic and construction that they seem to surrender only three yards and a cloud of dust at peak hours.


Ranger Victory Secures A Share of First Place
On a night the Rangers could have easily rationalized their way to another defeat, playing their third game in four days and a road game at that, they drew a little on last season's Stanley Cup magic.
Coming from behind and playing short-handed for the game's last 1 minute 34 seconds, New York held off the Tampa Bay Lightning, 3-2, to assume a piece of first place in the scrambled Atlantic Division.


In Canada, Doubts Fade Quickly About Trade Accord
WHILE the United States and Mexico are still recovering from battles fought during the first year of the North American Free Trade Agreement, Canada, which was dragged kicking and screaming into the arrangements, has emerged as the real winner.
Exports have brought much-needed job growth.
Employment last year rose by 2 percent, or 431,000 jobs, all of them full time and in the private sector.
Unemployment, at 9.7 percent, is near a four-year low.


Foreign Affairs; Battle of the Briefcase
When I was in Hong Kong recently I noticed a small item in the paper reporting that a prominent democracy campaigner from Shanghai, Dai Xeuzhong, had been sentenced to three years in prison for tax evasion.
Now that's interesting, I thought.
The Chinese have been telling the U.S. that they just can't track down all those pirate factories ripping off American compact disks, movies and software, but they managed to track down the tax returns of Mr.
Dai, out of 1.2 billion Chinese.
Funny people these Chinese leaders.
They have no problem with the needles; it's the haystacks that elude them.
Why?
Because the pirate factories are owned and operated by provincial governments, ruling families or the army and are cash cows for all of them.
They need to keep them going to underwrite lavish life styles, to finance government budgets or to employ some of the millions of Chinese who have left the countryside and are roaming the cities for work.
That's why when the central authorities in Beijing, who have good copyright laws on the books, pull levers to enforce those laws, the levers come off in their hands.


Business Diary: February 5-10
COMPANIES You Can't Go Home Again If You Stay in California  To Morrison Knudsen's directors, William Agee must have seemed a natural.
He'd done great things as the boy wonder of Bendix, and if he'd made messy headlines for promoting Mary Cunningham a bit too rapidly, well, that was yesterday's news.
She was Mary Agee now.
And Mr.
Agee would surely put his heart into running Morrison, based as it is in his hometown, Boise, Idaho.
Maybe the board was so proud to have landed Mr.
Agee in 1988 that it didn't notice the warning signs.
What signs?
Well, there was the company jet; the Agees used it so much the I.R.S. tried to get them to report it as taxable income.
And Mr.
Agee took telecommuting to unimagined heights, ending up running things from California, mainly by fax and phone.
But losses and a plunging stock price could not be ignored; last week, under mounting pressure, Mr.
Agee resigned.


NAVEL MANEUVERS
I presume that had Singman's 13-year-old daughter told him that all the kids were into animal sacrifice, we would be reading about his assistance in preparing a ritual altar.


Valentine's Splurge: Chocolate Desserts
CHOCOLATE has strange properties.
Studies have shown that it contains phenylethylamine, a chemical stimulant, which is released by the brain in a passionate love affair.
Perhaps that explains why so many people eat chocolate on Valentine's Day (conversely, those who fall out of love have lower levels of phenylethylamine, which may explain why they often go on a chocolate binge).
In any event, there are few better ways to end a Valentine's Day dinner than with a dessert made from chocolate.
I like chocolate desserts that are fairly straightforward, and not too sweet.
A dark, moist chocolate cake, unadorned by creams or icings, is one of my favorites.
I also love a hot chocolate souffle, something I like to order in French restaurants when they have it on the menu.
Making a hot souffle at home, however, is not difficult if you have a reliable oven.
It is important to use egg whites at room temperature, since they will expand more when they are beaten and help the souffle rise.
They should be whisked until they form glossy peaks, not over-beaten or over-folded, or the souffle will be flat.
Care should also be taken when melting chocolate.
It turns into a solid lump if the heat is too high.
Melt it in a slow oven or a double boiler.


Correction
The Commercial Property column last Sunday, about work space rented to caterers, rendered incorrectly the name of a catering concern and the surname of one of its owners.
The caterer is Glorious Food, not Glorious Foods.
Its executive chef is Jean-Claude Nedelec, not Nedelac.
A picture caption with the article misidentified the kitchen shown with chefs at work.
It is at Glorious Food, at 522 East 74th Street, not at Gansevoort Kitchens.


On the Subject Of Highway Tolls
Once again, it tolls, and the toll increases.
As a longtime commuter and traveler in the N.J./N.Y. area and N.J./Washington corridor, I believe it is long past the time for a fresh look at the entire situation.
Perhaps our new governors can be persuaded to apply some new thinking to the toll issue.
Is there not a way to devise a registration-based system that would eliminate both the need for and the colossal waste involved in the toll collection process?


Jill E. Pearl, Richard T. Farrell
Jill E. Pearl, a daughter of Sheila Pearl of Ridgefield, Conn., and John Pearl of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Richard T. Farrell, a son of Janet and Frank Farrell of Ridgefield.
The Rev.
James Rosch performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Ridgefield.
Mrs.
Farrell, 25, is also a stepdaughter of Hilary Pearl.
The bride graduated from Franklin Pierce College.
She and the bridegroom, 29, are students at Johnson State College.
She is studying for a master's degree in education; he is enrolled in the undergraduate school.
Mr.
Farrell is also a residential counselor at the Laraway School, a group home for adolescents with behavioral problems, in Johnson, Vt.


Correction
A report in the "Sunday" pages on Jan. 29 about the Center for the Arts in California described its location imprecisely.
Yerba Buena Gardens is a cultural center in downtown San Francisco, not a separate town.


Profile; Having Done It All in Steel, He's on Top at Last
"BY most measures, we should have gone bankrupt," Tom Graham said of the steelmaking operation here, which he took over in 1992.
The outlook was indeed bleak, with the operation bleeding cash and torn between its joint owners, Armco and Kawasaki Steel.
But it did not go bankrupt.
Buoyed by the strongest market for steel in decades -- plus Mr.
Graham's ferocious insistence on lifting productivity -- AK Steel last year became, ton for ton, the most profitable integrated steel company in the nation.
Today it is an independent, publicly traded company specializing in high-value coated sheet steel, which it sells to the automotive and appliance industries.


Cambridge Journal; Putting Sweet Nothings On Little Candy Hearts
The New England Confectionary Company, better known as Necco, makes eight billion conversation hearts a year.
Year after year the same hearts, white, green, yellow, orange, purple and pink, with the same sayings.
Be True.
My Man.
Honey Bun.
I'll Wait.
So ubiquitous are the hearts around St.
Valentine's Day that the marketing director, Walter Marshall, can hardly muster any enthusiasm for them.
"I'd like to be out on the golf course, not talking about conversation hearts," he said as he led a visitor through the plant here.
"They're aggravating."


Who Are Those Guys? Veil of Secrecy to Be Lifted Soon
A truck driver double-parked outside Shea Stadium the other day, went inside for about an hour, threw some pitches for Mets officials and now won't be driving a truck much longer.
But who was that masked man?
The Mets aren't saying.
They won't say until Friday afternoon when, on the first day of their spring training, they identify all of the players they have recruited to replace their striking players.
The 27 other major league baseball teams haven't revealed the names of their replacement players either.


Rice Guns Down Miller From Afar
See what happens when Reggie Miller doesn't have Spike Lee to shut up and the Knicks to shoot down?
Miller, one of the favorites in the AT&amp;T Long Distance Shootout, guaranteed victory if the event had been staged at Madison Square Garden, where he nearly shot down the Knicks in last year's Eastern Conference finals with a trash-talking diminutive film maker egging him on.


The Last Refuge of Everybody
THE POPULIST PERSUASION An American History.
By Michael Kazin.
Illustrated. 381 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $24.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Icy Sculpture for Icy Days
HOW cold was it at the ice-carving exhibition at the Americana shopping center in Manhasset last weekend?
So cold they put a dress on Botticelli's Venus.
"It's just a gauzy thing," a spokeswoman for the center, Susan Olsen, said.
And it wasn't added for warmth, Ms.
Olsen said.
It was added for modesty.
With the theme of "A Tribute to Love," the ice series, which continues this weekend, has several carvings bordering on the racy.
"We asked the carvers this year to make replicas of famous works of art," Ms.
Olsen said, "like Botticelli's 'Birth of Venus' and Rodin's 'The Kiss.' We wanted sculptors that were passionate about their work. We didn't want catering- hall buffet pieces."


Viewpoints; A Song for Products Long Unsung
GRUMBLE, grumble, grumble.
Everyone complains about bad products, and often this criticism is richly deserved.
But far too many praiseworthy products are unjustly ignored.
It is time to redress the balance. *
Why the Shoe Fits.
How many of us have taken a moment to appreciate the Brannock Device?
This is the gizmo, invented decades ago by one Charles F. Brannock, that measures your shoe size.
A workaday function, sure, but its chrome-and-black metal design, sliding parts and remarkably balanced asymmetry (much like the human foot itself), combine perfectly the industrial and the aesthetic.


The Windfall in Volleyball
A LITTLE more than two years ago, when Billy Bloom was writing television commercials and Richard Gilbert was editing concert booklets, the two would eagerly wait for work to be over so they could lace up their sneakers, get to the gym and head for the net.
Self-described "volleyball fanatics," Mr.
Bloom, 36, and Mr.
Gilbert, 35, often joked about starting a league.
It was one of those quirky ideas that friends kick around.


Honoring the Past in the Borough of Homes
On the 30th anniversary of New York's landmarks preservation law, the city's largest and second most populous borough still has the fewest landmarks.
For years, preservationists complained that politics were felling Queens's architectural and historical prizes.
But the political climate has changed in the last five years.
And preservationists say that last year's designation of 38 blocks in Jackson Heights as a historic district has considerably diminished general hostility toward landmarking -- a fact they say will make it easier for three sites being considered as landmarks.


. . . And a Parents' Guide to the Politics of Angel Grove
IN THE BEGINNING, THERE WERE five Mighty Morphin Power Rangers: Jason, Zack, Billy, Kimberly and Trini.
Two seasons and countless karate kicks later, there are (as of this writing) six rangers on Fox's inexplicably popular children's series.
Meanwhile, their names, powers, colors and technozords (fighting machines, to those who haven't been inside a Toys "R" Us lately) have changed at a pace that only a true ranger devotee could follow.
For those who have been on Neptune since August 1993, "Mighty Morphin Power Rangers" is the top-rated children's television show, one that grafts stories about teen-age do-gooders onto campy Japanese kung-fu fighting footage.
If you are a parent, however, you may have spent much of the past year and a half trying to outrun the ranger marketing juggernaut.


Tourism in Japan Mostly Unaffected by Quake
THE great earthquake that devastated parts of western Japan on Jan. 17 has created only minor inconveniences for most foreign tourists.
At the same time, it has cleared the throngs of tourists who usually pervade the ancient capital of Kyoto, so that the city is now more enchanting than ever.
To be sure, the port city of Kobe, which was near the epicenter of the earthquake, is still partly in ruins.
But Kobe is not on most tourist itineraries, for it is famous primarily as the gateway for Japanese imports and exports in the Kansai region of western Japan.


To Help Utility Bills Cut More Taxes
Energy costs can be reduced, as everyone desires  [ "Analyst Says a State-Run Lilco Could Cut Electric Bills by 13%," Dec. 21 ] .
I would caution, however, that we not attempt to do it by creating a public utility with the idea that the public utility would then become exempt from the various taxes that are imposed upon Lilco.
Instead, I would like to recommend that we lobby for and work toward the reduction or elimination of all gross-receipt taxes that are charged for the fuel oil, which is used in producing our electricity, and also entirely eliminate the sales taxes, which are charged by Lilco to its customers.
These two taxes are by requirement factored into the rate base which the Public Service Commission authorizes and allows Lilco to charge its users.
Of course, these two taxes benefit both the state and local governments.
But the state and local governments should forfeit these levies and be forced to manage their respective budgets without this source of revenue.


BENEFITS
A Valentine for Children  TUESDAY -- A Valentine's Day party for children ages 3 to 8 will benefit the Abigail Adams Smith Museum, a historic house.
The party, from 3 to 5 P.M., will be held in the museum's auditorium, 417 East 61st Street, and will include games, photography, food and entertainment.
Tickets, $30 each for adults and children, from (212) 838-7390.
Help for Cocteau Repertory  TUESDAY -- A benefit for the Jean Cocteau Repertory will begin with a buffet dinner at 5:30 at the Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, followed at 8 by a performance of "Sunset Boulevard," at the Minskoff Theater.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 677-0060.
Fun for Fashion  TUESDAY -- A cocktail reception celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Fashion Institute of Technology will benefit the Museum at F.I.T.
The event, from 6 to 8 P.M., will include a retrospective fashion exhibition at the museum, at the southwest corner of Seventh Avenue at 27th Street.
Tickets, $65, from (212) 744-4111.
New York Honors Its Own  TUESDAY -- The Citizens Committee for New York City, an umbrella group for neighborhood associations, will honor Jonathan Tisch, the president of Loews Hotels.
The black-tie evening at the Waldorf-Astoria will begin with cocktails at 6:30.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 245-6570.
Helping Naked Angels  TUESDAY -- The Naked Angels Theater Company will benefit from its performance of "Love Is Red," in which Marisa Tomei, Madeline Kahn and others are to perform, at the Roseland Ballroom, 239 West 52d Street.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 6:30, followed by dinner at 7:30, the performance at 9 and dancing.
Tickets, $250, or $100 for the performance and dancing only, from (212) 807-1341.
A Quality Evening  TUESDAY -- Civitas, a quality-of-life advocacy group for New York's Upper East Side, will benefit from a cocktail reception and preview of 19th-century European paintings, drawings and watercolors at Christie's, 502 Park Avenue at 59th Street, from 6 to 8 P.M.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 996-0745.
Champagne for Teaching  TUESDAY -- A champagne reception will benefit the teaching programs of the English-Speaking Union, an educational organization.
The event, from 6:30 to 9 P.M., will be at 16 East 69th Street.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 879-6800.
Cabaret to Help Babies  TUESDAY -- The Babies Heart Fund of the Babies and Children's Hospital of New York at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center will benefit from a cabaret evening.
Charles A. Heimbold Jr., the president of Bristol-Myers Squibb, will be honored.
The black-tie event, at the Plaza Hotel, will begin with cocktails at 7, followed by dinner at 8, along with a silent auction for trips and tickets, a balloon sale and dancing.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 305-3155.
For Art Conservation  TUESDAY -- The junior committee of the American Associates of the Royal Academy Trust, Britain's oldest privately financed fine arts institution, will be the host of a dinner to benefit the academy's picture and sculpture conservation program.
The evening will begin with a champagne reception at 7:15 at the Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, followed by dinner at the Union League Club, 30 East 37th Street.
Tickets, $95, from (212) 980-8404.
Dining for Dancing  TUESDAY -- The School of Hard Knocks, a contemporary dance troupe, will benefit from several private dinners, a performance and dancing.
The dinners will begin at 7 P.M. in several apartments and will be followed at 9 by dessert, dancing and a preview performance, all at P.S. 122, 150 First Avenue at Ninth Street.
Tickets, $75, or $35 for dessert, dancing and performance only, from (212) 777-3891.
For Small Businesses  WEDNESDAY -- The Trickle Up Program, which provides development grants and training for small businesses in 108 countries, will benefit from a cabaret evening, from 7:30 to 10, at the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street.
Celeste Holm will be the host of the event, which will include cocktails, hors d'oeuvres and a performance by Jenny Burton, a singer.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 362-7958.
The Art of Design  WEDNESDAY -- The Museum of Modern Art will celebrate the 60th anniversary of its design collection with a benefit dinner-dance.
The black-tie evening will begin at the museum at 7 with a cocktail reception and viewing of recent acquisitions, followed by dinner at 8 and dancing from 9 until midnight.
Tickets, $500, or $100 for dancing only, from (212) 708-9680.
Dancing at Lunch Time  WEDNESDAY -- The New York City Ballet will benefit from a luncheon and performance at the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center.
The luncheon will begin at noon on the promenade, followed at 1 P.M. by a specially choreographed performance in the theater, with Robert LaFosse explaining the creative process.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 870-5585.
Auction House, Old House  WEDNESDAY -- The Morris-Jumel Mansion, the oldest house in Manhattan, will benefit from a cocktail party and a preview of 19th-century furniture and decorative accessories, from 6 to 8 P.M., at Christie's, 502 Park Avenue at 59th Street.
Tickets, $65, from (212) 923-8008.
Birthday Dance  WEDNESDAY -- The Players' Project, a dance company, will benefit from a party and performance to celebrate the 85th birthday of Anna Sokolow, the modern-dance choreographer.
The event will begin with a reception at 6:30 P.M. at the Cosmopolitan Club, 122 East 66th Street, followed by an 8 P.M. performance at the Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College, on 68th Street between Park and Lexington avenues.
The choreographers Jerome Robbins and Paul Taylor and the actress Uta Hagen are among those scheduled to speak.
Tickets, $100, or $40 for the performance only, from (212) 772-4448.
A Breakfast Talk  THURSDAY -- A Circle of Women, an organization providing support services for American-Indian women, will benefit from a breakfast at the Pierre.
The event, to begin at 8:30 A.M., will include a short talk by the writer Iris Rainier Dart.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 563-5991.
An Evening for Free Tutoring  THURSDAY -- A dinner and dance to benefit the Grace Church Opportunity Project, a free tutoring program for public-school students in grades 1 through 4, will be held at Tuttle Hall of Grace Church School, 86 Fourth Avenue at 11th Street.
The black-tie evening will begin with cocktails at 6:30, followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 533-3744.
Art Show Preview  FEB. 22 -- A preview and sale of items from the Art Dealers Association of America Show, from 5 to 9 P.M., at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th Street, will benefit the Henry Street Settlement, a social services agency.
The evening will include drinks and hors d'oeuvres.
Tickets, $500, or $250 for entry at 6 P.M., or $135 for admission at 7; from (212) 766-9200 or (212) 472-2960.


Q. &amp; A.
Assuring Rights to an Apartment Q I've been living with an elderly person for four years now.
She has been living in her apartment for more than 40 years.
We are not related and the apartment is not rent-controlled, so I'm wondering how I could keep the apartment in the event of her death.
What steps should I take to insure that I won't get kicked out if she passes away? . . .
Zouheir Louhaichy, Manhattan.


F.Y.I.
'Here's Beeping at You' Q.  What's that strange high-pitched beeping that I occasionally hear in some subway stations?
It sounds like a warning of some sort but I can't figure out of what.


Seminars That Help Workers Cope
WORK and life.
Life and work.
You can't have one without the other.
But, despite the economic recovery, the level of stress in the workplace is still high.
Understaffing and downsizing means that fewer employees are required to do more, often working longer hours that cut down on their personal time.
Aware that their employees are finding it difficult to balance jobs and family, companies are taking education into the workplace with the help of lunchtime seminars.


Grown-ups, Children And Fun
Cocktail parties, dinner-dances and games prove that raising money for worthy causes need not be stuffy or sedate.


Care and Flair
DUANE PARK CAFE * (212) 732-5555; 157 Duane Street, near West Broadway; $$$; all major credit cards


Valentine's Splurge: Chocolate Desserts
CHOCOLATE has strange properties.
Studies have shown that it contains phenylethylamine, a chemical stimulant, which is released by the brain in a passionate love affair.
Perhaps that explains why so many people eat chocolate on Valentine's Day (conversely, those who fall out of love have lower levels of phenylethylamine, which may explain why they often go on a chocolate binge).
In any event, there are few better ways to end a Valentine's Day dinner than with a dessert made from chocolate.
I like chocolate desserts that are fairly straightforward, and not too sweet.
A dark, moist chocolate cake, unadorned by creams or icings, is one of my favorites.
I also love a hot chocolate souffle, something I like to order in French restaurants when they have it on the menu.
Making a hot souffle at home, however, is not difficult if you have a reliable oven.
It is important to use egg whites at room temperature, since they will expand more when they are beaten and help the souffle rise.
They should be whisked until they form glossy peaks, not over-beaten or over-folded, or the souffle will be flat.
Care should also be taken when melting chocolate.
It turns into a solid lump if the heat is too high.
Melt it in a slow oven or a double boiler.


An Emporium for Art Rises in the West
DEPARTMENT STORES MAY BE a dying breed, but new museums continue to rise, and Mario Botta's new building for the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, which opened last month, should delight those who lament the passing of the great shopping emporiums.
For the $60 million building, the Swiss architect's first American project, could be easily mistaken for the last great Art Deco department store.
I hope that Mr.
Botta would not be chagrined by the error.
Bonwit Teller, Derry &amp; Toms, May Company: department stores were some of the great creations of the Deco era.
And in our era, which has seen mass consumption displace connoisseurship as a top priority for many major museums, the department store is not the worst model a museum's architect might choose.
Indeed, in Los Angeles, there are plans afoot to turn May Company's landmark black-and-gold building on Wilshire Boulevard into an annex to the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.
In his first museum design, Mr.
Botta, working in association with Hellmuth, Obata &amp; Kassabaum, has created a landmark for a time when museums are less punctilious about holding the line between looking at art and window shopping.


For Harness Racer, 83, Victory Is No Surprise
AROUND the race tracks they call him "Old George." But at the age of 83, George McCandless is not only still in the race, he is ahead of it.
He is the oldest harness race driver ever to win a parimutuel race in New Jersey, a feat he accomplished last fall in Freehold.
It brought him wide press coverage, and he found the instant fame perplexing.
"It seems that since I turned 83," he says, "they are all paying attention to me, but heck, I've done this almost all my life.


After Fabulousness, An Age of Intimacy
THERE are those who believe that the only thing more splintered and tribalistic than nighttime New York in the 1990's is the former Soviet Union.
A crawl through the city on a Friday may prove them right.
At the Cub Room in SoHo, administrative assistants in khakis and pearls order Rolling Rocks and exchange office war stories.
Not far away, at the Crowbar in the East Village, shirtless young gay men sweat to Gloria Gaynor in a tiny, steamy space.
A slightly older crowd of men, some of them in wild wigs, dance across town at Don Hills.
The Palladium is jammed with black and Hispanic youths who move to a raucous hip-hop beat, and at the Limelight, a crowd that is mostly white college students in cropped sweaters from Urban Outfitters sways barely discernibly.


Broad Terror Campaign Is Foiled By Fire in Kitchen, Officials Say
The neighbors had wondered what was going on behind the locked door of Apartment 603, but it wasn't until there was a small fire in the apartment last month that they learned the truth about their mysterious, silent neighbor.
The tenant, who called himself Naji Haddad and said he was Moroccan, was apparently building bombs, and late on Jan. 6, he accidentally set off a fire as he mixed the explosive chemicals in the kitchen sink of his dingy one-bedroom apartment a few blocks from Manila Bay.


Connecticut Premiere For Piano Concerto
WHO'S supposed to play this?" asked the pianist Michael Boriskin, in mock hysteria. The question was posed over the phone to George Perle, the Pulitzer Prize-winning composer.
Mr.
Boriskin, a longtime resident of Danbury, had just received Mr.
Perle's Piano Concerto No. 2 -- written for him.
And it looked impossible.


Terminal Kitsch
CONTRARY TO WHAT I TELL MY friends, Wayne Newton didn't really place a curse on my three-day-old marriage.
Newton, after all, didn't force Sasha and me to honeymoon in Las Vegas.
Nor did The Midnight Idol or Mr.
Las Vegas, as he is also called, make us watch his act at the Hilton and write the gushy fan letter that inspired him to invite us backstage.
My wife and I had a longstanding love of the campy esthetic that recycled the lowest of pop culture -- the Brady Bunch, Pop-Tarts and Wayne Newton -- into hipster icons.
We hadn't gone to Las Vegas to do anything so lame as gamble.
We'd gone to celebrate our marriage amid the tackiness.
We wanted to visit the Liberace Museum, make out in Glitter Gulch and find the Flamingo Hotel wing where Bugsy Siegel trysted with Virginia Hill.
We wanted to hear Wayne Newton and Tom Jones croon.


Excitement in Lovingly Prepared Food
CALLA LARGA is a simple spot with simply wonderful food.
This newcomer in Bellerose is so close to Nassau County that its card lists its address as both Jamaica Avenue and Jericho Turnpike and with the 516 and 718 area codes.
Nassau and Suffolk residents are advised to travel the extra half-mile.
Calla Larga inspires raves like, "This is the real thing," from people who have visited Italy frequently.


In Defense of Heart Transplant Device
To the Editor:
John Bray poses legitimate questions about the dissemination of an expensive new health-care technology, but his suggestion that approval of third-party reimbursements for Thermo Cardiosystems' Heartmate as a bridge to heart transplants may be a "bridge too far to cross" is narrow and shortsighted.


The End Is Near
To the Editor:
I wish to respond to the characterization of the Spanish philosopher Jose Ortega y Gasset that appears in John Gray's review.
Rather than blame the masses for the problems of the nation-state, Ortega saw their revolt as spurred by a lack of leadership.
In "The Revolt of the Masses," he explained that all of the leadership groups of his time -- whether leftist revolutionary or rightist reactionary -- offered the masses programs with "all of the rights and none of the obligations."


'Dr.' Yoo, Target of Brothel Raids, Vanishes
Dong Keun Yoo may not be one of America's Most Wanted or the F.B.I.'s 10 Most Wanted.
But he is at the top of the fugitive list at the Mayor's Office for Midtown Enforcement, with a price tag on his head in the form of a $2.2 million court judgment against his assets.
For years, law-enforcement officials say, the elusive Mr.
Yoo carried on a highly irregular dual career.
His main occupation was owning several midtown massage parlors that authorities say had up to 30 prostitutes each, making him one of the city's biggest brothel operators.


Hollywood Presents: Government as Villain
AS AN ARMY OF NEWLY elected Republicans settle into Congress declaring that they've heard the vox populi, they may want to double-check the pulse of the country by watching a few movies.
The anger against Government that exploded in November only confirmed what film audiences have known: politicians and bureaucrats are in big trouble, surpassing gangsters and mobsters as the villains of choice.
More and more Americans seem to share the sentiment of Col.
William Ludlow in the current hit "Legends of the Fall." Silenced by a stroke, Ludlow (played by Anthony Hopkins) manages to dredge from the depths of his soul the energy to yell one vulgar phrase that expresses his irrepressible contempt for his Government.
At best, as films like "Forrest Gump" suggest, Presidents and politicians are seen as just passing irrelevant figures in the American landscape.
The simpleton Gump meets three Presidents, yet they pale in significance compared with his family and friends.


'Oversexed, Overfed, Over Here'
RICH RELATIONS The American Occupation of Britain, 1942-1945.
By David Reynolds.
Illustrated. 555 pp.
New York: Random House. $30.


Reluctantly, Britain May Arm More of Its Police
Constable Damien Finbow says he does not want to carry a gun.
After all, in the nine years he has patrolled London's sometimes mean streets, he can recall only four times when he has had to draw his nightstick in defense.
"If I wore a gun, I know I'd be worried about losing it in a fight," said Constable Finbow, one of some 24,000 uniformed officers and detectives who routinely keep the peace in this metropolis of nearly seven million people, armed with nothing more lethal than a black truncheon.
"Besides, if you carry a gun, you have to be ready to use it, and I don't think I can do that."


Ecuador and Peru Trade Air Strikes Along Border
With a major air battle being fought over a remote Amazon river valley, Ecuadorean antiaircraft batteries shot down three Peruvian attack jets and a helicopter Friday afternoon, Peru's President acknowledged today.
"Yesterday, we lost two Sukhoi, one A-37 and a helicopter," Alberto K. Fujimori, told foreign correspondents gathered at the Presidential Palace here.
Peru's President said that one Sukhoi pilot and the two-man crew of the A-37 successfully ejected over the rain forest and were rescued by Peruvian troops.


No Headline
"I remember one day standing on the checkout line at the supermarket and seeing a woman with a belly, and I realized I hadn't seen that for the longest time. Then there was another one. And all of a sudden it was like an ant colony." ALICE OZAROFF of Chappaqua, N.Y., on the baby boomlet.  [ 1:1. ]


Detours on the Road To Legal Precedents
It's the wrong time And the wrong place.
Though your case is charming, It's the wrong case.
COLE PORTER may not have put it quite that way, but the Supremes -- Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, et al. -- may soon be singing that tune.
While the Supreme Court's current term will undoubtedly produce several important decisions, the docket is notable for some cases that probably will not live up to expectations.
Once apparent candidates for major rulings, these cases now appear more likely to produce only narrow decisions -- if the Court manages to decide them at all.


Commercial Property/The Loan Market; Lenders' Purse Strings Are Opening Wide Again
BY and large, the fallout from all the overspending on real estate in the 80's has dissipated.
But until now, a sword of Damocles has hung over the many landlords who faced lump sum payouts on the huge mortgages they so blithely took a decade ago.
Now they, too, can breathe easier.
Commercial banks, savings and loans, life insurance companies -- all the formerly recalcitrant sources of mortgage money for commercial properties are opening their purse strings wide again, and flooding the market with refinancing money.


REWRITING THE END
Having once given us a much-needed glimpse of reality, Kubler-Ross now lapses back into the fantasy world above which she once had the courage to rise.


Shades of Difference
THE WEDDING By Dorothy West. 240 pp. New York: Doubleday. $20.


Doorman's Tale: Scenes From a Former Life
THREE or four years ago, as Al Weaver tells it, an old buddy passed him at work on East 22d Street.
"I felt bad for him," said Mr.
Weaver.
"I could tell from the expression on his face that he was taken aback. The last time he saw me was in my office. I had a receptionist, a secretary, my own phone.


Maurice Halperin, 88, a Scholar Who Chronicled Castro's Career
Maurice H. Halperin, an exiled American scholar and former intelligence official whose books chronicled the career of Fidel Castro, died Friday at Royal Columbia Hospital outside Vancouver, British Columbia, a friend, Lenard Cohen, said.
He was 88 years old and had lived in Canada since 1968.
He died of a stroke, Mr. Cohen said.


February 5-11; Space Encounters: The Russian Kind
In the first significant step toward an international space project, the space shuttle Discovery flew to a close rendezvous with the Russian space station Mir in orbit more than 200 miles above the earth.
"We are bringing our nations closer together," Comdr.
James D. Wetherbee of the Navy radioed from the Discovery to his Russian colleagues a mere 37 feet away.


Economic Zone Faces Threat
Although the state signed a written pledge that it would contribute $100 million over 10 years to the newly created Federal Empowerment Zone, Governor Pataki's budget proposal includes only $1 million for the program, $9 million less than the Department of Housing and Urban Development says it will require of the state in the first year.
The discrepancy is causing much concern in Harlem, Washington Heights and the South Bronx, where local leaders fear the state is backing away from its commitment to the empowerment zone.
Under the programs, communities are slated to receive $300 million over 10 years for urban renewal, with the Federal, state and city governments each contributing a third.


Journal; White History Month
The last thing I ever expected was to get sucked into Black History Month.
In my high school, we simply didn't have black history.
Some days we didn't even have white history.
Miss Gillespie, who taught my ungrateful class against the approaching drumbeat of Martin Luther King's new civil-rights movement in the 1960's, hoped we would live to see "Dixie" replace that "impossible" national anthem.
"When you hear 'Dixie,' " she said, "the tune just makes you want to join in!" When it came time to teach the Civil War, Miss Gillespie glided right by it, reflecting the public school system's fear that the topic might "stir up racial tensions."


Official for Orange County
Orange County, struggling with bankruptcy, took a leap into the unknown Friday by announcing that it was retaining a corporate turnaround specialist and banker as its new chief executive.
The county's Board of Supervisors said after a series of meetings that it had decided to hire William J. Popejoy, 56, the former chairman of American Savings and Loan, to rework its budget and lead it out of bankruptcy.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
FULTON FERRY Royal Musical Treatment In a Unique River Setting
Chamber music was once enjoyed mainly by royal Romantics as they flirted and partook of food and drink behind palace walls.
"But with democratic principles and a few beheadings, the music was passed on to the common people," said Olga Bloom, the president of Bargemusic, situated on a small wooden barge permanently moored at the Fulton Ferry Landing, under the lights of the Brooklyn Bridge.


Among Prison Inmates, There Are No 'Infidels'
To the Editor:
On behalf of all rationalists, agnostics, atheists, Unitarians, freethinkers and secular humanists, I object to the wording of the Jan. 8 headline, "Residents in Queens Enclave Want Gates Against Infidels."


Julie S. Menack and Dan Barki
Julie S. Menack, the daughter of Marilyn Menack of White Plains and Martin I. Menack of Port Chester, N.Y., is to be married today to Dan Barki, the son of Gerda S. Mathan of Berkeley, Calif., and the late Victor C. Barki.
Rabbi David E. White is to perform the ceremony at the Lake Merritt-Clarion Suites Hotel in Oakland, Calif.
The bride is the manager of hydrogeologic services at Groundwater Technology, environmental consultants in Concord, Calif.
She graduated from the University of Chicago and received a master's degree in geological sciences from Cornell University.
Her father is an accountant in Port Chester.
Her mother is an associate dean at Westchester Community College in Valhalla, N.Y.


February 5-11: Baseball Blues; Clinton Bats Zero in Arbitration
For a moment, it seemed that the coming baseball season might be saved.
Or at least that's the way President Clinton saw it.
But his hopefulness quickly collapsed.
Having summoned owners and players to the White House for a late-night summit, Mr.
Clinton found that the majesty of his office could not compel the warring parties to set aside their differences and let the games begin.


Moot Courage
To the Sports Editor:
While I agree with the foundation of George Vecsey's column, "Scabs Are Ultimate Owner Scam," The Times, Feb. 5, I take issue with his statement that the players "have proved their courage by not giving in to the owners." Courage emanates from the heart, not from the wallet.
Contemporary major leaguers with the larger paychecks and numerous financial advisers are better equipped to survive during a strike than their predecessors were.
Words like courage should be applied to those forgotten ballplayers whose strikes and lawsuits paved the way for today's athletes.
HUNTER WALK  Poughkeepsie, N.Y.


Owners Chose Their Course
When President Clinton held a news briefing after the most unusual bargaining session in baseball labor history, he twice mentioned the absence of a commissioner.
"There is no baseball commissioner," he said, explaining why he was taking the unusual step of asking Congress to pass a bill imposing binding arbitration.
"We'd lost the World Series, millions upon millions of dollars in lost income is at stake, and a lot more as well."


The Great White Way Transplanted


Frequent Fliers Can Sue Airlines, Court Rules
A deal is a deal, the Supreme Court told the airlines in a Jan. 18 decision of great interest to the industry and to the 31 million members of airline frequent flier programs.
Under the 6-to-2 ruling, frequent fliers who think the airlines have not lived up to their promises can go to state courts and sue for breach of contract.
The decision permits a lawsuit filed against American Airlines on behalf of four million members of its AAdvantage program to go forward in Illinois.
The plaintiffs claim that American, which created the first frequent flier program, breached its contract with members in 1988 when it announced that the free tickets earned with frequent flier miles could not be used on certain dates and flights.
The new rules -- blackout dates and capacity controls -- reduced the value of miles already accumulated.
American says that it has added many benefits to its frequent flier program and that AAdvantage members have always been on notice that it could change the terms of the program at any time.
Still to be established at trial is whether the airline reserved the right to impose the changes retroactively -- a practice familiar to a number of passengers, who are discovering that the 20,000 miles that once earned a free round-trip domestic coach ticket now fall 5,000 miles short.
The Supreme Court's decision is no guarantee of victory to the plaintiffs.
Another part of the lawsuit, which claims that American violated the Illinois consumer fraud statute, is barred by Federal law, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg said in the majority opinion.
And there is some ambiguity about what effect a courtroom victory would have.
Randy Petersen, publisher of Inside Flyer magazine, said the case could lead airlines to become less creative and more cautious with their frequent flier plans.
"I'm not sure if there will be any winners in this case," he said.
LINDA GREENHOUSE


Where Summer Camps Roll Out the Idyllic for the Parents
IT may be the dead of winter, but it is not too early to be thinking about summer camp.
And that's just what nearly 800 families were doing on a recent Sunday at the Westchester Camp Fair at the County Center here.
Sixty-seven camps came to publicize their programs -- and each conjured up its own vision of idyllic summer days whiled away in a picturesque setting.
But one child's summer fantasy may be another's seven-week sentence of misery, and many parents looked overwhelmed as they browsed the crowded room of booths, trying to find the perfect match between their child and the dozens of programs offered, all of which promised "a safe and secure environment" and plenty of fun.


INSIDE
Burmese Heroin Quandary
A huge supply of Burmese heroin is entering the United States, but the country's human rights record impedes anti-drug cooperation.
Page 3.
Hearts That Do the Talking
Change is slow where eight billion candy conversation hearts are made each year.
Still, Dig Me has been deemed obsolete and is on its way out.
Page 20.
Unlikely Political Hero
The Governor of Michigan, John M. Engler, is hardly a stirring speaker, but the success of his policies has changed his image.
Page 26.
2 International


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  MEXICO ON THE ATTACK  The new President of Mexico has been concerned about the rebellion in the south since he took office, and officials said they were on their way to dismantling the movement. 1  BRITAIN REVIEWS GUN POLICY  Scotland Yard and other police across Britain are reassessing policies of policing without guns in light of growing violence and a changing criminal culture. 12


REWRITING THE END
Belief in the afterlife is by no means a phenomenon limited to sojourners at Maidanek.
People of every ethnicity, and in every age (from Mozart to Aldous Huxley, to name a couple of pre-eminent D.W.M.'s) have held similar beliefs.
It is not Kubler-Ross who holds the minority opinion here, but rather the dogged materialists who still spook us.
MARK S. GREENBERG Bronx


Students Follow the Aromas to Their Vocation
When Park West High School was built in 1978, it was equipped with 18 huge kitchens for training students as chefs, maitre d'hotels and other restaurant positions.
All were multi-million-dollar visions in gleaming stainless steel, lined with rows of commercial stoves, special ovens, walk-in freezers, giant soup vats, and professional grills.
The program produced culinary standouts like Hector Ayala, executive pastry chef of the Rihga Royal Hotel.
But for the last decade, most of Park West's kitchens have sat locked and unused, its culinary program a victim of violence among students, disruptive administrative changes and a new curriculum that downplayed the food business in favor of other vocations.
By the early 90's, the 25 teachers and 800 students, had declined to only 5 teachers, 200 students and few courses.


Data Bank/February 5, 1995
Data Bank/February 5, 1995
Consumer Borrowing
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Monthly percent change
9.8
16.5
15.9
Producer Prices
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
Monthly percent change
0.3
0.4
0.6
Productivity
IV Q'94
III Q'94
II Q'94
In percent
1.8
3.2
-2.1
3-Month Treasury Bills
Feb. 10
Feb. 3
Jan. 27
Rate in percent
5.78
5.78
5.73
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
6.10
6.05
6.10
Gold
London A.M. fix, per ounce
$376.40
$376.35
$380.00
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
Friday spot price, per barrel
$18.46
$18.78
$17.95
Weekly Jobless Claims
Feb. 3
Jan. 27
Jan. 20
In thousands
318
326
325


Individuals' Accounts Spur Many to Make Donations
Sandra Westin knows the dread and frustration of losing a job.
She knows the ache of rejection and isolation.
So when she read the story of Aida D., a jobless woman who has been helped by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, Ms.
Westin's response was heartfelt.
In a letter to the fund, she offered her typewriter to Ms.
D., who has been writing cover letters by hand.
The story, she said, mirrored her own struggles.


An Obvious Grump
To the Editor:
I'm pleased that the review of Stacy Schiff's exceptional "Saint-Exupery" (Jan. 8) was accompanied by an excerpt.
This will, I hope, permit readers to judge her writing for themselves, rather than depending on the summary judgment of an obviously grumpy reviewer.
WITOLD RYBCZYNSKI  Philadelphia


Bronx Update
*
WESTCHESTER SQUARE Last spring, members of Community Board 10 voted to accept all of Weschester Square and its 15,000 residents into their district.
But Mayor Giuliani's budget cut the board's staff to three.
Members are to vote Thursday on accepting Westchester Square only if the budget and staff are restored. *
BAYCHESTER Since the Love Shack opened in Baychester, the Rev.
Richard Gorman, the chairman of Community Board 12, has picketed the X-rated video store and demonstrated in front of the Westchester house of its owner, Charles Monaco.
Mr.
Monaco kept quiet until the priest man was quoted in a local newspaper asking how Mr.
Monaco's wife, Claudette Monaco, a school official in the Bronx, could permit her husband to operate the store, Mr.
Monaco shot back in a letter to The Co-op City Times: "The true disgrace of this entire affair is that Father Gorman . . . would disparage the reputation of a woman who has done so much for the education and welfare of children. . . ."


WANTED: A KINDER, GENTLER COP
I'm sure that when the thin blue line has finally been erased by the chaos and rage of the unsocialized, Richard Rayner will be one of the loudest and most articulate frightened-to-death citizens screaming for a big, strong policeman to save him ("Wanted: A Kinder, Gentler Cop," Jan. 22).
Although I don't approve of police abuse, I applaud the L.A.P.D. officers for their service and sacrifice.
I can't wait until liberals suddenly discover that you can't fight the hate-filled brutality of the street with a kinder, gentler cop.
Anyone who thinks so knows nothing about the street.


It Seems That Only the Rangers Bring Out Best in Devils
Showing little of the emotion and firepower that had propelled them to victory over the archrival Rangers two nights earlier, the Devils were a mistake-prone imitation of themselves in tonight's 3-1 loss to the Philadelphia Flyers.
Although their errors occurred on all areas of the ice, the worst one was committed by Chris Terreri in the waning minutes.
With the Devils down by 2-1 and about three minutes to go, Terreri inadvertently helped a weak shot by Josef Beranek leak into his own goal, ending any hope for the Devils.


Touring New Orleans in the Springtime
Two spring tours explore the gardens, historic houses and musical traditions of New Orleans and its environs.
"Springtime in New Orleans and the Louisiana Plantation Country" is sponsored by the National Trust for Historic Preservation.
Participants will dine on Creole and Cajun cuisine, hear gospel and jazz music, and visit historic houses, plantations and gardens from New Orleans to Baton Rouge and New Iberia, La.


Royal Support for Bid
KING CARL XVI GUSTAF and QUEEN SILVIA of Sweden will actively campaign on behalf of Ostersund/Are in bidding for the 2002 Winter Olympics, reports from Stockholm said yesterday.
"The royal family now supports our campaign and the King is considering best how to help out," CHRISTER PERSSON, head of the Ostersund/Are organizing committee was quoted as saying by The Svenska Dagbladet newspaper. (AP)


Variety in Coverage of Women
To the Editor:
You are to be commended for the four interesting articles about women in the Business section last Sunday ("A Silk Blouse on the Assembly Line? Yes, the Boss's," Profile; "A Unifying Force at Novell," Sound Bytes; "Sexism on High: Corporate Boards," Viewpoints, and "Women Seeking a Working Agenda," At Work).
While it is not unusual to see as isolated feature on women in the business arena, rarely does such a variety of articles on women's business and economic issues appear in a publication.
The most intriguing aspect of these reports is that two feature women who have clearly crashed the glass ceiling, one summarizes the challenges women face on board committee assignments and the last outlines the problems of women starting their own businesses or merely surviving on the job market.
GEORGE A. DEAN  Southport, Conn., Feb. 6


Foundling Hospital Linked to N.Y.U.
To the Editor:
We have a special interest in the renovation of 3 Washington Square North by New York University  [ "Social Work Brownstones," Dec. 12 ]  since it was New York Foundling Hospital's home from 1870 to 1873.
Sister Mary Irene Fitzgibbons, a Sister of Charity of New York and our foundress, through her compassion, determination and skill established community, business and legislative networks of support for children and their mothers.
As our agency celebrates 125 years of service, it is significant to us that 3 Washington Square North houses part of the Shirley M. Ehrenkrantz School of Social Work.
It is a meaningful connection for the Foundling Hospital and the university.
SISTER HELEN MURPHY  The writer is executive director of the New York Foundling Hospital in Manhattan.


The World: Martial Arts; This Is a Trade War! Get Your Popgun!
AS trade wars go, the one that started between the United States and China last week in Washington -- and that may well end in truce or treaty later this month in Beijing -- is a classic of the art form.
Both sides claim their national sovereignty and economic livelihoods are at stake, so they threaten each other with billions in sanctions and counter-sanctions.
Both grab big headlines from Silicon Valley to Shanghai.
And both quietly abide by the Geneva Convention of Economic Conflict: Never aim for the vital organs.


Freestyler Takes Rhymes From Streets to a Recording
Super Natural is sitting on an ottoman in his apartment, shoeless and rhyming to himself.
He's been rhyming for hours, and the presence of guests doesn't break his mood.
It inspires him.
Super Natural, whose real name is Reco Price, is a freestyle rap artist known for his "on-the-spot" rhymes in clubs like Mecca at the Tunnel.


British and Irish Chiefs to Meet on Peace Plan
After 10 days of public kerfuffle and out-of-sight maneuvering by officials and politicians, the Northern Ireland peace effort appears to be approaching another crucial point: a private negotiating session between Prime Ministers John Major of Britain and John Bruton of Ireland.
The meeting, according to Irish and British officials, is likely to take place by the end of the month, in London or Belfast.
Mr.
Bruton told Parliament in Dublin on Wednesday that he expected to meet with Mr.
Major in a working session to resolve differences on the plan.
The differences are also to be discussed on Tuesday by the Foreign Minister of Ireland, Dick Spring, and the Britain's Northern Ireland Secretary, Sir Patrick Mayhew.


Excitement in Lovingly Prepared Food
CALLA LARGA is a simple spot with simply wonderful food.
This newcomer in Bellerose is so close to Nassau County that its card lists its address as both Jamaica Avenue and Jericho Turnpike and with the 516 and 718 area codes.
Nassau and Suffolk residents are advised to travel the extra half-mile.
Calla Larga inspires raves like, "This is the real thing," from people who have visited Italy frequently.


CLOTHING
Fingerless gloves: These latest weapons against the freeze leave hands free to dig into pockets for change.
Sports stores sell wool versions, but some people make their own.
On the runway last week, Joop!, inspired by fishermen, showed cashmere gloves with hoods that can be folded back to bare the digits.
Intrepid basketball players are using fingerless gloves in the cold.
And to soak up sweat in the heat, one company has made nylon gloves with National Basketball Association logos and rubber palm treads. (Naum Kazhdan/The New York Times)


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
HENRY JAMES' MIDNIGHT SONG By Carol De Chellis Hill.
Norton, $11.
Sigmund Freud, Edith Wharton and, yes, Henry James all appear in a mysterious manuscript left on a scholar's doorstep on a dark and stormy night.
This novel is "grand, ebullient," Linda Simon said here in 1993, calling it "a shrewd and irreverent look at the tense, innocent, bewildering time we call the fin de siecle."  THE LANGUAGE INSTINCT By Steven Pinker.
Harper Perennial, $14.
Language is wired into the human brain by evolution as surely as web spinning in spiders or sonar in bats, says the author, a professor at M.I.T. who directs the Center for Cognitive Neuroscience there.
In this work, chosen by the editors of the Book Review as one of the best books of 1994, he explains how children learn language and how the brain computes it.
This is "a brilliant, witty and altogether satisfying book," our reviewer, Michael D. Coe, said last year, praising the author's skill in making the material "accessible to the average reader."


Genus and Species, It's All in the Latin
WHAT is it about the use of Latin names for plants that makes so many gardeners wince?
Those who use the Latin are often considered overbearing, while those who are neophytes are usually put off by it.
Many believe that Latin binomials are too hard to learn and they would rather stick with the common names, thank you very much.


Picky, Picky, Picky
AFTER computing the results of a five-city survey of personal ads, I have evidence that may help answer the question so many New Yorkers ask themselves on Valentine's Day: Why am I going home alone tonight?
Except for an Hawaiian island settled as a leper colony, no other place in America has such a concentration of solitary souls.
Forty-eight percent of the households in Manhattan consist of people living alone, a figure twice the national average and exceeded only by that other island, Molokai.
Many of these single people are here only briefly -- they find a partner and flee to the suburbs -- but many remain alone.
In Manhattan nearly one fifth of the women over 45 have never married, the highest ratio of any American county.


Claire Danes
Q: Which is harder, acting or high school?
A: Oh, it's much, much easier being on the set.
It's a place where I feel, you know, semi-accepted, especially on "My So-Called Life" because everybody loves everybody there, and they all know me, and I have a job.
It's just a really different type of place from high school, where nobody knows why they're there and nobody knows who they are.
Everybody's trying to fit into the mainstream.
You know, kids can be clique-y.
In the past, I've been sort of persecuted and talked about and all that.
High school's a scary place for me.
I think I have a really terrible attitude, though.
I've only gone two weeks in the last year and a half, and I think I've built it up in my head that it's worse than maybe it is.
It was really hard to go back.
I don't know, I was used to adults, who are much less mean than high-schoolers.


'Twelfth Night' At Yale Repertory
WHAT is reassuring about the Yale School of Drama's "Twelfth Night" is its palpable sense of ensemble fun in a production where chaos wins over cohesion.
Granted that "What You Will" is the comedy's alternate title and that the director Mark Rucker, in his return to Yale two years after graduating from the directing program, is in a farcically free-for-all state of mind.
Still, his is a "Twelfth Night" not "untangled by the whirligig of time." A program note reminds one that "Where there is no illusion, there is no Illyria." In "Twelfth Night" according to Mr.
Rucker, there is no illusion.
Delusion, perhaps.


BEST SELLERS: February 12, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
50
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
2
34
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
3
3
4
KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The police detective Alex Cross pursues a serial killer and the kidnapper of his niece.
4
5
4
EYES OF A CHILD, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $24.) The apparent suicide of a San Francisco man leads to courtroom encounters.
5
4
5
SELF-DEFENSE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tries to help a woman who says she is being stalked.
6
6
3
ACCEPTABLE RISK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $23.95.) A researcher's quest for the ultimate drug to treat depression has devastating consequences.
7
1
ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D.
James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a prestigious London publishing house.
8
7
131
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
9
8
3
THE MURDERERS, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Putnam, $23.95.) A series of murders and "willful deaths" beleaguers the Philadelphia police force.
10
11
24
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
11
10
19
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
12
1
HOME SONG, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $23.95.) The appearance of his unknown biological son threatens the serenity of a man's family life.
13
9
3
TRUST ME, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $22.) A canceled wedding leads to a curious romance between the groom and the caterer.
14
12
11
WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World War II America.
15
13
14
THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote themselves to solving crimes.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
I WANT TO TELL YOU, by O.J.
Simpson. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) The former football star, now on trial for murder, responds to letters he has received.
2
1
18
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
3
2
15
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of belief, suffering and hope.
4
3
7
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
5
1
RAGING HEART, by Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $18.) An account of the marriage of O.J. and Nicole Brown Simpson.
6
5
3
INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE, by Ronald Kessler. (Pocket, $23.) Anecdotes about events at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue during the past 30 years.
7*
10
3
ALL MY CHILDREN, by Gary Warner. (General Publishing, $25.) A scrapbook of photographs and mementos about the long-running television show.
8
4
19
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
9
7
23
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
10
9
49
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
11
6
60
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
12
7
NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker. (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J.
Simpson as remembered by a friend.
13*
8
11
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
14
11
20
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.
15
12
15
THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence affect American life.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
90
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
2
42
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
3
4
FOOD, by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Information about recipes, nutrition and diets.
4
1
DOCTOR, WHAT SHOULD I EAT? by Isadore Rosenfeld. (Random House, $25.) A physician's advice about food that may prevent or help recovery from ailments.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 28, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) ADMITTING THE HOLOCAUST: Collected Essays, by Lawrence L. Langer. (Oxford University, $23.) Mr.
Langer, a retired professor of English, illuminates the literature of the Holocaust -- the chronicles of ghetto and camp, the fiction and poetry wrought out of the horror, the representations in film and on television.
Mr.
Langer is also the editor of ART FROM THE ASHES: A Holocaust Anthology (Oxford University, $30), a remarkable collection of personal accounts, both by well-known survivors and by victims otherwise obscure, and of fiction, poetry and art related to the cataclysm.
ALL THE DAYS AND NIGHTS: The Collected Stories of William Maxwell. (Knopf, $25.) Stories, balanced, gentle and humane, concerned above all with reconciliation, from six decades of work by a master writer and editor who is now 86.
THE CUNNING MAN, by Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) The hero of this wise and entertaining novel, a chronicle of personal and social change in Toronto, is a doctor whose superb diagnostic skills rest on shamanism and Platonism as well as scientific medicine.
DEMOCRACY ON TRIAL, by Jean Bethke Elshtain. (Basic Books, $20.) A thoughtful professor of ethics argues that the weakness of democratic institutions in America reflects the replacement of rights conceived as immunities from government interference by rights conceived as individual entitlements.
FELICIA'S JOURNEY, by William Trevor. (Viking, $21.95.) Mr.
Trevor's latest novel concerns an unmarried, pregnant, vulnerable Irish girl, wandering England's industrial Midlands until she encounters a predatory Englishman whose monstrosity remains long concealed.
GIVING AWAY SIMONE: A Memoir, by Jan L. Waldron. (Times Books/Random House, $22.) An absorbing personal history of the author and her family, women who for five generations failed or declined to keep their children.
GOOD COP, BAD COP: Detective Joe Trimboli's Heroic Pursuit of NYPD Officer Michael Dowd, by Mike McAlary. (Pocket Books, $23.) Mr.
McAlary, a New York newspaper columnist who followed the case closely, reports on a police corruption investigation that appears to have been frustrated by departmental solidarity.
HOW LATE IT WAS, HOW LATE, by James Kelman. (Norton, $21.) A novel about a Glasgow ne'er-do-well that charms, persuades and illuminates, though it is written not only in salty talk but in the Glaswegian language.
OUT OF EGYPT: A Memoir, by Andre Aciman. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) A splendid rendition of life over 50 years or so in the prosperous business class in Alexandria, ending with the expulsion of the author's Jewish family.
THE PAPERBOY, by Pete Dexter. (Random House, $23.) An eerie and beautiful novel whose emotionally alienated title character, a reporter in quest of facts only, is outmaneuvered by violent half-wits who know what they want.


Corrections
A report in the Guide column on Jan. 29 about a performance by Tommy Dorsey's Orchestra on March 25 misstated the location.
It will be in Willcox Hall Gymnasium of Pace University on the Pleasantville campus, not the White Plains campus.


At the Repository of High School Memories
FOR some people, yearbook predictions can indeed be prophetic.
Take Michael Crichton, Roslyn High, Class of '60.
Mr.
Crichton's classmates voted him "most likely to succeed," "class writer" and "the tallest."
Today Mr.
Crichton is still writing and still tall.
As for succeeding, his best-selling novels-turned-movies, "Jurassic Park" and "Disclosure," place him in the stratosphere of success tales.


The Rembrandt of Barbers
FREDDY AVILA APPROACHES EVERY HEAD IN CUTTY'S, HIS barbershop in Jamaica, Queens, the way a painter approaches a canvas.
He calculates angles with his beefy hands, tilts his head as he imagines a design and touches the electric razor to the hair with the delicate flick of a brush stroke.
Slowly, images gleaned from magazine ads, graffiti and even his dreams take shape.
Avila became a barber when he arrived in the United States from Colombia in 1985.
After four years of working for other barbers, he opened his own shop, about the time "Batman" logo hairstyles became the craze.
As more elaborate designs evolved, Avila's imagination distanced him from competitors.
Recognized most often for his creations on Anthony Mason of the Knicks (he once covered Mason's head with a New York skyline gracing the Knicks logo), he is the barber of choice for the St.
John's basketball team and other premier New York athletes who favor a razor-sketched do.
Today, even as clean-shaven heads and box braids compete with design cuts, gangly homeboys swarm the 33-year-old's cramped shop, waiting up to an hour for a session that could take another hour.
The customers who forgo the basic $ 10 haircut and pay an extra $ 10 to $ 100 for a hair drawing have such confidence in his vision that they rarely arrive with a design in mind.


A Shooter as Vigilante, and Avenging Angel
William Masters had often rehearsed the moment in his head when, on one of his late-night walks, he would pull out his 9-millimeter pistol, level it at a criminal and shout, "Freeze!"
It was his duty as a citizen, he said in an interview this week, to be armed, trained and ready to defend the victims of crimes.


Replenish the Peace Process
President Clinton has gathered the top diplomats of Israel, Egypt and Jordan and the Palestine Liberation Organization along with Secretary of State Warren Christopher today in Washington to revitalize the drive for Middle East peace, particularly the talks between Israel and the P.L.O.
Suicide bombings by radical Palestinians, border closures, growing talk of "separation" by Israelis and Yasir Arafat's complaints about election delays have created a bleak mood.
It need not be so.
Not long ago, a meeting like today's would have been inconceivable.
Israel and the P.L.O. are negotiating, not denouncing each other.
Where Egypt was once shunned by the Arab world for the Camp David agreements, there is now an Arab peace camp, including several North African and Persian Gulf states as well as those represented in Washington today.
Israel is formally at peace along most of its borders.
Only Syria and Lebanon are holdouts, and they too are negotiating.


NAVEL MANEUVERS
As an open-minded father of a 13-year-old daughter, I have one question for Tom Singman, who, with his blessing, gave his daughter, on her 13th birthday, the gift of a navel piercing: Are you off your nut? (About Men, "Navel Maneuvers," Jan. 22).
J.
P.
SMITH Newburyport, Mass.


Reading Scores: A School-by-School Breakdown


Holiday on Monday
President Lincoln's birthday is observed tomorrow.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal and state offices open.
Municipal offices closed.


Love Songs With No Tomorrows
IN THE VIDEO CLIP FOR BOYZ II MEN'S "I'LL MAKE Love to You," a young man struggles over a love letter.
Finally, he copies down some lyrics from a Boyz II Men CD.
The object of his affection, who somehow doesn't recognize the song, nearly swoons over the letter; the words were all she wanted.
Once again, a love song has provided the script for romance.
Pop songs have the perennial job of distilling emotions down to verses and choruses.
The eternal human perplexity over love -- with its ever-shifting proportions of lust and affection, of longtime partnership and immediate gratification, of friction and transcendence -- has always been reflected in love songs, and pop provides bulletins on the current states of the heart.
There are sentiments for all occasions, from "You Send Me" to "Hit the Road, Jack."


Karl Kraus's Contempt
To the Editor:
In his review of "The Florence King Reader" (Jan. 22), Terry Teachout quotes Karl Kraus, "a man who did not like many things but would undoubtedly have liked this free-fire zone of a book": "To me all men are equal: there are jackasses everywhere, and I have the same contempt for all. No petty prejudices!" Apropos, it was Karl Kraus who also observed: "I no longer have collaborators. They may offend readers I wish to lose for myself."  SHALE DWORAN  New York


Sampling: Where to Go
A sampling of places to go and dance, throughout the city.
Many have cover charges; call ahead.
THE BIG CLUBS  LIMELIGHT Sixth Avenue at 20th Street, (212) 807-7850.
Tuesday to Sunday 10 P.M.-4 A.M.
Theme/ music: Tuesday, alternative; Wednesday, half-gay, half-straight; Thursday through Saturday, house, techno; Sunday, rock &amp; roll and live bands.
Door policy: "Neat but casual, avoid ripped jeans, sneakers, gold chains, hoodlum-wear."  WEBSTER HALL 125 East 11th, (212) 353-1600.
Wednesday to Saturday 10 P.M.-4 A.M.
Theme/ music: Wednesday, runway parties -- "Walk down the runway and pretend you're a model"; Thursday, psychedelic night; Friday and Saturday, downtown rock and roll crowds; four different DJ's on four floors playing disco, rock, pop and reggae.
Door policy: "Everyone gets in as long as they're not drunk or unruly." No torn jeans.
PALLADIUM126 East 14th Street, (212) 473-7171.
Thursday to Sunday, 10 P.M.-5 A.M.
Music: House, hip/ hop and reggae.
Door policy: No jeans, sneakers or gold chains.
THE TUNNEL 47 West 20th Street, (212) 695-7292.
Thursday to Sunday, 10 P.M.-4 A.M.
Theme/music: Techno, house.
Door policy: "Dress well enough to be out dancing with no big fat gold chains." THE ROXY 515 West 18th Street, (212) 645-5156.
Tuesday, Wednesday, 8 P.M.-2 A.M.; closed Thursday and sometimes Friday; Saturday, 11 P.M.-4 A.M.; Sunday, 1:30 P.M.-6 P.M.
Skate rental: $3.50 to $10, depending on the night.
Theme: Tuesday and Wednesday, rollerskating and rollerblading; Saturday, gay night.
Door policy: "Look for people who are trendy and wild."  SMALLER CLUBS  NELL'S 246 West 14th Street, (212) 675-1567. 10 P.M.-4 A.M, every night.
CHINA CLUB 2130 Broadway, (212) 877-1166. 10 P.M.-4 P.M., every night.
Music: current dance music, plus some live rock &amp; roll.
Door policy: "Regulars get in first."  THE BANK 225 East Houston, (212) 505-5033.
Friday, Saturday, 10 P.M.-4 A.M.
Theme: Friday, "The Realm," gothic, new wave, industrial; Saturday, "Exedor," alternative, danceable gothic.  205 205 Chrystie, (212) 473-5816.
Every night, 10:30-4 A.M.
Themes: Monday, "Concrete Jungle"; Tuesday, "Bingo Bango Etc."; Wednesday, funk; Thursday, guest DJs; Friday, Saturday, "S.O.A.P." (hiphop, gangster rap, dance music), Sunday, "Maroons."  REBAR 127 Eighth Avenue, (212) 627-1680.
From 8 P.M.-4 P.M.; Sunday 10 P.M.-4 A.M.
Themes: Tuesday, "Debalicious," house; Wednesday, "Snog," 80's music; Friday, Saturday, everything; Sunday, "Cafe de Paris," a musical timeline.
BUDDHA BAR 150 Varick Street, (212) 255-4433. 9 P.M.-4 A.M. every night.
Theme/music: Tuesdays are backgammon night; Sundays for ladies only.
Wednesdays, hip-hop; Thursdays, progressive soul; Fridays, latin music, house, soul to nostalgic music.
DON HILL'S 511 Greenwich Street at the corner of Spring Street, (212) 219-2850.
Tuesday to Sunday, 10 P.M.-4 A.M.
Music: Downtown.
VELVET 600 West 26th Street, at Eleventh Avenue, (212) 675-9602 or 675-9607.
Thursday and Friday, 11 P.M.; Saturday, 10 P.M. and Sunday, 8:30 P.M.
Theme: Thursday, Tribe; Bliss on Fridays; Latin, house and classics on Saturday, and "Velvet Sundays," with disc jockeys.
Q-CLUB 93-37 150th Street, Jamaica, (718) 262-0733.
Wednesday to Saturday, 10:30 P.M. to 5 A.M.
Theme: Caribbean music, reggae, disco, calypso and R&amp;B.
Wednesday is "Dance All Night"; Thursday, Hip Hop; Friday, Ladies Night; Saturday, varies.
RIDDLERS 1860 Westchester Avenue, the Bronx. (718)822-9291.
Mixed music.
BENTLEY'S 7110 Third Avenue (between 71st and 72d Streets), Bay Ridge, (718) 745-0748.
Till 4 A.M., everynight.
Theme/music: Top 40 dance, disco, pop.
Door policy: No men under 25, no women under 23.
LEGENDS 639 Utica Avenue (between Winthrop and Clarkson Streets), Flatbush, Brooklyn. (718) 778-0500. 11 P.M.-4 A.M.
Fridays and Saturdays.
Theme/ music: Reggae, calypso, slow jam and house music.
THE ARK , 135 East 22d Street, East Flatbush, Brooklyn. (718) 693-2168.
Friday through Sunday, 10 P.M. to 4 A.M.
Music: Friday night, reggae, R&amp;B, house.
Saturday, R&amp;B, "oldies but goodies," and usually a live show.
Sunday is Love Boat Reggae Sunday, i.e., reggae all night.
Door policy: No men under 25, no women under 23.
Saturday is "more mature." No jeans, no sneakers.
GAY  JACKIE 60 432 West 14th Street, (212) 677-6060.
Tuesday only.
SOUND FACTORY 530 West 27th Street, (212) 643-0728.
Saturday only, 1 A.M.-whenever, $20.
LESBIAN  GIRL BAR 15 St.
Marks Place, (212) 674-7959.
Usually Friday.
BARROOM 432 West 14th Street.
Saturday.
AFTERHOURS  BERLIN 1 West 125th Street (downstairs), (718) 617-4783.
Fridays only, midnight on.
ROVING PARTIES  AQUA-BOOTY!  (212) 229-7777, monthly underground parties.
KONCRETE JUNGLE (212) 604-4224.
Next event will be held today at S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, (212) 243-4940.  10 P.M.-4 A.M.
"Kings of the Jungle, Live and Direct from the U.K." LATIN  CLUB BROADWAY 2551 Broadway, between 95th and 96th Streets, (212) 864-7600.
Friday, 9 P.M.-4 A.M., Saturday, 9 P.M.-5:30 A.M., Sunday, 8 P.M.-3 A.M.
Music: Live Latino bands.
Sundays are "Baile Mexicano."Door policy: "Bien vestido, no tenis, no jeans." CLUB BROADWAY 2 2700 Queens Plaza South (by 59th Street Bridge), Long Island City, (718) 937-7111.
Thursday, 6 P.M. to 3 A.M., Friday, Saturday and last Sunday of each month, 8 P.M. to 5 A.M.
Theme/music: Salsa, salsa, salsa.
Door policy: Well dressed.
COPA CABANA 617 West 57th Street, (212) 582-2672.
Tuesday, Friday, 6 P.M.-3 A.M.; Saturday, 10 P.M.-A.M.
Door policy: Minimum age: 23 for women, 25 for men.
"No jeans, no sneakers, no work boots, no T-shirts." S.O.B.'S 204 Varick Street (at Seventh Avenue), (212) 243-4940.
every night, opening and closing varies.Theme/music: Monday, Latin music; Tuesday, Soul Kitchen, classic R&amp;B; Wednesday, variable; Thursday, 11 P.M., hiphop jazz; Friday, French-Caribbean dance party; Saturday, Brazilian dance party; Sunday, variable.
Dress code: "Casual."  BALLROOM/OLDIES  BOOK-FRIENDS CAFE 16 West 18th Street, (212) 255-7407.
Cover: $5.
Alternate Wednesdays, tea dance (traditional ballroom dancing with 30's flavor), 7-10 P.M.
Alternate Fridays, vintage dancing (pre-World War, includes workshop and demonstration), 8-10:30 P.M.
Dress code: "Civilized." ROSELAND 239 West 52d Street, (212) 247-0200.
Call for information.
CHARISMA BALLROOM 71-46 Main Street, Flushing, (718) 268-2800.
Call for information.
SWING  CONTINENTAL CLUB Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place, Sunday night.
Call New York Swing Dance Society, (212) NY-NYSDS.
WELLS RESTAURANT 2247 Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard, (212) 234-0700.
Monday night.
METROPOLIS 31 Union Square (at 16th Street), (212) 455-0401, Tuesday.
THE HUSTLE  HUSTLE HOTLINE 1-800-92-HUSTLE. (Places to go.)


REWRITING THE END
I do not fear death precisely because I believe that it will bring absolute surcease.
I was therefore perturbed by Kubler-Ross's notion that the already-dead arrive to greet the dying.
In 1978, I was given a surprise 40th birthday party, and although I put on a jolly face at the time, I have never entirely forgiven anyone involved.
If I were to have a surprise party sprung on me at the moment of my demise, I would not take it at all well.
JOHN MALONE Lancaster, Pa.


G.O.P. Moves Health Debate To Medicare
The painful, complicated struggle over health care is beginning anew on Capitol Hill.
This time, it is Republicans, not Democrats, who are leading the charge.
And this time, it is the huge Medicare program for the elderly that is the target, not the private health-care system.
But the Clinton Health Care Battle of 1993-94 and the developing Republican sequel are alike in at least one respect: they were and are fueled by the rising costs of health care.


World Markets; Socializing Risk to Foster Free Markets
INVESTORS in emerging markets should offer up a nightly prayer for the success of Michel Camdessus's latest endeavor.
Mr.
Camdessus, a former governor of the French central bank, heads the International Monetary Fund, which seeks to impose financial discipline on the world.
But the I.M.F. has found increasingly that countries can evade its strictures by borrowing from private markets instead.


India Weighs New Approach to Immigration
Hoping to ease tensions and stem a tide of illegal Bangladeshi migrants into the northeastern state of Assam, Indian officials have shifted from supporting a crackdown on the settlers to advocating economic development here and in Bangladesh.
"The only way to stop people from leaving Bangladesh is to improve conditions there," said an Indian diplomat who has been involved in talks with Bangladesh and spoke on condition that he not be identified.
"In addition, the economies of the northeastern states must be strengthened by establishing business relations with our neighbors."


Grounded Tanker Leaks Oil Into Harbor Off Sandy Hook
An oil tanker trying to avoid another passing vessel ran aground near the shipping channel off Sandy Hook, N.J., Friday night, tearing a hole in the hull and spilling at least 300 barrels of light oil into New York Harbor, Coast Guard officials said.
By yesterday morning, most of the oil had been confined in a ring of floating booms or had been skimmed off the surface and pumped onto a barge, the officials said.
And by afternoon, the tanker, under tow, was on the way to an offshore anchorage for inspection.


Shall We Dance?
TO go dancing is to abandon, however briefly, the roles of everyday life.
Some people go to find their wild side.
Some go without their last names, so powerful is the need to escape their daylight identities.
Some are re-creating home, like the new immigrants who cluster to hear old songs, or reviving youth, like the die-hard fans who won't let the the Hustle fade out.
Randy Martin, a sociologist at Pratt University who has studied dance in the city, says the richness of dance in New York is a sign of a vital urban center.
"It gives you a different impression of what it means to live in the city. You think that what gets people out of the house is they go to work. But there's a very healthy public life."


Alan G. Mnuchin, Kimberly E. Kassel
Kimberly Ellen Kassel, the daughter of Mrs.
Ted Kohl of New York and stepdaughter of Mr.
Kohl, was married in New York yesterday to Alan Geoffrey Mnuchin, a son of Elaine T. Cooper and Robert Mnuchin, both of New York.
Rabbi Richard Chapin officiated at the Pierre.
The bride, 28, was until recently the director of public relations and marketing at Tommy Hilfiger U.S.A., the men's clothing manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University.
She is also a daughter of Robert Kassel of San Francisco and a stepdaughter of Maureen Kassel.
Her father is the president of Natural Earth Technologies, a manufacturer of agricultural products in San Francisco.
Her stepfather is the president of the Herbert Construction Company in New York.


The End Is Near
To the Editor:
If John Gray truly believes that the United States is on its way to "Colombianization," or even an early death, he should recall as a historian that British detractors have a long history of foretelling America's nearing doom.
They did so in 1776, during the War of 1812, during the Civil War, after the Great Crash of 1929 and even during the disorders of the 60's.
Their record so far is perfect: they've been wrong every time.


Villanova's Height and Accuracy Halt Hall
It's scary to think, but the last time Villanova had a record this good at this point of the season was in 1985, when it was 16-4.
That team went on to win the National Collegiate Athletic Association title.
These Wildcats may not match their predecessors, but they are on a roll.
Now they are 17-5 and are ranked 16th and 18th in the two major national polls.


The County's Stake In Effort to Save Federal Arts Fund
WESTCHESTER COUNTY makes art quietly.
Exhibitions generally open and close without incident; audiences are not known to hiss or throw eggs, and it is hard to recall any significant protest against a specific artwork.
But it would be a mistake to think that art is not a passionate pursuit here, or that artists are not hard at work in every pocket of the county.
It would be just as wrong to assume that the political controversy surrounding the National Endowment for the Arts, which has been chosen as a target for elimination by some Congressional leaders, is irrelevant to Westchester.


Stamford Theater Presents 'Shotgun'
IN "Shotgun," Romulus Linney, a prolific playwright of range, intelligence and accomplishment, is, with sudden insecurity, poking about hazardous terrain.
He is driving a domestic drama to a stylized, symbolic dead end.
Mr.
Linney's tricky experiment needs help but Stamford Theater Works is giving it a careless production that verges on recklessness.
Here's the setup: After John and Beth matter of factly announce their separation, John's divorced parents, William and Sarah, proclaim their reconciliation.
William and Sarah's parting had been bitter; John's and Beth's is "entirely amicable." Beth has fallen in love with Fred, John's best friend who, given his homosexual past and noncommital future, apparently represents the vague drifter ruled by the momentary whim.


Scott P. Grader, Patricia A. Lande
Patricia Alison Lande, a vice president of the International Management Group, the sports marketing and management company in New York, was married last evening to Scott Paul Grader, a senior associate at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, the New York law firm.
Rabbi Carole Balin performed the ceremony at the Union Club in New York.
Mrs.
Grader, 34, is also the director of the IMG-Julian Bach Literary Agency.
She graduated from the University of California at San Diego.
She is a daughter of Fred and Irma Lande of Carlsbad, Calif.


Esthetic Dining In TriBeCa
BAROCCO ** (212) 431-1445; 301 Church Street, at Walker Street; $$; all major credit cards


In China, Art of the Raw Deal
FOR 16 months, Jimmy Peng Jiandong has been held in a jail in Shenzhen, just across the border from this British colony.
He was imprisoned after being kidnapped by the Chinese police from the Portuguese colony of Macao.
He has never been convicted -- indeed, the judge at his trial last November told prosecutors they had not proved that Mr.
Peng was corrupt.
But he wasn't released.
Chinese officials seem determined to prove him guilty of something.
Mr.
Peng, a 36-year-old Australian citizen, is one of a growing number of foreign citizens of Chinese ancestry whose business dealings and commercial disputes inside China have resulted in extortion, house arrest, even jailing and trials.
Lawyers, human rights advocates and business people themselves are citing a surge in detentions, extortion demands and fabricated criminal charges against foreign business people by local police and judicial authorities, who are wielding their power on behalf of local business interests -- power often exercised free of control from Beijing.


Beyond Wimpole St.
DARED AND DONE The Marriage of Elizabeth Barrett and Robert Browning.
By Julia Markus.
Illustrated: 382 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


Eldredge Proves Demise Is Greatly Exaggerated
He had gone four years since his last national figure-skating title, his ascendancy interrupted by injury, sagging confidence and illness, and there were many wondering when and if Todd Eldredge would ever get back to the top after such a prolonged fall.
Today he did, prevailing over Scott Davis, the defending champion, winning the long program from all nine judges and erasing any thoughts that his career might be in permanent eclipse at the doddering old age of 23.


There Should Be a Place Where Cars Aren't King
To the Editor:
The Jan. 22 article "The Park Drives Are Open. No, Closed. No . . ." highlights the fact that taxi drivers love the Central Park loop.
But skaters love it, too.
The most wonderful thing about the park for us is the fact that it is a place to go where you do not have to compete with large machines for a small piece of asphalt.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  House 1.
Line-Item Veto: Vote on passage of a bill giving the President authority to strike specific parts of spending bills, and some tax measures passed by Congress without vetoing the entire legislation.
Approved 294 to 134, Feb. 6.


Genus and Species, It's All in the Latin
WHAT is it about the use of Latin names for plants that makes so many gardeners wince?
Those who use the Latin are often considered overbearing, while those who are neophytes are usually put off by it.
Many believe that Latin binomials are too hard to learn and they would rather stick with the common names, thank you very much.


Elizabeth Burbank and LaMott Britto
TO their friends, it seemed fitting that Elizabeth Burbank and LaMott Britto were marrying during a snowstorm.
"Betsy causes a stir wherever she goes," said Melinda Ely, a wedding guest who was the bride's roommate at St.
Timothy's boarding school in Stevenson, Md.
"When I first met Betsy, she was wearing bells on her ankles. I could hear her coming to the room before I saw her."


Danger: Chocolate Ahead
Let us now recall those innocent days when the love of chocolate was a simple pleasure, before the fear of fat and all its dietary angst introduced a frisson of danger.
I can remember a Valentine's Day in Paris, an invitation to Angelina's for a cup of hot chocolate so thick it resembled a warm mousse.
The hot froth slid down effortlessly; it was sweet and rich and seemed to coat every nerve ending.
The effect was tranquilizing and euphoric, a physiological state similar to the first blush of love.
At the same time, this was hot chocolate.
And since it was a vestige of childhood, the overall effect was that of sweet puppy love.


Greedy Players
To the Sports Editor:
Donald Fehr never discusses what effect unlimited salaries will have on ticket prices.
Instead he uses the term "market value." What he means is that the owners will pass the cost on to the fans if the salaries continue to escalate.
Fehr has absolutely no concern for the fans other than to use them to pay his fat-cat players.
He only wants to squeeze the owners for as much money as he can get for the players and let the owners worry how to pay for it.


On the Subject Of Highway Tolls
In the article "Turnpike Toll: Up, but When?" (Jan. 22), we are told that the question is not whether there will be a turnpike toll increase, "There will be" -- the real issue is when and how much.
We are also told that opposition to the toll increase comes from communities that fear greater use of local streets by trucks if there is another substantial increase.


Corrections
An entry in the Business Diary column last Sunday about the new Denver airport misstated the status of the automated baggage system.
When the airport opens on Feb. 28, the system will be used for all outbound United Airlines flights, roughly 60 percent of all outbound flights.
The other outbound flights, and all the inbound flights, will use a traditional system.


On Reading: A Ranking of New York City's Public Schools
Last week, the New York City Board of Education released school-by-school results of standardized reading tests taken by students at elementary and junior high schools in the spring of 1994, and the news was not good for nearly two-thirds of the schools.
Reading scores declined in 645 of the 1,084 schools tested, according to figures released by the Board of Education.
The tests, given each spring, have long been a yardstick to measure how the city's students compare to those around the nation.


Establishing Folk Art's Pedigree
THOUGH "A World of Their Own" may seem like a departure for the Newark Museum, it is actually a kind of reprise, for the institution was the first of its kind to show folk art, in 1930.
Holger Cahill, who had joined the museum a decade earlier, organized the display, another that followed a year later and a third that took place at the Museum of Modern Art, where he became acting director, in 1932.
After that, Mr.
Cahill took over the Federal Art Project, masterminding "The Index of American Design." Not to digress too far, this project was hailed in a 1937 Fortune Magazine article that began: "One thing every American sophomore knows about American art is that there isn't any." The article went on to say, in effect, that if such sophomores, their teachers and books had failed to find a tradition, the fault was not in America but in themselves.


February 5-11: Pasta Alert; Non-Fat is Not Non-Fattening
After a decade of stoking the public cry for pasta-hold-the oil, diet experts now think low-fat, high-carbohydrate regimes may actually contribute to obesity.
Over the past decade, Americans have cut their fat intake from 36 percent of their daily calories to 34 percent -- but they've also gained about eight pounds a person.
Part of the problem is that non-fat doesn't necessarily mean non-fattening.
By reaching for starch and sugar instead of fat, many Americans end up eating more calories.
But that alone can't explain the poor performance of low-fat, high-carbohydrate diets.


EFXtravaganza
More proof, as if it were needed, that Las Vegas hotel entertainments are getting bigger comes on March 1, when "EFX," a cryptically titled extravaganza, begins previews at the MGM Grand Hotel &amp; Casino.
Its promoters describe the 90-minute show, with a cast of 70 and a $41 million price tag, as "a surrealistic, high-tech journey through time and space."
Special effects account for a sizable chunk of the cost -- the 1,700-set theater has 300 loudspeakers.
Michael Crawford, the former Phantom of the Opera, stars and sings music written by Don Grady (Robbie from the 1960's television show "My Three Sons").
The title is "intentionally mysterious," a spokesman said.
But for $65.50 a person, $35.50 during previews, all will be revealed.
For information, call (702) 891-1111.


Russia's Returnees
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 7 front-page article on the migration of 300,000 ethnic Russians last year from Kazakhstan to Russia describes one aspect of a much larger potential human dislocation.
More than 25 million ethnic Russians reside outside Russia in the former Soviet Union.
Some are encouraged, or even pressured, to return as emerging states define their national identities.


Jurors See Where Simpsons Lived


2 New Black History Magazines Seek Out a 'Niche Within a Niche'
In conjunction with Black History Month, two handsome magazines devoted to black history have just made their debuts.
Moreover, their unusual David and Goliath ownership structures signal a new direction in the publication of small niche magazines.
Each magazine is being published by a leading media company in partnership with the small entrepreneur who came up with the idea.
In both cases, the larger companies are handling production, advertising and financial matters, while the entrepreneurs are supplying the editorial content.


Four Agencies Get Big Food Accounts
Four agencies have been awarded assignments by large packaged-foods advertisers.
Ore-Ida Foods has named Citron Haligman Bedecarre in San Francisco to handle project assignments, with billings estimated at $5 million to $10 million.
They include the Ore-Ida retail fried potato line of Tater Tots and other products, as well as advertising for new products like Snackin' Fries, microwave french fries being introduced nationally today.


Student Contracts Tuberculosis
A 14-year-old freshman at Wall Township High School has contracted tuberculosis, prompting school officials to offer TB tests to the school's 1,000 students.
Health officials said there was only a slight chance that other students were infected.


David Wayne, Sprightly and Versatile Actor, Is Dead at 81
David Wayne, an actor who played widely divergent roles on Broadway, in television and in films for almost 50 years and who was the first recipient of a Tony Award for acting, died on Thursday at his home in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 81.
The cause was lung cancer, said his daughter Melinda.


Gatti Cancels Concerts
The conductor Daniele Gatti, who was scheduled to conduct the New York Philharmonic for the first time in a four-concert series starting on Thursday, has canceled because of a shoulder injury.
Neeme Jarvi will conduct in his place.
The program remains unchanged: Mendelssohn's "Ruy Blas" Overture, the Barber Violin Concerto (Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg, soloist) and Prokofiev's Third Symphony.
Performances are Thursday, Saturday and Feb. 21 at 8 P.M. and Friday at 2 P.M.
Information: (212) 875-5656.


Jacksonville and Carolina Will Be Looking for Bargains at the N.F.L. Rummage Sale
Tom Coughlin thinks he'll be lucky if 10 of the 30 or more players he selects in the veteran allocation draft this week are around when his Jacksonville team plays its first game in September.
Dom Capers, the Panthers coach, thinks he will have done "very well" in the draft if 12 to 15 players are still around for the regular-season kickoff.
From a talent acquisition standpoint, that's why both Coughlin and Capers are looking forward more to the free agent signing period, which begins Friday, and the college draft on April 22 and 23 than they are to Wednesday's expansion draft.


CHRONICLE
ANNE KAUFMAN SCHNEIDER received an unexpected gift the other day: a pair of needlepoint slippers her father, the playwright George S. Kaufman, had left under the bed of Natalie Schafer, an actress with whom he had a romance in the 1940's.
The slippers passed from one hand to another before reaching Mrs.
Schneider, who knew nothing of their existence, confirming, she said, that there are fewer than six degrees of separation.


In Free Trade Era, World's Sweatshops Thrive
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 6 front-page article on New York's sweatshops was right on the mark.
This is what happens when manufacturers' retail store customers demand prices comparable to those attainable overseas.


Canoes Take to Pacific, Guided by Stars and Sun
Testing the vast, wild swells of the Pacific, two specks put to sea on Saturday on a three-month, 6,000-mile voyage to tiny scraps of land and back, guided only by knowledge of the sea and the stars.
In about six weeks, the specks hope to be joined in the Marquesas Islands by six more of their kind, double-hulled Polynesian voyaging canoes, from New Zealand, Tahiti and the Cook Islands.
While the canoes will be accompanied by a modern oceangoing sailboat with an engine for maneuvering in emergencies, the sailors will use only readings of winds, ocean swells and the positions of the sun, moon and stars that guided the ancient Polynesians.


A Mother Loses Life So Twins Can Be Born
On a misty rainy day in January, Barbara Barton succumbed to the consequences of a life-and-death decision she had made more than a year before.
She died of complications from leukemia.
One day in the fall of 1993, Ms.
Barton's doctors gave her two pieces of news that brought with them a terrible choice.
They told her that she was pregnant and that she had chronic granulocytic leukemia.


Visiting Russian Governor Meets Idol, Frank Perdue
When Aleksandr Belyakov, governor of the Leningrad region of Russia, was invited to a recent meeting of the National Governors Association, he used the opportunity to share notes with his American counterparts about common problems.
But what he was really looking forward to was a chance to rub shoulders with a man with whom he has even more in common -- the chicken king Frank Perdue.


For Nedved, the Point Is Getting Points
Petr Nedved painfully understands that he has missed a chance to make a good first impression.
Now the Rangers' touted center is hoping not to be written off as a bust.
Nedved has produced only 5 points for the Rangers this season since being obtained July 24 in a trade with St.
Louis for Esa Tikkanen and Doug Lidster as part of the settlement when Mike Keenan left New York to coach the Blues.
And both of Nedved's goals came against Ottawa on Jan. 30.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  MUSLIM WITNESS IS FLOWN TO U.S.
A South African Muslim whose tip led to the arrest of the suspected mastermind of the World Trade Center bombing was flown with his wife and child to the U.S., a Pakistani official said.
A1


New York Striving to Become Technology's Creative Center
For years, New Yorkers watched passively as the San Francisco, Boston and Seattle areas became technological giants, building powerful high-tech industries that attracted the country's best technical minds.
But New York is a part of the latest technology wave.
As a mecca for writers, graphic artists, musicians and film makers, it is poised to become one of the country's centers for the emerging multimedia industry, which combines visual and audio elements like animation, video and music to create films, CD-ROM's, television programming and virtual reality.


Bobek's Title Routine Silences Critics for Now
Richard Callaghan had heard all the stories about Nicole Bobek.
That she was a free spirit, wild, uncontrollable.
Abrasive.
Gifted but indifferent to training.
That her mother was controlling.
That he might have on his hands another Christopher Bowman, the talented but troubled 1992 Olympian who called himself Hans Brinker from Hell.
When the 17-year-old Bobek arrived in Detroit in September, looking for her third coach in three months, Callaghan said yes.
With conditions.
She would have to lose weight and commit herself to work.
It would be his way or the highway.


Stunts and Sweeps on TV As Art Imitates Art
It's called stunting.
It's what television does during monthlong sweeps periods, when ratings can determine how much advertisers are charged for their commercials.
Eager to get the biggest audiences possible, programmers put what they deem to be their best feet forward.
Viewers might wonder why they don't do that all year round, but that's an old and sad story.
Meanwhile, there is no denying that the best of any television year can usually be found during the sweeps.
Stunts in this February period range from the goofy (Jerry kissing Kramer on "Seinfeld") to the shameless (the current weeklong "Buncha Brady" festival on Nick at Nite honoring the ultimate boomer security blanket, "The Brady Bunch") to the genuinely startling (next week's episode of "All-American Girl," in which Margaret Cho co-opts Quentin Tarantino, whose film "Pulp Fiction" has been the darling of the cinema circuits).


A Tight Race to Head the World Bank
Three prominent Americans are angling to replace Lewis T. Preston as president of the World Bank.
Mr.
Preston, 68, disclosed this month that he has cancer, and he is widely expected to retire soon.
The principal contenders for the post, which has always been held by an American, are Lawrence H. Summers, Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs and a former chief economist at the World Bank; Stanley Fischer, also a former chief economist at the bank and now a deputy managing director at the International Monetary Fund, and James D. Wolfensohn, a New York investment banker who is chairman of the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.


Sports of The Times; Role Models Abound As Well as Rebound
Contrary to the prevailing notion that professional basketball has been taken hostage by marauders from Generation X, not one player refused to enter a game here this weekend, or walked into America West Arena with his sneakers unlaced.
No one blew off practice, or hurled a chair onto the court.
Charles Barkley made some bad racial jokes, but what else is new?
The likes of Hakeem Olajuwon and David Robinson, ignored when the state of the league is discussed, were, as usual, a delight.
And Saturday's rookie game was havoc-free, even without Grant Hill to set the behavioral standard for the rest of the social deviants supposedly rolling into the National Basketball Association off the collegiate assembly line.


North Carolina Sets Back Ga. Tech
North Carolina 85, Ga. Tech 81
Rasheed Wallace had 27 points, including seven dunks, as top-ranked North Carolina snapped Georgia Tech's 15-game home winning streak with an 85-81 victory yesterday.
Wallace scored 10 of his points in the final 5 minutes 37 seconds as the Tar Heels (19-2, 9-2 Atlantic Coast Conference) held off the Yellow Jackets (15-8, 6-5), who twice cut the Carolina lead to a point.


Price Rises By Factories On Increase
After months of trying, the nation's manufacturing companies, in a growing number of cases, are managing to increase the prices of some of their products, although rarely by as much as they would like.
The reports of price increases were much more frequent at the winter meeting of the National Association of Manufacturers, which ended today, than they had been at the fall meeting, in September.
In many cases, the manufacturers passed along their higher costs for materials.
But strong demand in a robust economy made the price increases possible, and the manufacturers expressed concern that the Federal Reserve, by raising interest rates, might kill off the demand.


TRANSACTIONS
Auto Racing
NASCAR -- Fined Junior Johnson, car owner, $45,000 after discovering an illegal engine piece in qualifying and barred Brett Bodine, driver, from qualifying.
Fined Jeff Hammond, crew chief, $5,000 after discovering 18 pounds of loose weight in the Pontiac driven by Greg Sacks in the Busch Clash.


Croat-Muslim Link as Flimsy As a Bridge of Rope in Bosnia
Where once the magnificent Ottoman arch of Mostar's Old Bridge soared, United Nations soldiers swayed in the wind today, trying to establish a rope bridge across the swirling Neretva River.
"It's treacherous," one Spanish peacekeeper said as he wrestled to secure one end of the makeshift structure.
"When the wind blows, it's not safe for anyone."


Before You Decide To Give Up Pasta Too
To the Editor:
Certainly as evidenced by the steady flow of "new" findings, nutrition sciences are ever evolving.
Given the potential for creating confusion with respect to health messages, it is the obligation of the press and the scientific community to keep the facts straight and provide accurate timely information.


Single Father Receives Help in Meeting His Children's Needs
Mickey Irizarry has been a single father for his three children since 1986, the year he said his life was nearly ruined.
That year, two of his sons were killed in a fire, all his possessions were destroyed, he lost his job, his wife of 15 years became addicted to crack and he had to go on welfare.
After the fire, Mr.
Irizarry said, his wife became distraught.
She neglected her children, stole money and stayed out with her friends until 2 or 3 in the morning, he said.


A Business Chief for Orange County
After weeks of turmoil, Orange County took a step on Friday toward extricating itself from bankruptcy with what county officials regarded as a sensible move: hiring William J. Popejoy, an experienced corporate executive with zero experience in government, to be the county's chief executive.
Mr.
Popejoy's newly created title was borrowed from the corporate world, not a civics textbook, and replaces the county administrative officer, whose position involved a careful balance of powers.
In theory at least, the chief executive's title gives Mr.
Popejoy a corporate chieftain's ability to make quick decisions without the need to hammer out a consensus.


Genoa Journal; Sport's Image Is Splattered by Bloodletting in Italy
The knife that killed a soccer fan before a game here one recent Sunday also wounded the feeling in this down-at-heel port city that the worst of a bad decade or so might be behind it.
The killing, on Jan. 29 outside the big brick stadium in the Marassi neighborhood, led to a one-day cancellation of virtually all athletic events throughout Italy a week later.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Venturing the Familiar In Unfamiliar Settings  Quintet of the Americas Weill Recital Hall
Adventure seemed oddly muted in the 15th-anniversary concert of the adventuresome Quintet of the Americas on Friday evening.
True, all the works were solidly of this century, and one was brand new: Karel Husa's "Five Poems," composed for the occasion.


An Unlikely Elite in Postwar Paris
EXILED IN PARIS Richard Wright, James Baldwin, Samuel Beckett and Others on the Left Bank  By James Campbell  Illustrated. 271 pages.
Scribner. $25.
In a parlor game of unlikely friendships, Richard Wright and Gertrude Stein might be a winning entry.
And yet, as James Campbell reveals in his new book, "Exiled in Paris," the black novelist and the priestess of modernism met and got to know each other in Paris just after World War II.


Jarrett Wins First Pole
DALE JARRETT, received the first installment of what he expects will be a big payoff for taking a big chance.
On Saturday, in his first official act as the driver for ROBERT YATES Racing, Jarrett won the pole for next Sunday's Daytona 500 in Daytona Beach, Fla.


In Free Trade Era, World's Sweatshops Thrive; A Bay Area Case
To the Editor:
While "Despite Tough Laws, Sweatshops Flourish" (front page, Feb. 6) focuses on New York, it rings true for exploited immigrant workers around the country.


Bourque's Late Goal Lifts Bruins Over Sabres
Bruins 2, Sabres 1
Ray Bourque's power-play goal with 1 minute 52 seconds left in the third period gave the visiting Boston Bruins a 2-1 victory over the Buffalo Sabres last night.


F.T.D. and Amoco Narrow Reviews to 5
Florists' Transworld Delivery, known as F.T.D., and the Amoco Oil Company each narrowed the reviews on their accounts last week to five finalists.
Mark Miller, marketing director at F.T.D. in Southfield, Mich., identified the company's finalists as Bates U.S.A. in New York, Campbell Mithun Esty in Minneapolis, DDB Needham Chicago, Grey Advertising in New York and J. Walter Thompson Detroit.
A decision is expected in April.
Under F.T.D.'s previous ownership, the account, with billings estimated to exceed $20 million, had been divided among Thompson Detroit, D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., and Wunderman Cato Johnson in Detroit.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Singer and His Accompanist Delve Into French Subtleties  Bernard Levasseur, Baritone Noel Lee, Pianist Miller Theater
Music is pitiless in the way the misfortunes of one practitioner so often create opportunity for another.
Anne-Marie Rodde was to have sung French songs with Noel Lee on Thursday.
She is ill and was replaced by Bernard Levasseur, a young Canadian baritone offering much the same repertory.


Discovering the Ease of Fund Raising
Clarence D. Rappleyea, the Assembly's Republican minority leader, was at his Winterfest fund-raiser for Assembly Republicans last month when a lobbyist grabbed his hand, gestured toward the throng sampling shrimp and scallops and said, "For a moment, I thought I was in the wrong place."
Mr.
Rappleyea, long accustomed to seeing empty rooms at his fund-raisers and looking a bit disoriented in the swirling crowd, smiled and replied, "Yeah, what a difference a year can make."


Politics and Air Safety
Charges that Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota pressured the U.S.
Forest Service on behalf of a friend's air-charter business cry out for a full and open Congressional investigation.
Senator John McCain, chairman of the subcommittee that oversees the Forest Service, has too quickly deferred to the inspector general of the Transportation Department, who started an investigation last week.
Given Senate coziness, and Mr.
Daschle's status as minority leader, it is easy to imagine why his colleagues might duck this one.
But safety regulation must be free of politics, and must be seen to be.


Signing on Broadway: It's a Tough Act
Your line is:  When I was a lad, I ate four dozen eggs


Holiday Today
President Lincoln's birthday is observed today.  NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal and state offices open.
Municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICE Regular home delivery.
BANKS Open.
PARKING Alternate-side street cleaning regulations suspended.
SANITATION No pickups or street cleanings or recycling.
SCHOOLS Open.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Open.
TRANSPORTATION Subways, buses, the Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North on regular weekday schedules.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal offices open.
State and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICES Regular home delivery.
BANKS Some banks may be closed.
SCHOOLS Some school districts may be closed.
TRANSPORTATION N.J.
Transit buses and trains on regular weekday schedule.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal offices open.
State and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICES Regular home delivery.
BANKS Open.
SCHOOLS Some school districts may be closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on regular weekday schedule.


Essay; Counter-Punch Strategy
When three White House speechwriters quit in disgust, unable to get access to or direction from the top man;
When the President is rightly treated as irrelevant after submitting a weak-kneed, punt-and-pray budget that helplessly runs up another trillion dollars in debt;


U.S. to Sell Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.78 percent and a six-month bill was 6.10 percent.


Runner, 18, Is Gaining Ground Despite the Losses
There were all kinds of winners yesterday at the 21st annual Colgate Women's Track and Field Games.
Not all of them crossed the finish line first.
Take the 18-year-old Ernestine Epps of Philadelphia.
In terms of past performance, she probably did not belong at Madison Square Garden with the other athletes who made it to the Colgate series finale.


Back to Vietnam With the Kronos
"Thirteen Images from the Dark Land" is the subtitle of George Crumb's theater piece "Black Angels," which was staged by the Kronos Quartet on Friday night.
The dark land in question in this 1970 work was Vietnam, and the piece sets up opposition between hostile, shrieking dissonances and otherworldly consonances, between aggressive sounds of assault and haunting timbres redolent of Asian instruments.
The Western string quartet is juxtaposed with sounds emerging from Chinese gongs, bowed water glasses and whispered overtones.
This unambiguous set of oppositions inspired by the Vietnam War is accompanied by allusions to annihilation and redemption.
But on this program at the Majestic Theater, which was the first of four presented by the Kronos in its residency at the Brooklyn Academy of Music this season, the piece took on other resonances as well.
Written at the height of the counterculture and invoking many of its themes, it seemed an ancestor to much of the post-modern repertory that has defined the Kronos Quartet and made it the most popular contemporary chamber ensemble.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; What's the appeal of a chewed stick? Outside magazine thinks its readers will know.
THERE usually isn't much call for a chewed-up stick to appear in slick advertising campaigns.
But to a publication that promotes itself as "America's active life style magazine," it is as powerful a prop as pearls are in Tiffany's ads and wasp-waisted bottles are in Coca-Cola's.
The stick is featured in a trade campaign that begins this week for Outside, the monthly magazine published by Mariah Media Inc.
Colorful print advertisements and promotional materials use photographs of the stick, gnawed by a playful dog, and other evocative images like footprints on a beach and a lizard skittering across a desert landscape.


Angelos Thinks Settlement Is Possible Within 2 Weeks
The owners' negotiating team won't invite Peter Angelos to help settle the baseball strike that began its seventh month yesterday, but the Baltimore Orioles' owner believes the ingredients for a settlement are in place.
They are to be found, he said yesterday, in the framework presented last week by Bill Usery Jr., the mediator.
Angelos, who has become an outcast among at least some of his fellow owners for his refusal to field a replacement team, said yesterday that if both sides see what he sees, they could settle their dispute in the next couple of weeks.


Mayor Seeks Cut In Medicaid Rate
Trying to close a $2.7 billion budget gap, Mayor Giuliani plans to ask Governor Pataki to reduce the amount of money hospitals receive for treating the poor beyond what the Governor has already proposed, officials said yesterday.
Because the state sets the rate for Medicaid reimbursement, but the city pays part of the cost, the cuts would help the Mayor balance his budget.
But the budget for municipal hospitals -- and other hospitals throughout the state -- would suffer sharply.


Town Divided Over Whether to Teach Creationism in Schools
This town of 22,000 just a few miles north of the Massachusetts border, where high-tech industries have replaced farming, is divided over a proposal from a local Baptist pastor that the school board give creationism and evolution equal time in science lessons.
State leaders, following New Hampshire's tradition of laissez-faire government, say it is a local decision and will not interfere.
And the townspeople who crowded a public hearing this week on the measure, blame themselves for letting the proposal get as far as it has.


Mother Teresa Has Served the Poor Selflessly
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 8 Critic's Notebook discusses a film about Mother Teresa by Christopher Hitchens.
Televised in Britain on Channel 4, the film reportedly depicts Mother Teresa as "a demagogue, an obscurantist and a servant of earthly powers."
You quote Mr.
Hitchens as saying that "The profane marriage between tawdry media hype and medieval superstition gave birth to an icon which few have had the poor taste to question."


Terror Informer Reported to Get U.S. Protection
A senior Pakistani official said today that a South African Muslim man who provided the tip that led to the arrest last week of the suspected mastermind of the World Trade Center bombing had been flown to the United States and placed under a witness protection program.
The official said the man was accompanied from Pakistan by his wife and child.
The Pakistani identified the couple as Ishtiaq and Fehmida Parker, and said they had agreed to be taken to the United States as part of the deal under which American and Pakistani agents were led to a rooming house in an Islamabad suburb on Tuesday where they seized the suspect, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef.
He had been on the Federal Bureau of Investigation's most-wanted list for 23 months.


Mental Health
Depite Budgetary pressure and community opposition, group homes and community residences for the mentally ill have mushroomed as states have moved people out of large psychiatric hospitals.
The deinstitutionalization has proceeded despite the difficulty of providing sevices for the mentally ill in their communities.
It is more economical to keep a patient in a group home, which typically houses a dozen residents and has a 24-hour-staff, costing New York State about $35,000 a year, compared with $120,000 a year for hospitalization.
Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposed budget has alarmed advocates for the mantally ill, as it cuts community mental health programs while accelerating the release of patients from state hospitals.


In Performance; POP
Cameroonian Novelist Plays Pygmy Music on a Thumb Piano  Francis Bebey, instrumentalist New School Auditorium
Francis Bebey, a Cameroonian authority on African traditional music and a novelist, is no purist.
On Friday night at the New School Auditorium, he performed his own compositions, accompanied by his sons, Patrick and Francis Jr., on percussion.
The concert took in love songs (with lyrics in English, French, Spanish and Bantu), program music for classical guitar and easygoing improvisations with a Brazilian percussionist, Nana Vasconcelos.
The music radiated Mr.
Bebey's genial modesty and gregarious optimism.


In Performance; JAZZ
A Contemporary Trio That Evokes Earlier Styles  John Pizzarelli, singer and guitarist Algonquin Hotel
The jazz singer and guitarist John Pizzarelli embodies an esthetic that might be called warm cool.
That is to say, Mr.
Pizzarelli, who is appearing at the Oak Room through Feb. 25, is at once charming and laid-back, cozily ingratiating and slyly hip.


Japanese Will Make a Mac-Compatible PC
The Pioneer Electronic Corporation will become the first Japanese company to make a personal computer compatible with Apple Computer's Macintosh, industry officials said on Friday.
Pioneer scheduled a news conference for Wednesday to announce the development of a personal computer with the "cooperation" of Apple.


Father Sentenced for Abuse
All children wind up in the doghouse from time to time.
But they are not supposed to sleep there for three nights.
Sirel Reele, an Ocean County veterinarian who forced his two adopted sons to sleep in a kennel, has been sentenced to 21 days in jail.
Judge Edward J. Turnbach of Superior Court, who imposed the sentence on Friday, also issued a warrant for the doctor's wife, Sondra, who is caring for her ill parents in Virginia.


Jon Garness, Lighting Designer, 65
Jon Michael Garness, a lighting designer and stage manager, died on Feb. 8 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 65.


G.O.P. Bill Endangers U.N. Peacekeeping
To the Editor:
Your editorial on H.R. 7, the national security portion of the Contract With America ("Cold-War Nostalgia," Feb. 3), was right on the mark for the most part.
This bill is cause for concern: It endangers United States security, politicizes United States foreign policy and reflects extremist views no thoughtful American would agree with.


Toy Fair Is Facing Challenges
On its sparkly, fun-loving surface, at least, all is well and business is booming at the American International Toy Fair, which opens today in Manhattan.
The venerable trade show, with its festival of news releases and celebrity-party invitations, has signed up more exhibitors this year, 1,640, than last year to hawk their Barbies and Power Rangers and Matchbox Lamborghinis.


James Kerr, 77, Chief Executive Who Led Avco as Conglomerate
James R. Kerr, an executive who helped to lead the Avco Corporation into the conglomerate era, died on Wednesday at his home in La Jolla, Calif.
He was 77 years old.
The cause of death was congestive heart failure, his son William said.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Study in Anachronism: Music, Singers and Ambiance  Chanticleer Metropolitan Museum of Art
Chanticleer's lovely concert of early French and Italian vocal music in the Temple of Dendur on Friday night pointed up a few of the futilities that face the early-music movement.
For here were men in modern evening dress singing church music in a pagan temple surrounded by listeners who applauded between the various sections of the Holy Mass.
Authenticity of place and ambiance are hopelessly skewed in modern reincarnations like this, yet how absolutely correct they seemed for this large and attentive audience.


Mexico's Ruling Party Faces Strong Challenge in State Election
In a first test of President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon's promises to remove the taint of unfairness and fraud from Mexican elections, his party faced one of the strongest challenges of its 65-year rule in an important state vote here today.
Most of the reputable opinion polls taken before the balloting in the western state of Jalisco have shown the right-of-center National Action Party likely to defeat the governing party in what would be only its third loss in a gubernatorial election.


Abroad at Home; Dumb And Dumber
We are told that we are moving to a knowledge-based society.
The future will belong to the individual and the country that can best make the transition from brawn to brain.
No one is more committed to that vision of the future, or more convincing in expounding it, than Newt Gingrich.
So it is a puzzle when he also says that he wants to wipe out the most effective instrument we have for spreading knowledge of ourselves and our world.
That is public broadcasting.


No Rest No Trouble For Devils In Florida
The Devils arrived here at 3 A.M. after their Saturday night home loss against Philadelphia.
Coach Jacques Lemaire promptly announced a 10:30 A.M.  practice.
"I've been going easy with them, taking care of the practices and how hard I train them," Lemaire said.
"But sometimes they need a kick in the rear."


Executives Shifted At DDB Needham
DDB Needham Chicago has promoted two of the eight executives on its management team to more traditional agency titles.
Alan Pilkington, 52, an executive vice president and managing director, was named chairman, and Bob Scarpelli, 42, executive vice president and chief creative officer, becomes vice chairman and chief creative officer.


No Goals for Romario
The fanfare was there. What was missing was a goal.
ROMARIO played his first official game in Brazil yesterday after being transferred from Spain last month, but his club Flamengo tied Fluminese, 0-0, before 99,000 fans in Maracana Stadium in Rio de Janeiro.


World News Briefs; Hard-Line Islamic Paper Is Banned by Iran
The Iranian Government has banned a hard-line Islamic newspaper owned by the brother of Iran's religious leader for violating laws that prohibit publishing articles deemed offensive to Islam, the official press reported today.
The editors of Jahan Islam, which is owned by Hojatolislam Hadi Khamenei, brother of Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, said the paper's license was revoked on Thursday by the Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance.


In Performance; THEATER
A Popular Italian Playwright And a Wartime Family  'Napoli Milionaria' Jean Cocteau Repertory
The Jovines, a poor Neapolitan family caught in the flight pattern of Allied bombers, not to mention food shortages, in World War II, are trying to survive a war that is none of their making and, if possible, to retain a small measure of dignity and integrity.


Atypical Choreography From a Master of Economy
The New York City Ballet offered three uncharacteristically long-winded works by George Balanchine on Friday night at the New York State Theater.
Balanchine, usually a master of choreographic economy, let each of them wander.
Fortunately, all three are blessed with rewarding solo roles.
Balanchine's one-act version of "Swan Lake" begins and ends excitingly.
Yet the dances in the middle, though pretty, slow down the dramatic action.
That structural fault scarcely mattered, for Darci Kistler gave an extraordinary performance as Odette, Queen of the Swans.
Ms.
Kistler made Odette a wild, not-quite-avian yet not-fully-human creature at her entrance, slashing her arms through the air as if they were wings vainly trying to soar toward freedom.


Fighting Erodes Cease-Fire in Bosnia
Fierce fighting raged today in the Bihac pocket in northwestern Bosnia as a cease-fire that took effect at the beginning of the year began to unravel.
The fighting reflected the fact that attempts to reach a political settlement in Bosnia have been stalled for several weeks, making it inevitable that war will prevail in a country that has not known a day of peace since it gained independence in April 1992.


One Last Call of the Mild: Champion Akita Ready for Another Round
As a unique custody battle raged round him late last week, Ch.
Tobe's Return of the Jedai, the most decorated but grizzled of veteran Akitas in the dog show business, found himself a sunlit patch of snow in his Lido Beach, L.I., backyard and slept right through the family fireworks.
After all, this constituted normal behavior for the canine who snoozed in the same spot last September while a thief removed his master's Lincoln from the driveway.
The 8 1/2-year-old pinto Akita, who goes by the more informal monicker of Ben when he's hanging out with his owners, Jay and Ruth Winston, is apparently thick-skinned as well as thick-coated.
He will put his gray muzzle back in circulation today and take a dogtrot around Madison Square Garden to attempt a record eighth best-of-breed victory at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show.


Blockbuster President Faces Inquiry
Steven R. Berrard, president of the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, a division of Viacom Inc., is under investigation by the Dallas District Attorney's office for possible perjury in connection with a 1991 lawsuit against Blockbuster.
Viacom executives vigorously denied yesterday that Mr.
Berrard had committed perjury.
A report of the investigation of Mr.
Berrard was to appear today in Newsweek magazine.


Ethnic Hate Tears Pupils In Burundi
In the Secondary Technical School in Burundi, political slogans are chalked on the walls, the closets and the bathroom stalls.
Almost all of them bear the name of an ethnic Tutsi party whose agenda is ethnic cleansing of Hutu.
As political violence has spread through this tiny nation just south of Rwanda for the last 18 months, life for the more than 1,000 students at this school has increasingly become a tense standoff.


'Report Cards' on New York Schools Don't Give Whole Picture
To the Editor:
While the Council of Supervisors and Administrators agrees with New York City's Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, that parents must be actively involved in their schools and should be entitled to as much information as possible, we are concerned that parents, in using school "report cards" to make comparisons (news article, Feb. 7), may be led to believe that their children are able to attend any district school that the parents feel better meets the needs of their children.


Mayor Seeks Aid Reduction For Hospitals
As part of his effort to close a $2.7 billion budget gap, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani plans to ask Gov.
George E. Pataki to reduce the amount of money hospitals receive for treating the poor and disabled under Medicaid, officials said yesterday.
Because New York City pays part of the cost of Medicaid, the cuts would help it balance its budget, but would also cause even deeper reductions in financing for its municipal hospital system.


Opportunity Knocks and UConn Answers
Their celebration began understandably prematurely.
Near the end of a taut afternoon in the Carrier Dome, with an important and possibly historic milepost of this Connecticut basketball season within sight, Travis Knight and Donny Marshall embraced.
There were still 29 seconds remaining, and the Husky lead of 5 points over Syracuse, as wide a margin as there had been to that point in the second half, could still have been undone by two flicks of Lawrence Moten's wrist.
But that never happened today.
Once more, a sense of togetherness and passion overcame a potential Husky flaw.


Man Killed by Police After Attack on Wife
A Queens man was killed Saturday night by the police after he had attacked his wife and threatened officers with a pistol, the police said.
The man, Stive Cadlett, 43, was reported dead on arrival at Mary Immaculate Hospital shortly after the incident, which occurred at 9:26 P.M., according to police reports.
He died from one shot to his chest, fired by Officer Joseph Guerra, a seven-year police veteran, who had responded with his partner to a complaint of domestic violence by Mr.
Cadlett's wife, said Capt.
Harry Knorr, a police spokesman.


Foreign Policy, Hamstrung
This week Congress is to consider legislation that would undermine this and every future President's ability to safeguard America's security and to command our armed forces.
The measure is deeply flawed.
It is called the National Security Revitalization Act, but if adopted it would endanger national security.
We are committed to working with Congress in a bipartisan fashion.
But if this measure is passed in its current form, we have told the President we will recommend that he veto it.


People
*
Richard Russo was named executive vice president and chief creative officer at FCB/Tierney, Philadelphia, succeeding Tom Mabley, who left.
Mr.
Russo was previously an executive vice president and creative director at Deutsch Inc., New York.
Also, William Melnick was named senior vice president and media services director, succeeding Mike Daly, who left.
Mr.
Melnick was previously senior vice president and research director at Earle Palmer Brown, Philadelphia. *
Dave Linnie was named a creative partner at the Leap Partnership, Chicago.
He was previously a senior vice president and creative director at the Leo Burnett Co., Chicago.


Mexican Troops Settle In at a Retaken Rebel Base
Mexican soldiers strolled freely today through the abandoned streets of this tiny forest village, which was retaken by the army on Friday after nearly a year under rebel control.
Army officers have established their headquarters inside a small building here that had been used until recently as a communications command center for the rebel group, the Zapatista National Liberation Army.
Subcommander Marcos, the rebel leader, slipped away without being caught by the federal occupation force.


Invest in Day Care
In 1991 more than half of American women with children under 6 worked.
Many more would surely like to, and are surely destined to -- if the Administration and the states succeed in changing welfare by requiring recipients to commit themselves to education, training and jobs.
Millions of American youngsters are spending, or will spend, several of their most formative years in the charge of strangers.
They are going to be cheated -- because their country has yet to give day care the serious attention it deserves.
According to a recent study of hundreds of day care centers in California, Colorado, Connecticut and North Carolina, conducted by child psychologists and economists at four universities, the care provided by most is so poor it threatens the youngsters' emotional and intellectual development.
As for the parents, 90 percent of whom rated the care as "good," they were sadly misinformed, either because they did not recognize quality care or did not demand it.


In Performance; THEATER
Everyone Sings, Even a Dead Man  'Most Men Are' Theater Off Park
Stephen Dolginoff's new musical, "Most Men Are," opens and closes at a wake for a young man dead of AIDS.
But not to worry; there is nothing in this silly exercise that could trouble, or even arouse, the emotions of an audience.
The title song tells us that most men are, among other things, "pathetic," "insipid." Right.


Rosemary Clooney's View Of a Show-Business Past
Almost every song in Rosemary Clooney's wonderful new show at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza) has deep personal associations for the singer, who is celebrating what she calls her "demi-centennial," or 50th anniversary, in show business.
The warm, pensive "Danny Boy" that opens the show is sung in remembrance of her Irish-Catholic background in Maysville, Ky.
"I'm Confessin' That I Love You" was a favorite, she recalls, of Tony Pastor, the band leader whose group she and her sister Betty joined in 1947.
"I Left My Heart in San Francisco" pays tribute to Tony Bennett, her Columbia Records label mate in the early 1950's, with whom she did a radio show called "Songs for Sale." For "The Coffee Song," a catchy novelty she used to perform with her sister, Ms.
Clooney is joined onstage by Cathi Campo, one of Betty's four children.
"There Will Never Be Another You," done bossa nova style, was the favorite song of her former husband, Jose Ferrer.


The East Gets Exercise As West Gets a Victory
Maybe some of the Eastern Conference players spent too much time soaking up the Phoenix sun.
Maybe the Western Conference, which has been the stronger conference all season, simply wanted to prove a point.
Whatever the case, today's 45th National Basketball Association All-Star Game was a romp for the Western stars, who used a run-and-gun offense on their way to a 139-112 victory before a capacity crowd at the America West Arena.
The West built a 104-81 lead after three quarters, making the fourth quarter a mere exercise in finishing the game.


Familiar Beanpot Foes
Boston University Coach JACK PARKER has won a record nine Beanpot titles.
Boston College Coach JERRY YORK is hoping for his first.
They'll both try to become the last Beanpot champion in the Boston Garden era tonight, when they meet in the final.
York is in his first year at Boston College, which won the hockey title last year.
But he's no Beanpot rookie, having scored the tournament-winning goal in overtime in 1965 to beat Harvard.


Critics Say Aloofness Adds to Plight of Rutgers President
For years a band of Hispanic professors and students at Rutgers University pushed, lobbied and cajoled for the chance to open a cultural center.
They were ignored by one administrator after another until 1990 when Francis L. Lawrence became the university's 18th president and gave the group his support just a few months after taking office.
But little attention has been given to Mr.
Lawrence's role, and he has rarely visited the university center since it opened three years ago in a modest red, brick house here.


Pakistan Officials Hope to Repair Ties With U.S.
After Pakistan's swift deportation of the suspected mastermind of the World Trade Center bombing, the Government of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto is hoping that its action will give a new impetus to Pakistan's bid to improve frayed relations with the United States.
By allowing American agents to join in a raid on a rooming house here on Tuesday that led to the capture of the suspect, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, and by approving his return to the United States on an American military aircraft eight hours later, "Pakistan has been able to prove our cooperative and friendly attitude toward the United States," said Husain Haqqani, an aide to Ms.
Bhutto and the Government's chief spokesman.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Retail Sales . . .
Jan.
Wednesday  Consumer Price Index . . .
Jan.
Industrial Production . . .
Jan.
Capacity Utilization . . .
Jan.
Inventory-Sales Ratio . . .
Dec.
Thursday  Housing Starts . . .
Jan.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Balance of Trade . . .
Dec.


Suspect in Robbing of Nun Caught by E.M.S. Workers
The man who snatched the purse of an elderly woman in Far Rockaway, Queens, on Saturday didn't know she was a Roman Catholic nun.
And he certainly didn't know about the "little angels" watching over her -- two Emergency Medical Service technicians who chased him away and cornered him for the police.
Yesterday, Sister Kathleen Grimes, a nun in her early 70's, said she planned to write a letter "to the city" praising the two technicians, Vincent McMichael and Albert Pruden, for their help in capturing the suspect, Edward Jones, and getting her purse back.


CBS, Struggling, Sinks in Ratings
CBS, which three years ago became the first network to rise to first place from third in a single television season, has turned that achievement on its head: it is on course to become the first network to drop to third place from first in one season.
Even more serious, many industry executives say, is that CBS now finds itself at a competitive disadvantage with ABC, NBC and even the less-established Fox network in appealing to the audience that is most desirable to advertisers: viewers under 50 years old.


Rights Group Issues Criticism Of Arafat Rule
Human rights are in a "perilous state" under Palestinian self-rule, threatening the prospects for regional peace, the United States-based Human Rights Watch/Middle East said today.
In a 50-page report, the monitoring group accused Yasir Arafat's police force in the Gaza Strip of arbitrarily rounding up political opponents and mistreating some of them.
Press freedoms have also been violated, it said, and the Palestinian Authority, which administers self-rule, has failed in its first nine months to show "a commitment to installing a rule of law."


Patents
LOSING a limb doesn't stop people from participating in athletics -- in fact, in the Para-Olympics, some of the fastest track and field stars are people who have lost both legs, racing with prosthetic limbs specially designed for sprinting.
A California company that makes those artificial sports legs has now gone one step further, patenting a limb that is itself sports equipment.
The prosthesis has a "foot" with integral binding mounts on the toe and heel so that it can be fastened directly into downhill ski bindings.


Both Sides Are Adamant in Fight Over Independent Police Review
Amid repeated allegations of police brutality, leaders of black and Hispanic groups here are pressing for an independent board to look into complaints against the police.
But, as in New York City, Norwalk's Mayor and Police Chief are adamantly opposed, insisting that the present three-member police commission is properly monitoring the 188-member department.


Tennessee Makes Full Use Of Vanderbilt's Miscues
Tennessee 75, Vanderbilt 55
Nikki McCray scored 23 points and was just as effective defensively to lead No. 2 Tennessee to a 75-55 victory over No. 7 Vanderbilt yesterday in Knoxville, Tenn.


INSIDE
Bad Days at Black Rock
Ratings and morale are plummeting at CBS, as speculation grows that the network will be sold and its long-time president, Howard Stringer, will go elsewhere.
Page D1.
Rebels Flee Mexican Troops
Soldiers strolled through the streets of a former Zapatista stronghold that was retaken after nearly a year under rebel control.
Page A3.
Restarting Mideast Talks
President Clinton met with the foreign ministers of Egypt, Israel and Jordan and a Palestinian official to help restart stalled talks.
Page A11.
Nat Holman Is Dead
Nat Holman, a basketball star of the 1920's and later a respected coach over 41 years at City College, died at the age of 98.
Page B7.
Star Dog, Nervous Owners
Stress increases for all but the champion in question when the family Akita goes for a title at Westminster.
SportsMonday, page C3.


Congressional Memo; G.O.P. Facing Some Obstacles After Fast Start
First, they changed the rules of the House.
Then they passed the balanced-budget amendment.
Then came restrictions on unfinanced requirements on the states.
This last week, the Republicans rammed through the House of Representatives a measure that would give the President a line-item veto and began passing bills to crack down on criminals.


Trying to Share
Lots of people have opinions about the Republican program known as the Contract With America.
The head of the state's Industrial Union Council said he just wanted to share his.
But the police had different ideas about what Bill Kane, the union leader, was doing Saturday at a hearing of the United States House of Representatives Budget Committee in this Somerset County community.
They said he would not wait his turn to speak and charged him with disrupting a public meeting and resisting arrest.


RESULTS PLUS
SPEED SKATING  Blair Sets World Mark  Bonnie Blair set a world record yesterday in a 500-meter World Cup speed skating race in Calgary, Alberta.
Susan Auch of Canada also bettered the old mark in the race.
Blair was clocked in 38.69 seconds, breaking her own world record of 38.99 seconds.
Auch, from Winnipeg, was second in 38.94 seconds, marking the first time two women broke the 39-second barrier in the same race. (Reuters)


ELITE HOSPITALS OF NEW YORK CITY IN FINANCIAL BIND
New York's elite medical centers are facing their worst financial crisis in decades, caught between newly powerful health maintenance organizations demanding deep discounts and state and Federal legislators planning to cut millions of dollars in hospital payments to balance budgets.
Some of these teaching hospitals may not survive the decade, health-industry analysts say, and those that do will emerge transformed: from ivory tower institutions focused on research, training and high-priced specialty care to vast health-care networks whose main task is to provide cost-conscious basic medicine, a pursuit that many have performed only as an afterthought -- and then grudgingly.


Dole Rehearses for '96 Race With Lighter Touch
The majority leader of the United States Senate, the early front-runner for the Republican Presidential nomination, sat by a fire in his Capitol office on Friday afternoon, wondering if he could carve out time for an important engagement: to be guest host of "Saturday Night Live."
It was not a question of whether Bob Dole should do it, but whether he could afford four nights of rehearsals and posing for promotional spots with the comedian Dan Aykroyd, whom he would want on the show.
"I like Aykroyd," he said.
"He plays me. I think he's great."


For British Women's Magazines, Sex Is a Recipe for Success
A bunch of thirtysomething editors of British women's magazines think they have discovered what women want.
The same thing men want, they seem to be saying: sex, plenty of it and the tackier the better.
Publications that used to attract readers with recipes for lemon meringue pie now reel them in with exposed flesh -- the same time-worn tabloid tactic that used to be the province of men's magazines.
After a flirtation with articles aimed at women with broader interests, magazines like Marie Claire, More! and Company have been reaching new highs in circulation by publishing just about any article with the word sex in it.


Well-Wishers for a Retiree in Barn 3
On the morning after his racing career ended in the middle of his 16th race, Holy Bull walked briefly down the row of Barn 3 at Gulfstream Park favoring his left foreleg while his owner and trainer, Jimmy Croll, said with sadness and appreciation: "He'll be a very hard act to follow."
The great gray superstar of racing was injured Saturday halfway into the Donn Handicap at Gulfstream Park, the tendons in his lower left foreleg strained, his career ended at the age of 4 and his racing record halted at 13 victories in 16 races and $2.5 million earned.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The American International Toy Fair is in danger of having its scope and influence reduced.
The biggest threat is the fundamental evolution in retailing patterns in the United States toy industry, in which many toy orders are placed well before the toy fair offers itself as a showcase.  [ Page D1. ]


Millicent Lang, Top Tennis Player, 78
Millicent Hirsh Lang, a Bronx native who became a top-ranked women's tennis player in the 1930's and 1940's, died at a hospice in Boca Raton, Fla., on Friday.
She was 78 and lived most of her life in Great Neck, L.I.
She died of a stroke, said her husband, Nathaniel Lang.


TROUBLED NOMINEE GETS NEW DEFENSE FROM WHITE HOUSE
The White House today angrily defended its nomination of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. as Surgeon General and sought to paint his critics as right-wing extremists, even as it coped with new questions about his having performed a handful of hysterectomies on severely mentally retarded women more than two decades ago.
With some prominent Republicans vowing to oppose the nomination and many Democrats openly contemptuous of initial missteps by the Clinton Administration in explaining how many abortions Dr.
Foster had performed, the White House unleashed its most vigorous support yet for the nominee and prepared to escort him to courtesy calls on Capitol Hill on Monday.


Frank Bailinson, 81, Reporter and Editor
Frank Bailinson, a reporter and copy editor at The New York Times for 31 years, died on Saturday in a nursing home in Chapel Hill, N.C.
He was 81.
Mr.
Bailinson, who had lived in Chapel Hill for the last 10 years, died of pneumonia, said his daughter, Ann Kleinman.


An Offer He Could Not Refuse
In 1987, when Andrew P. Napolitano became a Superior Court judge at age 36, he was the youngest trial judge in state history.
A year ago, he got a lifetime appointment.
Now, he is quitting.
On April 1, he is resigning to become a partner in one of the state's largest law firms, Robinson, St.
John &amp; Wayne, in Newark.
The word is that he will make roughly three times his current salary of $100,000.


CHRONICLE
CHRIS CROSMAN is the director of the Farnsworth Art Museum in Rockland, Me., which is about to acquire a huge collection of works by ANDREW WYETH and other members of the Wyeth family, but even he does not know the scope of the permanent loan.
Asked how many paintings would be included, Mr.
Crosman said the other day: "I can't even guess. He's still painting them, and the family does not want to be pinned down on numbers."


Equity Offerings Expected for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Adco Technologies Inc., Michigan Center, Mich., an initial public offering of two million shares.
Janney Montgomery Scott Inc.


A Spill Leaves Little Damage
An oil spill had almost been cleaned up yesterday while the accident remained under investigation.
Most of the more than 12,000 gallons of diesel fuel that leaked from the Mormac Star when it ran aground two miles offshore on Friday either evaporated, dissipated or was skimmed off by cleanup crews, said Petty Officer Chris O'Neil, a spokesman for the Coast Guard.


CBS, Struggling, Sinks in Ratings
CBS, which three years ago became the first network to rise to first place from third in a single television season, has turned that achievement on its head: it is on course to become the first network to drop to third place from first in one season.
Even more serious, many industry executives say, is that CBS now finds itself at a competitive disadvantage with ABC, NBC and even the less-established Fox network in appealing to the audience that is most desirable to advertisers: viewers under 50 years old.


One Way to Tackle Cold: Touch Football in Park
There must be a reason three guys from New Jersey would pick one of the coldest days of the year to hop a bus to Manhattan, head to Central Park and play touch football in a field packed solid with ice.
"It's what you call poor planning," Jose Ramos, a 27-year-old bartender who lives in North Bergen, explained yesterday with a shrug -- or was it a shiver?
And where were he and his friends the day before, Saturday, when the temperature was a positively balmy 47 degrees, virtual sun-bathing weather in the middle of winter?


Market Place; Does General Magic have the touch in hand-held computers?
THE GO CORPORATION.
Eo Inc.
The Momenta Corporation.
Silicon Valley is littered with the debris of companies that in the last half-decade tried to make the idea of hand-held portable computing a reality.
But on Friday, Wall Street demonstrated that this vision is anything but dead.


Dividend Meetings


Investigation Of Packwood By Grand Jury Is Renewed
The revival of a Federal grand jury investigation of Senator Bob Packwood indicates that his long legal battle may be coming to its critical endgame.
A lawyer for Mr.
Packwood today discounted reports that the Oregon Republican was under a fresh investigation by the grand jury to determine whether he illegally tried to have friends hire his former wife so that he could pay her less alimony.


No Headline
"I've been on the bench since January. Everywhere, people go, 'This is the nice Bob Dole, the voice of reason."' -- SENATOR BOB DOLE, on letting Speaker Newt Gingrich take center stage.  [ A16:2. ]


White House Releases Papers That Defend Foster
In the face of mounting furor over Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr.'s performing abortions, as well as hysterectomies on severely retarded women, the White House issued documents over the weekend portraying Dr.
Foster, President Clinton's nominee for Surgeon General, as a devoted medical educator dedicated to improving the health and welfare of the poor.
In one document, a scientific report published in 1976, Dr.
Foster said he performed an unspecified number of hysterectomies on severely retarded women for sterilization and "hygienic" reasons at a hospital in Tuskegee, Ala.


In Performance; DANCE
Examination of Vulnerability Or Just Pure Dance  Mary Seidman and Dancers Dia Arts Center
Mary Seidman saved the best for last in a program of work by her and Tina Croll on Thursday night.
Ms.
Seidman has described "Between the Lines," the program's closing dance, as an examination of human vulnerability and inhumanity.
The six men and women in her affecting new group dance are clearly vulnerable at times.
But the piece, performed to excerpts from Schumann's "Kreisleriana," can be seen more rewardingly as a pure-dance work with threads of vivid emotional nuance woven into the whole.


A 'Faun' Not Naif, Illumined By 2 Stars
The focus was on history and its progress at the New York State Theater on Tuesday night when the New York City Ballet presented George Balanchine's classic "Serenade," two definitive works by Jerome Robbins and a very contemporary burst of energy and color created by the company's current director, Peter Martins.
"Afternoon of a Faun" is Mr.
Robbins's imaginative response to the Debussy score, a piece about two self-absorbed, beautiful young dancers who encounter each other in an empty ballet studio, are attracted to each other for a moment and then go their separate ways.
There were some transcendent images in the luminous performance by Darci Kistler and Jock Soto, chief among them Ms.
Kistler, arching rapturously as Mr.
Soto held her parallel to the floor, his eyes fixed on himself in an imaginary mirror.


In Performance; THEATER
Resilience Is Key To Post-Operative Memoir  'My Left Breast' Ohio Theater
"Mastectomy" will never again be the name of an operation to anyone who feels the force of Susan Miller's one-woman show "My Left Breast." In her performance, she turns her own mastectomy into a metaphor of resilience as the middle-aged character of the play convinces us that life's losses define us, chipping away at the rough surface until we become who we are.


A Loung Lizards Specialty: Contrasts
Given all the artistic ferment on the Lower East Side in the early 1980's, it's a surprise that so much activity came to so little.
The Lounge Lizards are one of the exceptions; the band has circumvented just about all the traps.
In the success of its eclecticism, the group has become the master of the nonaligned movement, beyond a specific idiom but happy and expansive with its own new language.
The band, including its founder, the saxophonist John Lurie, is playing at the Knitting Factory off and on through Feb. 25, and on Thursday night they spread out a two-hour performance that used about every move open to the instrumentation.
Mr.
Lurie had the cellist Jane Scarpantoni and the tenor saxophonist Michael Blake pair off to play melodies alone.
Some tunes sped up and slowed down, with the horn section coming in at a different tempo than the rhythm section.
Mr.
Lurie set the guitarist Dave Tronzo and Ms.
Scarpantoni, along with some horns, to buzzing with overtones; dissonant, dense and shivering clouds of sound emerged.
Impressionistic harmonies contrasted with tough rhythm-and-blues, and the joy of full-band, blaring polyphony was set against the introspection of Mr.
Lurie's own improvisations, often sensual and cool.


Lethal Aid to Cambodia: Not Now
Last month Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott, on a visit to Cambodia, said the United States was willing to consider lethal military aid to the Cambodian Army in its struggle against the Khmer Rouge.
Given the traumatic history of American involvement in the region, and virulent corruption in the Cambodian Government and army, this is a questionable idea, at best.
The Khmer Rouge insurgents are the remnants of a movement that killed an estimated one million Cambodians when it held power during the 1970's.
It has little hope of regaining leadership of the country.
But it is still capable of causing much misery in the countryside and draining away resources that would be best used to rebuild the struggling nation.


Clinton Intervenes to Help Revive Stalled Mideast Peace Talks
President Clinton stepped into the stalled Middle East talks today to try to give them new momentum as Palestinian leaders promised strong new efforts to crack down on terrorism against Israel.
There were no breakthroughs, but modest steps were taken to resuscitate peace efforts, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said.


Richmond Suddenly Brightest All-Star
There were times when Mitch Richmond wanted out.
Big stars do not grow very much in small markets, and the thing he remembers most about his trade from Golden State to Sacramento in 1991 was this:
"All the Sacramento papers were going down to the Bay Area to cover the Warrior games. Boy, did I feel small."


Maligning the History Standards
The national history standards, recently developed by historians for voluntary use by teachers, have been attacked for their alleged preoccupation with the "dark side" of the American experience.
The standards, according to conservative critics, compulsively spotlight what America has done wrong and celebrate little of what it has done right.
Lynne Cheney, former chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, which helped finance development of the standards, points out that they mention McCarthyism 19 times and the Ku Klux Klan 17 times -- but never mention Thomas Edison or Albert Einstein.
The critics have a point.
But a small, misleading point.
Reading the standards and support materials is exhilarating.
Students will rejoice in learning from them; teachers will cherish using them.


The Road Not Taken
Who knows what makes a newspaper a success?
An editor's vision?
A publisher's plan?
Luck?
Some newspaper people were reflecting on such questions last week when the country's oldest business newspaper, The Journal of Commerce, was sold by Knight-Ridder Inc.
The publisher of The Economist magazine paid $115 million for the daily paper, which has been publishing since 1827.


Queens Man Shoots 3, Killing His Wife, Police Say
A Queens man who relatives said had recently been released from prison shot his wife to death and wounded two other relatives yesterday in the couple's Far Rockaway home, the police said.
The man, Peter Garcia, 33, was arrested at the couple's home, at 541 Grassmere Terrace, by police officers who heard the shots.


All But the Kitchen Sink?
A patient is suing Greystone Park Psychiatric Hospital and St.
Clares Riverside Medical Center for not stopping him from eating bedsprings, batteries and other inedibles.
Gary Christopher Badger's history of swallowing unusual objects was known when he entered Greystone in October 1993, Mr.
Badger's lawyer, Peter J. Koulikourdis, said after filing the complaint in Superior Court here.


'Report Cards' on New York Schools Don't Give Whole Picture; Health of the Building
To the Editor:
The New York Public Interest Research Group congratulates Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines on releasing the New York City Board of Education's first annual school report to parents (news article, Feb. 7).
However, the report missed the mark because it did not include anything on the environmental health and safety of a school facility.


Paul Monette, 49; Writer Humanized AIDS
Paul Monette, a writer whose autobiography, "Becoming a Man: Half a Life Story," a memoir of suppressing and then celebrating his homosexuality, won the 1992 National Book Award for nonfiction, died at home on Friday.
He was 49 and lived in West Hollywood, Calif.
Elisabeth Nonas, a close friend, said the cause was complications from AIDS.


A Long Shot Wins The Davona Dale
Mia's Hope, a 39-1 long shot, outran Wayne Lukas's star filly Minister Wife to win the Davona Dale Stakes by 2 1/2 lengths at Gulfstream Park today.
The favorite, Culver City, ridden by Mike Smith, was seven lengths back in third place.
Mia's Hope, owned and trained by Harold Rose and ridden by Kristi Chapman, won for the fourth time in seven starts with a strong rally from last place to the front, where she ran down Minister Wife in the deep stretch.


METRO DIGEST
ELITE HOSPITALS FACE CRISIS
New York's elite medical centers are facing their worst financial crisis in decades, caught between newly powerful health maintenance organizations demanding deep discounts and state and Federal legislators planning to cut millions of dollars in hospital payments to balance budgets.


Bridge
The usual guideline for the declarer is that ruffs in the short trump hand are desirable, but ruffs in the long hand are not.
One conspicuous exception is the dummy reversal play, which was used on the diagramed deal from a Knockout Team match at the Bermuda Regional Championships in January 1994.
The bidding featured the modern style of Blackwood, in which a five-spade response shows two of the five key-cards -- aces plus the trump king -- together with the trump queen.
At first sight, six spades might seem an inferior contract.
That is true if the declarer needs a 3-2 trump split and a favorable position of the diamond king.
But there is a better way to play after the lead of the spade jack, and this was demonstrated by Bill Tucker, a Bermudian who used to represent his country but now lives in Toronto.


Nat Holman Is Dead at 98; Led C.C.N.Y. Champions
Nat Holman, one of the greatest basketball players of the 1920's and then one of the nation's most respected coaches during a 41-year career at City College, died yesterday at the Hebrew Home for the Aged in Riverdale, Bronx.
He was 98.
He died of natural causes, said his nephew, Tom Holman.


CHRONICLE
Rabbi JOEL S. GOOR , spiritual leader of the Metropolitan Synagogue of New York, will give some of his congregants Valentine's Day guidance tomorrow -- on jitterbugging.
Not only that, he'll also offer them rabbinical instruction in the Lindy Hop and the fox trot.
The rabbi teaches a monthly class in Jewish values to the synagogue's Young Couples Club, and when he realized that this month's session coincided with Valentine's Day, he said, "We agreed that the subject would be 'Sex, Love, Marriage and Judaism.' " Then he noticed that a free dance was being held at the Winter Garden of the World Financial Center downtown, so he and his wife, LUCILLE A. ROUSSIN , are taking the group on a field trip there first.


A Son Sees Reflection in the Water; Kennedy Scion Shuns Public Office for Beloved Reservoirs
When Robert F. Kennedy Jr. walked into Andrew Cuomo's bachelor party in June 1990, his eye was drawn to the bar: there, sitting alone on a stool, was the groom's father, then the Governor of New York.
But rather than just exchange pleasantries, Mr.
Kennedy was seized by an urge to buttonhole Mario Cuomo about his pet concern, New York City's giant watershed.
And so he did, for the better part of an hour.


Simpson Jury Is Taken on a Tour of the Crime Scene
With the defendant seldom far away from them, jurors in the O. J. Simpson double murder trial today retraced the familiar and gruesome itinerary of the case, riding through the affluent, flower-filled neighborhoods, then walking through the homes where Mr.
Simpson and his late wife once lived.
After driving by the Italian restaurant where Nicole Brown Simpson ate her last meal, the 12 jurors and 9 alternates spent two hours inspecting the condominium where Mrs.
Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were slain last June, outside the front gate.
The 14-vehicle entourage -- including separate cars for the prosecutors, defense lawyers, and Judge Lance A. Ito and his staff -- then crossed Sunset Boulevard and journeyed north by northwest to Mr.
Simpson's estate.


Budget Cuts Are Planned By Bratton
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton huddled with top department officials yesterday, planning a strategy on how to comply with the Mayor's order to cut his budget as other city agencies have.
One of the Commissioner's advisers said Mr.
Bratton was looking at the entire department, considering how to cut the number of officers in administrative posts and put more officers on the street.


Sartre, Soldier: Musing, Writing
Having been sent to Alsace in September 1939 to help prevent a German invasion of France, the soldier Jean-Paul Sartre found he had ample time on his hands: time enough to revise his new book, to read the latest edition of Andre Gide's "Journal" and above all, to think and write.
In the 10 months before he became a German prisoner on June 21, 1940, Sartre wrote hundreds of letters -- to Simone de Beauvoir, to his mistress, Wanda Kosakiewicz, and to other close friends.
But as ever, he also had an eye on posterity, filling 15 notebooks of a journal that he decreed should be published posthumously.


Trying to Share
Lots of people have opinions about the Republican program known as the Contract With America.
The head of the state's Industrial Union Council said he just wanted to share his.
But the police had different ideas about what Bill Kane, the union leader, was doing Saturday at a hearing of the United States House of Representatives Budget Committee in this Somerset County community.
They said he would not wait his turn to speak and charged him with disrupting a public meeting and resisting arrest.


Former N.H.L. Player Reveals He Has AIDS
BILL GOLDSWORTHY, an original Minnesota North Star and a onetime Ranger, has AIDS.
The St.
Paul Pioneer Press reported that Goldsworthy, 50, was diagnosed in November while hospitalized in Memphis for treatment of pneumonia.


The Mayor's Housecleaning: Past Deeds or Future Fears?
USUALLY, when a mayor dismisses people from their jobs, there is a tangible reason.
A bridge collapsed.
Or a budget wasn't balanced.
Or someone was accused of malfeasance.
What's so baffling about Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's housecleaning is that there is no clear explanation of what most of the dozens of people dismissed did to attract his ire.
Some spokesmen were caught telling the truth, awkward as the truth may have been, and the Police Department's spokesman not only balked at trimming his staff but also burnished to a bright shine Police Commissioner William J. Bratton's image, which apparently did not please the Mayor.


UConn Takes Revenge On Determined Hall
When Connecticut, the nation's top-ranked women's basketball team, arrived in the locker room for today's Big East game against Seton Hall, it found a message from Coach Geno Auriemma on a blackboard.
There were no words, just numbers:
"74-53."


I. L. Goldberg, 88, U.S. Judge
Judge Irving L. Goldberg, a friend and adviser to President Lyndon B. Johnson and one of the Federal judiciary's strongest links to the civil rights era, died Saturday at his home in Dallas.
He was 88 and died of complications of a long-standing neurological disorder, family members said.
President Johnson appointed him to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, in New Orleans, in 1966.
Judge Goldberg remained there until his death.
In nearly 29 years on the appellate court, he ruled on issues ranging from school desegregation to cold-war-era loyalty oaths to public school financing.


Packing Up Panama Camps


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League  LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Signed Oreste Marrero, first baseman, and Dennis Moeller, James Bruske, Miguel Alicea and Wayne Edwards, pitchers, to minor league contracts.


Empty Stadiums, but Very Full Coffers
Hooray for public financing of baseball stadiums!
Three cheers for lotteries and wine, booze, cigarette, hotel and sales taxes!
Without 'em, Oriole Park at Camden Yards, Jacobs Field, The Ballpark at Arlington, Coors Field and Comiskey Park would not exist.
And without 'em, they wouldn't pay for themselves, even during the baseball strike.


Dewar's Campaigns To Be Replaced
The Schieffelin &amp; Somerset Company and its agency, the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago, said yesterday that they would end two long-running national print campaigns for Dewar's White Label Scotch whisky and extend a popular regional campaign for the brand.
For the last 15 months the humorous campaign, "Truths," has been running in the Northeast, aimed at consumers in their 20's, who are more likely to drink vodka than Scotch.
"We've had some very good reaction to the 'Truth' ads," said Peggy Bernstein, a spokeswoman for Schieffelin &amp; Somerset in New York.


Gore and Nominee Take Fight to Tennessee
The White House abruptly changed plans today and decided not to send its nominee for Surgeon General to Capitol Hill today.
Instead, it sent Vice President Al Gore to Tennessee with the nominee, Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr., to highlight the physician's work in combating teen-age pregnancy.
The schedule shift was made after a meeting Sunday evening in which the White House officials responsible for shepherding the nomination through the Senate decided that they should lay more groundwork before dispatching Dr.
Foster to confront his critics directly.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the opening of the Hanoi Government's diplomatic office in Washington misstated the colors of the Vietnamese flag.
They are red and yellow, not orange and yellow.


History Standards Reflect Partisan Bias
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 13 editorial endorsement of the proposed national history standards is not surprising because the political views in the standards reflect those regularly expressed in your editorials.


In Performance; DANCE
A Festival Offering Canadian Choreographers  Lisa Bleyer and Renee Lemieux St.
Mark's Church
On Friday night, Lisa Marielle Bleyer and Renee Lemieux presented an evening of dance that seemed more sketched than finished.
Miss Lemieux knows how to explore her quiet, witty presence and her considerable range as a mover.
The highlight of the program, an excerpt from Sara Rudner's "Eight Solos," was a more sophisticated model for such exploration.


In Performance; POP
Assorted Obsessions With Rock of the Past  Three bands Under Acme
On Saturday night at Under Acme in the East Village, three bands -- Magic Hour, Strapping Fieldhands and The(e) Speaking Canaries -- displayed three very different obsessions with the rock music of decades past.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  Employers' medical costs fell last year for the first time in a decade.
Economists attributed the 1.1 percent decline to the growing number of employees covered by cost-conscious health plans that try to eliminate unnecessary tests and procedures and negotiate lower fees with doctors and hospitals.  [ Page A1. ]


Motorman Is Blamed for Crash of Two Subway Trains in Brooklyn
Having found no evidence of equipment failure, investigators have concluded that a motorman was at fault in the crash of two subway trains in Brooklyn last week, and the Transit Authority will take disciplinary action against him, an authority spokesman said yesterday.
The authority will probably try to dismiss or demote the motorman, Anthony R. DeRosa, 28, said the spokesman, Jared Lebow.
A nearly identical accident in 1990 on the same stretch of track led to a motorman's demotion to conductor.


Nets Get Anderson Back, But Still Wait for Coleman
For the Nets to improve their 19-31 record, Butch Beard needs his two best players to be healthy.
Beard got half of his wish today, when Kenny Anderson practiced for the first time in nearly two weeks after rehabilitating an inflamed tendon in his left forearm.
He will be re-evaluated on Tuesday, but he is scheduled to play that night against the Charlotte Hornets at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Georgia Superintendent Battles a Subtle Racism
During his 20 years teaching English at Calhoun County High School here, Corkin Cherubini gradually concluded that black students, regardless of ability, were being steered into lower-level classes.
But he said nothing for fear of losing his job.
In 1992, he won election as superintendent of schools in this rural southwest Georgia county, and Dr.
Cherubini broke his silence.
He called in the Federal Education Department last year to investigate whether the 1,200-student Calhoun County system, which is 70 percent black, was grouping students by race rather than class performance, a practice known as racial tracking.


Youngest of Philanthropists Prove Their Generosity
A dollar cannot buy a Mighty Morphin Power Ranger or even a jumbo candy bar, but Claire James supposed it might do some good in the larger scheme of things.
Last month, she surrendered a week's allowance to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
To punctuate her act, Claire, who is 9, sketched another dollar at the bottom of her letter.


Perhaps the Arctic Seals Are Biting


A Saint's Holy Work Emulated in Trenton
In the corner of the new Martin House Learning Center stands a statue of a black man in robes, his eyes compassionate, his hands clasped in prayer.
Standing next to the statue, pointing it out, is the Rev.
Brian McCormick, a white man who for 25 years has fought poverty in this capital city under the guidance of the 15th-century saint.
"That's St. Martin de Porres," Father McCormick said.
"He was well known for health cures and for being a miracle worker. Martin House is named for him. But when I first started, everything was ecumenical. So Martin could also stand for Martin Luther, Martin Luther King or Martin Buber, a Jewish philosopher."


Lopez Has the Game in His Hands, but Lets It Slip Away
The ball was in Felipe Lopez's hands with 20 seconds left tonight and the outcome against the University of Miami in doubt.
Under the circumstances, St.
John's Coach Brian Mahoney would not have changed a thing.
"We have a thing that we call 'baseline,' " Mahoney said.
"We send the rest of the guys to the baseline and have Felipe, with James Scott, try to create something off the dribble."


Surgeon General Fight: Job of So Little Power Is an Engine for Storms
The controversy swirling around the nomination of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. as Surgeon General should not be a surprise to anyone who knows how drastically the 125-year-old job has changed in recent years.
What was once one of the most powerful health positions in the country is now an anachronism, a vestige from the days when the Surgeon General oversaw a huge portion of the civilian Federal health empire.
Those duties now fall to the Assistant Secretary of Health and Human Services.
The Surgeon General reports to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Health and has little authority in the department and little staff.


Prosecutor Says Troopers Block Fake-Evidence Inquiry
Two years after he began looking into evidence tampering by the New York state police, a special prosecutor says corrupt troopers will escape prosecution because some of their colleagues "have done everything they possibly can to frustrate the investigation."
The prosecutor, Nelson E. Roth, said in an interview that he "continues to be surprised by the extent of the corruption."


Dentist in Gun Battle Wounds Masked Intruder
A dentist and a masked man exchanged gunfire in a point-blank duel after the gunman pushed his way into the dentist's office in downtown Brooklyn last night during an apparent robbery attempt, the police said.
The gunman, struck by five shots and bleeding heavily, fled the office and tried to commandeer a car at a busy intersection.
But one of the car's passengers wrestled with him and another passenger punched him several times in the chest, where he had been shot twice, and disarmed him.


Q&amp;A
Solar Sails
Q.  Could you "sail" on the solar wind?


Old Debate Again Divides the Schools
Just when it seemed that the New York City Board of Education had put one of the city's most divisive educational issues behind it by adopting a sex-education curriculum, the board president, Carol A. Gresser, is proposing reopening the issue of what to teach children about differences in race, culture and sexual orientation.
The last time the multicultural issue was debated, as the city considered the so-called Rainbow Curriculum, it tore the board apart and led to the ouster of Joseph A. Fernandez as Schools Chancellor.
This time, Mrs.
Gresser is proposing a controversial revision to the board's multicultural-education policy that would narrow it to cover only the "ethnic, racial and linguistic groups who live and work together in our city, our nation and the world around us." She proposes establishing a separate curriculum about discrimination that would cover "race, religion, national origin, gender, marital status, sexual orientation, handicapping condition or age."


Injections Delay Progress of AIDS
Repeated injections of plasma from otherwise healthy H.I.V.-infected people into patients with advanced AIDS slowed progression of the disease for one year in a new French study.
The experimental injections delayed the appearance of toxoplasmosis of the brain, cytomegalovirus and other opportunistic infections that commonly occur as a complication of AIDS, as well as wasting, cancers and an abnormal function of the brain known as encephalopathy.
The plasma injections, known as passive immunotherapy, resulted in a threefold decrease in the cumulative number of such adverse events, said the French team, headed by Dr.
J.
J.
Lefrere at the Hopital Saint-Antoine in Paris.


On My Mind; The Wrong Target
For the first couple of days, the issue seemed quite clear and the adversary.
The anti-abortion movement is using all its power to kill the nomination as Surgeon General of a respected physician because he has carried out a medical procedure not only legal but constitutionally upheld by the Supreme Court.


Free Speech at Rutgers?
To the Editor:
Re "A Second Chance at Rutgers" (editorial, Feb. 8), supporting the school's president, Francis L. Lawrence: The real damage has been to free speech.
The potential link between genetics and intelligence continues to be of public and academic interest, and it ought be possible for reasonable people to talk about the subject freely, especially in a university setting, without rousing anybody's thought police.


Mexican Economic Slide Has Only Begun
To the Editor:
Re "Mexico's Banks: A Weak Link in the Rescue Plan" (Business Day, Feb. 9):


Volcanoes at City Hall
When does strong, purposeful leadership slide over the line into ruinous authoritarianism?
As far back as Shakespeare, observers of government have pondered this question.
Now New York City's political journalists and citizens have reason to confront it as well.
There is no question that Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has provided direction to what often seemed a rudderless city government.
It is equally clear that his centerpiece accomplishment has been the 12.3 percent decline in crime in 1994.
The city's streets look and feel safer.
Citizens and visitors have responded to that change in mood.
But there is now a disturbing sense that all the Giuliani administration's accomplishments are balanced on a knife's edge.
There is no question that the Mayor is capable of winning a lot of battles, including ultimately control of the Police Department.
But the test he faces now is to prove himself a broad, embracing and stabilizing leader and not simply a tough one.


There Is Only One Scent of a Woman, and a Man
AMERICANS may try to scrub it off, soak it away, spritz it, splash it, deodorize it and atomize it into invented sweetness, but they will never fully eradicate their personal smell, an odor-print as unique as the whorls on the fingers.
"We're all little chemistry factories," said Dr.
George Preti of the Monell Chemical Senses Center of Philadelphia, one of the most famous institutions in the field of smell research.
"We have bacteria mingling with excretions from the body that form a variety of odors depending on what part of the body we're talking about."


Agency Spat Escalates Over European Venture
A disagreement between two international advertising agency giants over a jointly owned European venture has escalated into a bitter dispute, as one seeks to take control of their alliance and the other seeks to dissolve it.
The spat raises the specter of the two companies competing against each other for clients and accounts rather than cooperating.


CHRONICLE
Another singer, albeit in a different league, is diversifying, too: the soprano JESSYE NORMAN has been elected to the board of managers of the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx, thanks to a staghorn fern.
Several years ago, Ms.
Norman bought the exotic-looking fern at the garden's annual plant auction.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Maurice Saatchi wins the first round in his court fight with Saatchi &amp; Saatchi in London.
MAURICE SAATCHI won the first skirmish yesterday of what promises to be a lengthy court battle when a judge in London's High Court denied a request by the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company P.L.C., the advertising group he co-founded and later left in acrimony, to stop him from establishing a rival agency.
Justice Jonathan Parker denied Saatchi &amp; Saatchi's request for an injunction to prevent Mr.
Saatchi and three former Saatchi &amp; Saatchi executives from proceeding with plans for a new agency tentatively known as Dress Rehearsal.


Commissioners Angry
As Mayor Giuliani prepares to present an austere budget plan, he has angered several commissioners with a wave of staff dismissals and a decision-making process that some say has shut them out.
Article, page B6.


Devils Will Work Until They Get It Right
Jacques Lemaire's smiles are becoming more infrequent.
Brief smiles after a victory over the Rangers last Thursday turned into prolonged scowls after a loss to Philadelphia on Saturday night.
The coach of the Devils was still not smiling yesterday, even after Sunday's victory in Miami.
Last season, Lemaire usually gave his players a day off every time they played three games in four days.
But that was then.
The Devils were 8-3-0 after 11 games last season but are only 4-5-2 this year, and they have already been shut out twice.
No wonder they were on the ice yesterday for practice at South Mountain Arena in West Orange, N.J., for a little lesson.


INSIDE
Surprise in AIDS Study
A major study of AIDS in children was halted because AZT, the drug of choice in adults, proved ineffective and caused a large number of side effects.
Science Times, page C13.
Gingrich Will Not Run
Quashing speculation that he would ride his prominence to higher office, House Speaker Newt Gingrich said he would not seek the G.O.P. nomination for President in 1996.
Page A13.
We're No. 1!
We're No. 1!
The University of Connecticut's men's and women's basketball teams are both No. 1 in the polls.
It's the first time a school has achieved a dual top-ranking.
Page B9.


If You Fake It, They Will Come
Say it ain't so, Gregory.
The owner of the RKE Athletic store here, Gregory Kapalko, is accused of selling "official" uniforms of professional sports leagues that aren't official at all.
The Monmouth County Prosecutor's office says the gear was produced on the embroidery machine and computer software that investigators seized at the store.


Review/Fashion; Quoth the Audience, 'Nevermore'
By the final, frigid day of the New York men's fashion collections last Wednesday, audiences no longer looked as if they were taking notes on the clothes on the runway.
Rather, they might have been composing their own personalized versions of Edgar Allan Poe's "The Raven." Never has fashion presented a vision as dark, dreary, weak and weary as this one for men for fall 1995.
What was most significant in this uninspired group of almost 30 shows, produced for the first time under the auspices of the Council of Fashion Designers of America, was that the drabness seemed completely unintended.
There was no coded message about a treacherous economy nor any new resolve to blend in with the concrete city landscape.
As comforting as such rationales may be, it seems the designers used fashion week mainly to show the clothes that men already wear, with no coherent vision of what men should be wearing.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8  MEXICAN RULING PARTY SLIPS  Mexico's governing party, the PRI, has accepted the worst election defeat of its six decades in power in Jalisco, one of the country's most important states.
A1


Keeping a History Alive
A Newark-based civic group has begun a drive to build a monument to those who suffered and died under slavery's yoke, as well as those who fought to break it.
The Memorial to the Ancestors Project held a luncheon yesterday to raise money for what organizers hope will be a $500,000 statue.


Urging Dose of 'Reality Therapy,' Giuliani Sets New Round of Cuts
Saying the city's fiscal problems required a dose of "reality therapy," Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani told New Yorkers yesterday evening that he would reduce city spending for a second year in a row and cut public assistance and health care for the city's poorest residents.
Although he offered few details in a brief televised address, Mr.
Giuliani said the preliminary budget that he is to unveil today would wrench $600 million in savings, or 7 percent, from the city's agencies, and ask the city's unions to agree to an additional $600 million in concessions on benefits and work rules in exchange for a pledge to avert layoffs.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Ambitious Program For Two Troupers William Bolcom and Joan Morris, pianist and mezzo-soprano Alice Tully Hall
Even when sick, William Bolcom and Joan Morris have more to offer than most performers in the pink, as they had occasion to prove on Saturday evening.
Ms.
Morris, her mezzo-soprano discreetly miked and sounding huskier than usual, and Mr.
Bolcom, his pianistic flights punctuated by bouts of coughing, trouped on gamely.


White House Forecast Says Rates Could Drop
President Clinton's economic advisers, suggesting that the Federal Reserve's drive to slow the economy to a more sustainable growth rate is on the right track, predicted today that short-term interest rates could start to fall before the end of the year.
Also, disputing the assertions of a vocal minority, the economic advisers reluctantly concluded that the long-run growth potential of the American economy had not substantially improved.


Powerhouse Of Senses, Smell, at Last Gets Its Due
ON this, the authorized day of passion and romance, when one tries hurriedly to spark a new flame or fan an old one back to life, when a wooer would prefer not to beat around the bush of love but rather dive right into it, the best Valentine's gifts may indeed be the staples: a dozen fragrant roses, a box of fine chocolates, a bottle of French perfume.
After all, these items became shorthand for love by appealing shamelessly to the second-sexiest organ of the body -- the nose.
Seeing may be believing and hearing may be music to the ears, but a good smell sails express nonstop to the deepest, warmest, happiest and most voluptuous sector of the self.
And nothing can evoke a time, a place, an emotion past better than an aroma.


Mr. Yeltsin's Health
No one in Russia understands the power of political imagery better than President Boris Yeltsin, who consolidated his leadership when he helped stop the August 1991 coup by standing on a tank and urging his countrymen to resist the attempted takeover.
That makes his stumbling appearance last Friday at a meeting in Kazakhstan with the leaders of 12 former Soviet republics all the more shocking and puzzling.
At a moment when his presidency has been badly shaken by the brutal Russian attack on Chechnya, Mr.
Yeltsin wobbled across the sidewalk in the Kazakh capital of Almaty, desperately gripping aides for support.
His face was puffy and sallow.
Before canceling a later news conference, he attempted to answer questions at a photo session and was barely able to speak.
These scenes were filmed by Associated Press Television, but not broadcast on the main Russian television news.


House Panel Votes to Ban Welfare Benefits for Unmarried Mothers Under 18
A Congressional subcommittee today signaled its support for one of the most contentious elements of the House Republicans' welfare bill, which would prohibit the use of Federal money to provide cash assistance to unmarried mothers under age of 18.
The vote came as the House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Human Resources began work on a keystone of the Republican legislative agenda -- overhauling the welfare system by replacing a Federal guarantee of benefits to poor people with large sums of cash that states could use as they wished to assist the needy.


Wanted: 100,000 More Police
President Clinton is right to stand firm against the Republican threat to the core of the crime bill passed last year: a measure to finance the hiring of 100,000 new police officers.
His threat to use his veto in its defense is entirely justified.
Last year's bill voted $12.5 billion for a combination of police and prevention programs over the next five years.
The new Republican leadership has now cut $2.5 billion of that money and transferred it to prisons.
The leaders would give the remaining $10 billion in block grants to the states, to use as they choose.
Their reasoning is seductive.
Each state, they say, best knows its own problems and how best to use the money to reduce crime.
To dictate the use of the money would just be another example of Federal interference.


Underdogs Become Top Dogs In Garden
Two stunning upsets were recorded in Madison Square Garden last night when the Westminster Kennel Club, which has been holding dog shows every year since 1877, opened its two-day run.
The first occurred early in the evening with the defeat of the boxer Ch.
Hi-Tech's Arbitrage, owned by Dr.
William and Zoila Truesdale, in the Working Group.
Then in the final event of the night, the top-winning performer in dog-show history in the country, Ch.
Altana's Mystique, was placed second in the Herding competition.


Doing the Right Thing; Top Mets Prospect Must Decide Whether to Report to Camp
On Thursday morning, Bill Pulsipher, the Mets' top minor league prospect, is supposed to get up, shave off his beloved goatee (in accordance with team regulations), and report to spring training at the Mets' minor league complex.
He is no longer certain that is what he is going to do.


METRO DIGEST
MAYOR OFFERS DOSE OF 'REALITY THERAPY'
Saying the city's fiscal problems required a dose of "reality therapy," Mayor Giuliani told New Yorkers that he would reduce city spending for a second year and cut public assistance and health care for the poorest residents.
A1.
Financial experts say there are many reasons that the Mayor needs to tighten the screws further, despite a year of aggressive actions intended to curb the fiscal distress that has plagued the city since 1989.
News analysis, B6.


A Funny Valentine


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Ever-Changing Touch On Suites by Bach  Anner Bylsma, Cellist Corpus Christi Church
Anyone keeping tabs on Anner Bylsma's performances of the Bach Unaccompanied Cello Suites needs a scorecard these days.
Three years ago he presented the Second, Fourth and Sixth Suites as part of the Music Before 1800 series at Corpus Christi Church.
With that cycle left unfinished, he presented the complete set in two concerts at Weill Recital Hall, but on Sunday afternoon he returned to Corpus Christi to tie up loose ends by playing the First, Third and Fifth Suites.


Health Costs Paid by Employers Drop for First Time in a Decade
Medical costs paid by employers, which had been rising as much as 18 percent annually in recent years, fell last year for the first time in a decade.
A decline of 1.1 percent for companies with at least 10 workers was reported yesterday by a widely followed annual survey.
Economists attributed the decline to the growing number of employees covered by cost-conscious health plans that try to eliminate unnecessary tests and procedures and negotiate lower fees with doctors and hospitals.


Gingrich Says He Won't Run For President
Speaker Newt Gingrich said today that he would not seek the Republican Presidential nomination in 1996, silencing speculation that he would try to ride his new-found prominence to the White House.
Mr.
Gingrich, who had been coy about his intentions, said he wanted to concentrate on serving as Speaker and on seeing through the Contract With America, the Republican political manifesto that he helped create.


Hardee's Food Dismisses Deutsch
Hardee's Food Systems Inc. said unexpectedly yesterday that it had dismissed Deutsch Inc. in New York, its agency for only 15 months, and moved its account, estimated at $75 million, to Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago without a formal review.
"We've enjoyed Deutsch, but Tatham is a better fit," said W. Maurice Bridges, a spokesman for Hardee's in Rocky Mount, N.C., in confirming a report of the changes this week in Adweek.
He added that Tatham, which was a finalist in the review that selected Deutsch, recently completed a "special assignment" for the fast-food restaurant chain, and made a "favorable impression on the entire marketing team."


No Headline
"It's rarefied air. It's stratospheric. I don't know that I'm a wordsmith, but it is stratospheric." -- DEE ROWE, an athletics adviser at the University of Connecticut, ranked No. 1 in men's and women's basketball.  [ B9:5. ]


Nelson Leaves The Warriors As Result of Webber Rift
There is a man overboard, and his name is Don Nelson.
He committed one egregious act -- he failed to charm 21-year-old Chris Webber -- and he paid with his job today.
Nelson and the Golden State Warriors parted ways this afternoon, after the coach and general manager agreed to a $1 million buyout.
He leaves with a cough, a soiled reputation and a son in tears.
Once a revered leader of men, Nelson is the latest coach unable to master Generation X.


In Performance; DANCE
Slice of History: 'A Black Burlesque'  Fist and Heel Performance Group Bessie Schonberg Theater
Music and dance spilled out over the stage in "A Black Burlesque," a full-evening theater and dance piece created by Reggie Wilson and performed by his Fist and Heel Performance Group on Saturday night.


Port Authority Nominee Has Shown Insensitivity on Minorities
To the Editor:
Re "Mr. Pataki's Port Authority Problem" (editorial, Feb. 7): I applaud the position you take on the choice of George J. Marlin as executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey by Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York.


Accounts
*
Eire Partners, Chicago, was awarded two accounts with combined billings estimated at $3.2 million: Four Seasons Hotel, Chicago, to handle its account, previously at Garfield-Linn, Chicago, and the Bridgestone/Firestone Retail and Commercial Operations, Rolling Meadows, Ill., to handle its account, previously in-house.


House Debating Measure That Would Cut New Police
The House today took up the final piece in the Republican overhaul of last year's crime bill, debating a measure that would gut President Clinton's pledge to put 100,000 police officers on the streets.
The President said on Saturday that he would veto a bill that eroded that pledge, and House Democrats said today that they had enough votes to sustain a veto, although they had not actually counted heads yet.


Will Angolan Rebel Give Peace a Chance?
In his prime, Jonas Savimbi charmed presidents and bedeviled rival armies.
Wearing an ivory-handled .45 Magnum at his hip, he conducted tours of a liberated zone he called "the Free Lands of Angola," where the peasants chanted his praises and schoolchildren memorized his "Master Thought."
Today, age 60, he has retreated to this bomb-charred town, with a rutted airstrip and scarcely enough paved road to get his bulletproof black Mercedes out of second gear.


Strategies on Mexico Cast Aside
The peso's crash has knocked American businesses off course, forcing many to postpone their dreams of exploiting the vast market to the south.
At the same time, other companies are rushing to expand investments in Mexican factories that will increase their exports to the north.
These shifts suggest that the North American Free Trade Agreement's second year will have far fewer benefits for many American companies and their workers than its first year.


GOVERNING PARTY IN MEXICO SUFFERS BIG STATE DEFEAT
Mexico's governing party today accepted its worst election defeat in six decades in power, a landslide that appeared to leave the right-of-center National Action Party with almost every major elective office in one of the country's most important states.
"I recognize that the results of the vote that we know up to this moment is not favorable to us," the governing party's candidate for governor in the western state of Jalisco, Eugenio Ruiz Orozco, said in what amounted to a concession speech.
"We will accept the results."


In the Eyes of Many, TV, Not the Movies, Is the Higher Calling
Television remains a stepchild of the movie business.
Movie stars and top directors often refuse to work in it, and won't admit to watching it.
Movie agents advise clients that it's the last resort for careers in distress.
Writers and intellectuals patronize it.
But for a while now, the movie business has been confronted with an uncomfortable fact of life: in terms of dramatic value, relevance and humor, prime-time television -- much of it, anyway -- is far better than what's on at the movies.
Admissions of this come grudgingly for the most part, but they do come, especially now, as the film industry struggles to find five films to nominate for the Academy Awards on March 27. (The nominations will be announced on Tuesday.)


CHRONICLE
Ready to listen to HULK HOGAN sing without being pinned to the mat by the flamboyant blond wrestler?
Mr.
Hogan announced yesterday that he had signed a deal to make a record for Select Records.


Latest Endangered Species: Natural Habitats of America
In the first full review of the health of the American landscape, a new Federal study has concluded that vast stretches of formerly vibrant natural habitat, once amounting to at least half the area of the 48 contiguous states, have declined to the point of endangerment.
Although the plight of individual species has been the focus of public interest, the health of the larger interconnected community of plants, animals and microbes of which they are a part -- the ecosystem, nature's functional unit -- is perhaps more important as a gauge of vitality.


In Performance; POP
A Salsa Diva Leaves Wreckage in Her Wake  'Concierto del Amor' Madison Square Garden
At the end of India's segment in the 'Concierto del Amor' on Saturday night, the show's M.C. introduced her to the audience as "The new queen of salsa, India."


Healy May Still Be Backup But His Outlook Is Brighter
Glenn Healy and several Ranger teammates left quickly after practice today to pick up tuxedos for the ESPY Awards at Radio City Music Hall this evening.
The Rangers were being honored for winning their first Stanley Cup since 1940, but their former coach, Mike Keenan, who coaches the St.
Louis Blues, was not to be on hand for the festivities.


Cairo Journal; Beware the Bawabs, the Know-It-Alls at the Gate
Abdu al-Hafiz, a stocky man in a flowing brown robe called a galabaya, huffed his way up the dimly lit stairs to the fifth-floor apartment at 14 Gazira Street.
"Abdu!" shouted a woman, who poked her head from her doorway. "I don't have any water!"


Workers Get a Union Label
About 9,700 county court employees who are moving onto the state payroll under the recent state takeover of the counties' share of financing the Superior Court system will be represented for now by the New Jersey A.F.L.-C.I.O.
Judiciary Council, a consortium of six unions headed by the Joseph Yeoman, president of Teamsters Local 331 in Atlantic City.


Coke, for 1995, Says It Will Be Better Than Real
Decades after promoting its flagship brand as "The real thing," the Coca-Cola Company in its 1995 advertising campaign is trying to convince consumers the soft drink is actually the "realest" thing.
Coca-Cola is aggressively accelerating efforts to promote the attributes of the brand called Coca-Cola Classic in North America and Coca-Cola in more than 190 countries.
Qualities like taste, the contoured Coke bottle and the red disk logo are even more prominently stressed than in the last two years, when the company successfully brought out the retro-chic campaign theme, "Always Coca-Cola."


CHRONICLE
GENE KELLY, the dancer and actor who starred in Hollywood musicals of the 1940's and 1950's, was hospitalized in fair condition following a minor stroke last week, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Mr.
Kelly, 82, was admitted to the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles under an assumed name last Tuesday "after suffering a small stroke," said Ron Wise, a hospital spokesman.


Unforeseen Stresses of Business
Holy Bull was bright-eyed and perky yesterday morning, and Dr.
Peter Hall, his traveling veterinarian, reported: "We are very pleased with his progress. His appetite is great. He is not running a temperature. He is cheerful, playing and nipping. And he walked better than he did yesterday."
But Holy Bull, whose racing career ended on the backstretch of Gulfstream Park during the Donn Handicap on Saturday when he somehow strained tendons in his left foreleg, was only the latest star horse to break down under the stress of racing.


A Proposal to Train Olympians In the House That Ruth Built
Among the many proposals floated to keep the Yankees in New York, the latest is a doozy -- or maybe that's just because of its sponsor.
Abraham Hirschfeld, the eccentric New York real estate developer who is known more for building parking garages than sports complexes, wants to put up a new field across from the current site and turn Yankee Stadium into an Olympic training center -- to the tune of $545 million, all of which he would finance.


Tyson to Be Released Early: On March 25, Not May 9
The former world heavyweight champion MIKE TYSON will be released from prison March 25, his original release date before being disciplined early in his six-year term.
Tyson's release had been set back to May 9 after he was disciplined at the Indiana Youth Center near Plainfield, Ind. in May 1992.
But H. CHRISTIAN DEBRUYN, commissioner of the Indiana Department of Correction, decided recently to lift the added penalty days after discussing Tyson's case with staff who supervise adult discipline in the prison system, the department spokesman PAM PATTISON said yesterday.
She said the commissioner felt Tyson's misconduct stemmed from an adjustment to prison life.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Lone American Loses  Alberto Berasategui, the only seeded player to take the court on the opening day, needed three sets and more than two hours to eliminate the only American entry, David Wheaton, in yesterday's first round of the $678,900 Muratti Time indoor tournament.
Berasategui, a 21-year-old Spaniard who's the No. 3 seeded player in the Milan, Italy, event, downed Wheaton, 7-6 (14-12), 3-6, 6-4 in 2 hours 16 minutes. (AP)


An Electronic Gallery of Rare Art
BEFORE World War I, a Philadelphia millionaire named Dr.
Albert C. Barnes began assembling a striking personal collection of Impressionist, post-Impressionist and modern art that he kept hidden from public view.
In the 1990's, a Seattle billionaire named Bill Gates has been assembling a collection of this and much more art in electronic form and is offering it, for a price, to one and all.
The Corbis Corporation is Mr.
Gates's other software company, which, unlike the Microsoft Corporation, he owns outright.
Over the last few years, the company has acquired the electronic reproduction rights to more than a quarter of a million images, including some of the world's great art.
Corbis assembled material from the Barnes collection to produce a CD-ROM called A Passion for Art: Renoir, Cezanne, Matisse and Dr.
Barnes, the company's first commercial product, which will be available for about $45 by March.
Like many recent Windows-based CD-ROM titles, it requires eight megabytes of memory, but unlike most, it requires virtually no hard drive space.
A Macintosh version is set for May.


Terriers Take the Beanpot
The millionth spectator in the 42-year history of college hockey's Beanpot Tournament was at the Boston Garden tonight for the event's last championship game to be played in this arena.
This unidentified fan, and the 14,447 others filling every seat by habit for the event, saw Boston University (21-5-3) pin a 5-1 defeat on Boston College (10-17-2).
The reward was the 18th Beanpot championship for the Terriers, the first since 1992.
Boston College has won 11, Harvard 10 and Northeastern 4.
Northeastern (13-11-5) defeated Harvard (12-9-1) by 4-2 in the consolation game.
Suspense left the championship match when the Terriers, who outshot the Eagles, 39-25, scored two goals within 18 seconds in the second period to go ahead, 3-0.
B.U. is ranked second nationally in the polls behind Maine, its Hockey East rival.


Zion Case Verdict Vindicates Training System; On the Evidence
To the Editor:
I was the forewoman on the Zion v.
New York Hospital case, and I would be remiss if I didn't address the campaign that Sidney Zion, Libby Zion's father, launched to reform the quality of health care in this country.


Batter Up, Already
With two days to go until spring training, and with the Republican leadership in Congress apparently unwilling to lift a finger to settle baseball's paralyzing six-month labor dispute, fans must be in a state beyond despair.
But the situation is not hopeless -- at least not yet.
To get real baseball in 1995, Congress needs to get involved now.
It won't do to wait until June, when some have said they plan to revisit the issue, to see if the players and owners come together.
The current negotiations were opened by the owners in December 1992, and the sides are little closer today than they were then.
The most significant movement has been toward ever greater rancor and distrust.


French Composers' Variations on East Meets West
Depending on one's point of view, the exoticism that flourished in early-20th-century French music was either an egregious example of European cultural appropriation or multiculturalism long before it was in vogue.
The composers were probably uninterested in polemics; they were doing what composers have always done, grafting new sounds and influences onto their own languages.
Exoticism was one of two topics explored in the New York Festival of Song's program of French music on Saturday evening at the 92d Street Y. The other theme, amorous misadventure, was also a mainstay of French composers.
Michael Barrett and Steven Blier, the festival's directors, presented several solutions to the problem of combining East and West.
Maurice Delage struck a tenuous but fascinating balance in his "Poemes Hindous" (1912).
The accompaniments sometimes approximated the sounds of an Indian ensemble, with a cello mimicking the elastic pitches of a sitar and violins supplying a tamboura drone.
But the vocal melodies were unmistakably Gallic.
Eugene Cinda Grassi, by contrast, notated traditional Thai melodies in his "Poemes Bouddhiques."


Nation's Vital Documents Get Checkups
GLANCING at the framed documents lying on the table, one can readily see that "America" has changed over the last two centuries.
Examination of the elegant script that boldly proclaims "the thirteen united States of America" reveals that a crease in the parchment courses through the end of the last word and that bits of ink have dislodged from the "c" and its adjacent "a."
Here is the Declaration of Independence on one of the rare occasions when it is out of its 55-ton bombproof vault and unobscured by the three-inches of bulletproof glass and green ultraviolet filters through which it is normally seen by visitors to the rotunda of the National Archives.


By Design; Floral Flourishes
The newest suits for spring are shapely and feminine, harking back to a time when the power suit was something worn only by a man.
To complement the retro feeling, the natural accessory would be a flower pin, which might be made of fabric, Lucite or metal.
And of course, a fake flower can evoke spring even before the first crocuses pop up.


A San Francisco Talk Show Takes Right-Wing Radio to a New Dimension
Do people with AIDS need to be quarantined?
Should American citizens be paid a bounty to shoot illegal immigrants?
Is President Clinton controlled by a coven of Communist lesbian members of the Trilateral Commission?
These are some of the questions up for discussion on Hot Talk KSFO-AM (560), a station taking right-wing radio to new levels here.
For the past week, as San Francisco's appalled politicians and gay-rights leaders have been rallying opposition, the station's callers and hosts have been casting themselves as beleaguered revolutionaries in the tradition of the Berkeley Free Speech Movement.


Handcuffing Investigated
A kindergarten pupil in Brooklyn is reported to have been handcuffed to a banister last week by a member of the staff of Public School 35 in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, New York City Board of Education officials said yesterday, and an investigation has been ordered.
"There are conflicting versions of events, with some staff saying that the child was handcuffed and other staff saying the child was never handcuffed," said John Beckman, a spokesman for the board.
Efforts to reach administrators of the school for comment last night were unsuccessful.


Huskies' Men Join Women as Leaders of the Pack
More than two decades after the passage of Title IX called upon universities to provide equivalent athletic opportunities for women, Connecticut created an unprecedented form of equality yesterday: two teams in the same place, from the same place.
The Connecticut men (19-1), one day after their emotionally taxing victory at Syracuse, were voted No. 1 in the Associated Press news media poll and the CNN/ USA Today coaches' poll for the first time.
The women's team (21-0) retained the top spot it has held for a month with its victory at Seton Hall.


Despite Tough Battle, Fiscal Recovery Is Still Eluding Giuliani
When Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani took office 14 months ago, he set out to solve, once and for all, the city's underlying financial problems, whose resolution had eluded his successor, David N. Dinkins, for four years.
He prepared a budget last spring that eliminated a projected gap of $2.3 billion.
When major holes opened in that plan, he imposed more than $1 billion in additional cuts and related savings.


Patterns
Anna Sui's New Line
Anna Sui has been wielding her remarkable influence over fashion from a modest business base.
Now, she is expanding her reach with plans for Sui by Anna Sui, a sportswear collection for fall, and a signature jeans line for spring.
The new deals will set her well on her way to building a global fashion house, based here but fueled in part with Italian lire.
Both new collections are to be licensed to the Gilmar Group, an Italian-owned apparel house run by the Gerani family.
It produces Iceberg and Cento X Cento, which is designed by Ms.
Sui.


Suspense in the Courtroom
When the murder trial of Scott R. Johnson resumes today in Superior Court, the biggest suspense will probably be among the defense lawyers.
Mr.
Johnson wants to testify, and his lawyers hope he doesn't.
The lawyers have not disputed that Mr.
Johnson, 25, of Plainfield, raped and killed Gail Shollar, 35, of Piscataway, in a 1992 carjacking.
However, they contend that because of childhood abuse he had a diminished capacity to knowingly commit such a crime.


Alcorn Star Isn't at Top of Jets' List
Don't look for the Jets to exert themselves in an effort to acquire Steve McNair, the acclaimed Alcorn State quarterback who produced more than 4,000 passing yards and 44 touchdowns last season.
The Jets again appear to be committed to Boomer Esiason -- although in a significantly different style of attack.


Hapless Lawyer, Thankless Job; Colin Ferguson's Adviser Sees Reputation and Practice Suffer
To an obscure criminal defense lawyer, it looked like the career-making catapult of a lifetime: a nationally known case, trial coverage in major newspapers and on Court TV, the chance to represent a beleaguered fellow alumnus of Calabar High School in Kingston, Jamaica.
But nearly a month into the trial of Colin Ferguson, who is charged with the Long Island Rail Road shootings, his legal adviser, Alton G. Rose, is seen by many lawyers as having the most miserable legal job in America.


Author Faces Up to a Long, Dark Secret
Interviewing Anne Perry, the detective novelist who harbored the dark secret of her identity as an adolescent murderer, is frustrating.
It's like trying to capture the mist that rolls off the mountains in the Scottish Highlands where she makes her home.
It is not that she is reluctant to talk.
Far from it.
The words come out in compulsive torrents.
With little prompting she speaks about her early years, her childhood pneumonia and bronchitis, the "courage and love" of her parents, her deep attachment to her father, a time of trial in prison, her epiphanic conversion to the Mormon church in Northern California.


Strong Gains For U.S. PC's
American personal computer companies made strong gains in Japan in 1994 and now account for about a third of PC sales here, according to a market research report released today.
But the NEC Corporation, which has long dominated the Japanese market, saw its lead decline, as the computers compatible with the worldwide I.B.M. standard made inroads against NEC's machines, which have a unique design.


A Bass Whose Range Runs Wide as Well as Deep
The search for authentic basses is feverish and frustrating, and this is why Samuel Ramey's astonishing career should actually astonish no one.
The vocal world long ago took note of Mr.
Ramey's range, power, flexibility and thoughtfulness, looked at his rivals and then put him to work on a virtually nonstop basis around the world.
He fills a void.
Mr.
Ramey came to Carnegie Hall on Saturday night with the pianist Warren Jones.
This usually wise program, divided between Europe and America, showed to an enthusiastic audience that years of labor may have toughened his amazing voice but have in no way shattered it.
He sang militant Handel (from "Rinaldo"); arias by Mozart, Giacomo Carissimi, Gluck and Giovanni Legrenzi; four Schubert lieder, and after intermission, songs by Barber, Charles Griffes and Gershwin.


Lautenberg Acts on Trash
A bill that would restore the power of local governments to regulate trash disposal was introduced yesterday by Senator Frank Lautenberg.
The Democrat said the measure is meant to insure that trash is not dumped in unsafe landfills where water and soil can be polluted.
The bill is in response to a Supreme Court ruling last May that local governments cannot require trash haulers to take garbage to designated transfer stations for sorting and bailing before disposal.


Give, and Take, at Defense
House Republicans seem determined to boost Pentagon spending, no matter the price.
Even before debate begins about the 1996 budget, the House Appropriations Committee has voted to increase the current budget for peacekeeping operations and readiness by $3.2 billion.
To pay for the increase without widening the budget deficit, they cut $1.5 billion from other Pentagon programs.
The remaining $1.7 billion will come out of domestic spending, including $200 million in job training for disadvantaged youth.
The better way is to make up the entire amount from the defense budget.
The Clinton Administration originally requested $2.6 billion to establish a kitty the Pentagon could draw on to cover operations in the Persian Gulf, Haiti, Korea, Bosnia, Somalia and the waters off Cuba.
House Republicans added $670 million to the request to pay for additional readiness -- funding for training, field exercises and maintenance.


On Sale, and All in the Name of Love
Ever hopeful, Michael Javer offered up chihuahuas at half price this week.
"We find sometimes that people think of puppies on Valentine's Day as a sign of warmth, love and all that good stuff," said Mr.
Javer, the manager of American Kennels on the Upper East Side.
Of course, his instincts are hardly unique.
All week, retailers have wooed shoppers with promotions for things they never knew they needed, like discounted Pomeranians, end tables and ladies' buttersoft lambskin swing coats.


Giants Sign 2 Free Agents
Two first-year linebackers who did not play a regular-season down in the National Football League in 1994 were signed by the Giants as free agents yesterday.
TYLER LAWRENCE and MITCH DAVIS both participated in training camps last year, but neither made an active roster.
Lawrence, who was signed by Washington as a free agent out of North Carolina State, was released by the Redskins on Aug. 23.
He was out of football last season.


Ben the Akita Exits in Style
Four days ago this retiree had his first bath in four months: showing up at Westminster was an 11th-hour coup for Ben the Akita, and he did not let the surprises stop there.
Last night in the Working Group, the nearly 9-year-old dog who spurred a family feud because his husband-and-wife owners were at loggerheads on the subject of showing him again, stunned the cognoscenti by capturing Westminster group honors for the first and last time in his stellar career.


League Approves Heat Sale
After a long and sometimes acrimonious battle, the National Basketball Association yesterday approved the sale of the team to the ARISON family.


Chess
The idea of turning your opponents' own weapons against them seems reasonable, yet it does not give much better than a 50-50 chance of success.
It is true that you may thereby disconcert them: there are many players who do not like to face their favorite attack.
But remember, you have chosen territory that they can be presumed to have a deeper, more comprehensive knowledge of.
And that's not all.
There are many players who have no emotional investment in what they play.
Turn the board around, and they approach the problems presented with a calm objectivity.


Doubts Cast on Report Of Earliest Americans
MORE doubt has been cast on claims that stone tools, hearths and wall paintings at a rock shelter in Brazil constitute evidence that people lived in the Americas as early as 50,000 years ago, long before the generally accepted time of 12,000 or at best 15,000 years ago.
At the invitation of the European and Brazilian excavators, three archeologists from the United States, specialists in early American settlement, inspected the rock shelter of Pedra Furada in the Piaui region of northeastern Brazil.
The excavators, led by Dr.
Niede Guidon of France, hoped the independent evaluation might establish the site's great antiquity.


For Man and Beast, Language of Love Shares Many Traits
WITH the same ethological methods they have long used in studies of animals, scientists are turning their attention to the nuances of human courtship rituals -- otherwise known as flirting.
By turning the ethologist's lens on human courtship, scientists are finding striking similarities with other species, suggesting that the nonverbal template used by Homo sapiens for attracting and approaching a prospective mate is to some extent part of a larger, shared animal heritage.


Mystery of the Missing Haitian Bully
In what American officials describe as an embarrassing but innocent bureaucratic blunder, the leader of Haiti's most notorious paramilitary group was permitted to enter the United States on a tourist visa late last year, and has now dropped from sight.
The whereabouts of Emmanuel Constant, founder of the militia known as the Front for the Advancement and Progress of Haiti, or Fraph, were a mystery since December, when he twice ignored a summons to testify at a judicial investigation of his group's role in the killing, kidnapping, rape and torture of thousands of supporters of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about Thomas McElrath Debevoise 2d, a former Attorney General of Vermont who died on Feb. 1, misstated the given name of the lawyer under whom he served on the defense team for a Soviet spy, Col.
Rudolph Abel.
The lawyer was James B. Donovan, not Robert.


Gunmen Rob Tollbooths
Tollbooths on the Queens side of the Queens-Midtown Tunnel and the Triborough Bridge were robbed last night by gunmen who escaped without firing a shot, the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority said.
An authority police officer said the gunmen robbed the tunnel at about 9:40 P.M. and escaped with an undetermined amount of cash.


Corrections
An entry on Sunday in the calendar of events in the Westchester Weekly included an outdated reference to a staging of "Wallis, Duchess of Windsor" at the Warner Library in Tarrytown.
It was performed in 1993; it will not be performed on Thursday.


Struggling With Environmental Fears
UNTIL last month, most of the residents of Silver Stream Village had never heard of MTBE, though they were drinking and breathing it for at least a year.
What that means, no one is sure.
The only thing the 500 people in this tidy mobile home park know is that a few weeks ago they were warned not to drink or use their well water because of high levels of MTBE, and it scares them to death.


Man Charged in Death of Wife; Body Found Dumped in Bronx
A 71-year-old man was charged today with strangling his wife, a computer systems designer with clients like Nynex and Equitable Life, and dumping her body in the Bronx, the police here said today.
The suspect, Burton Barling, is a retired computer analyst who worked for Pepsico from 1969 to 1986.
He was arrested at 6 A.M. and charged with second-degree murder in the death of his wife of 26 years, Renee Meyers Barling.
She was strangled with bare hands, said Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the New York City Medical Examiner's office.


Patkai's First Veto Upheld
Republicans in the Assembly voted today to uphold Gov.
George E. Pataki's first important veto.
And the Democrats relished every minute of it.
Last week, Mr.
Pataki rejected a bill to raise pensions for state and municipal workers, a measure that Democrats and Republicans alike had approved in the Assembly on Jan. 25.
So in the call for an override, the Republicans had to choose between Mr.
Pataki and government retirees, who vote in large numbers.


Victor and Vanquished Mourn Dresden's War Dead
With candlelight and church bells, requiem and prayer, Dresden tonight observed the 50th anniversary of its wartime destruction by British and American bombers, an occasion that led the Germans to ask if they were victims too.
The ceremonies here, on a cool night at a bend in the River Elbe, were the most elaborate Germany has arranged to commemorate a war in which its troops, tanks and airplanes were finally vanquished after spreading destruction across Europe and overseeing the Holocaust.


SOCCER REPORT
World Youth Championship
Under pressure from Nigerian and other African federations, FIFA said it would reconsider last week's decision to cancel the FIFA World Youth Championship that was to be held in Nigeria next month.
FIFA said last week it made the original decision based on what it called "the health situation" in Nigeria.


In Light Trading, Dow Gains 15.14 Points
After drifting for five trading sessions, blue-chip stocks turned upward yesterday, but the rise of 15 points in the Dow Jones industrial average was mainly caused by gains in two stocks.
The broader market indexes were mixed in light trading.
Stock traders are bracing for several important economic reports this week, including the release of the Consumer Price Index, scheduled for tomorrow.
In addition, the market faces another "double witching" hour on Friday, when two types of stock options expire, sometimes causing stock prices to gyrate wildly and trading volume to soar.


Executive Changes
COLLAGEN CORP., Palo Alto, Calif., named Gary Petersmeyer president and chief operating officer.
EXTREME TECHNOLOGIES INC., Santa Ana, Calif., named its chairman, Scott Mednick, to the additional position of chief executive.


UNITED AND USAIR TO LOWER AGENTS' COMMISSIONS
United and USAir said yesterday that they would lower commissions to travel agents on domestic air fares, joining Delta, American and Northwest in putting a cap on commissions instead of paying the traditional 10 percent.
All five airlines will now pay a maximum of $50 for any round-trip domestic ticket with a base fare higher than $500, and $25 for any one-way domestic ticket with a base fare higher than $250.
Travel agents oppose the caps, saying they will result in lost jobs and reduced earnings.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Messiaen's Visions Of Unearthly Serenity  Jon Gillock, Organist Church of the Ascension
What set Olivier Messiaen apart from other 20th-century composers was a capacity to dream.
Surrounded by music of uprightness, intelligence and determination, Messiaen wandered away from his colleagues and into a world of wonder and awe.
The organ was always his central means of locomotion, and a means of livelihood as well.
Jon Gillock played two of the most beautiful organ pieces on Sunday afternoon: the "Diptyque" and "Les Corps Glorieux."


Vermont House Votes Down Call for Flag-Burning Amendment
Vermont lived up to its independent reputation last week and bucked a national trend as its House of Representatives defeated a resolution urging Congress to pass a constitutional amendment against desecration of the American flag.
In place of the measure, it passed an affirmation of First Amendment freedoms.
After nearly three hours of debate on Thursday, House members rejected the resolution to Congress, 76 to 69.
The Senate is expected to take it up later this month.


DeBerg May Join Giants
The Giants have talked to one of the most successful and respected quarterbacks in National Football League history, Steve DeBerg, about becoming an assistant coach.
DeBerg, who played on five different teams in 17 seasons, has told several people that he is close to joining the Giants.
DeBerg, 41, has told people he would be an assistant to Offensive Coordinator George Henshaw, serving as the quarterbacks coach.
He would help develop quarterback Dave Brown.


Texas Joins Parade of States Colliding With Clean Air Act
Early last month, Texas began a program to help reduce smog by 15 percent in its biggest cities.
Auto-exhaust inspections were to be required during the next two years for nearly every car and truck in the Houston and Dallas areas.
If Texas did not clean up the air, it stood to lose hundreds of millions of dollars in Federal money.
The state signed a contract with a company that invested $127 million in private money to set up test stations.
"The skies of Texas are upon you," proclaimed bright blue billboards, informing motorists of the new $23-a-car inspections.


Even Money on Betting
Real betting at a real sports book: it happened in track and field for the first time Friday night in the Reno Air Games.
The legal bookmakers are delighted with the result.
Meet officials are happy because the interest stimulated by betting helped attract a capacity crowd of 5,100.
Some athletes like the publicity the betting brought to a sport that has suffered in the fight for entertainment dollars and news media exposure.


Giuliani Seeks Power Over Spending for Schools
In a shift from his earlier efforts to get more control over New York City's school system by reorganizing the Board of Education, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani today asked the state legislature instead to give him sweeping powers to dictate how the board spends its money.
Mr.
Giuliani has long said that he wanted more authority over the city's schools, and a commission he appointed last year recommended doing that by breaking up the board into five borough boards controlled by the Mayor and overseen by a commissioner who would be appointed by the Mayor.


Zion Case Verdict Vindicates Training System
To the Editor:
The death of Libby Zion on March 4, 1984, was tragic, but issues surrounding her death should have been resolved years ago in a malpractice trial, as they were Feb. 6, 1995, nearly 11 years later.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
5.94
3.35
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.82
5.78
3.28
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.15
6.10
3.43
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.59
7.60
5.89
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.66
7.67
6.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.53
8.53
7.28
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.55
6.53
5.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Russians and Chechens Agree to Truce and P.O.W. Trade
The Russian and Chechen commanders agreed today on a cease-fire and an exchange of prisoners in the civil war in Chechnya, with more talks scheduled for Wednesday, the day before the Russian President makes an important speech to Parliament.
The overall Russian commander, Col.
Gen.
Anatoly Kulikov of the Interior Ministry forces, met for five hours today with the Chechen chief of staff, Col.
Aslan Maskhadov, at the airport in the small town of Sleptsovsk, in Ingushetia.
The Russian Army commander, Gen.
Anatoly Kvashnin, and the Ingush Vice President, Boris Agapov, also attended the talks.


Children's AIDS Study Finds AZT Ineffective
In a major surprise about the treatment of the AIDS virus in children, the drug AZT, which is now the standard treatment, proved so ineffective in preventing disease progression that Federal health officials have halted part of a large study involving it ahead of schedule.
AZT, or zidovudine, also had unexpectedly high rates of adverse side effects in children, like bleeding and biochemical abnormalities, Federal health officials said in disclosing the findings today.


Slalom Champion Paralyzed
The Swedish slalom champion THOMAS FOGDOE will probably never compete again because of "serious paralysis" from an accident last week.
Fogdoe, 24, might be able to overcome some of the spinal damage with physical therapy, but it's unlikely he will return to competitive form, said Dr.
OLLE ANDREN, chief physician at Umea (Sweden) University Hospital.
Fogdoe hit a tree while training at the Swedish resort of Are last Tuesday. (AP)


A Colorful Carousel For Changing Programs
WINDOWS 95 is supposed to overcome the awkwardness of opening files and starting programs with the Program Manager/File Manager duo of Microsoft Windows.
In short, a PC running Windows 95 (if it does not turn out to be Windows 96) will feel more like a Macintosh.
In the meantime, we must live with Windows 3.1 or accept one of the solutions offered by third parties for operating our computers.


Oregon Hires New Coach
MIKE BELLOTTI, the University of Oregon's assistant offensive coordinator, was hired yesterday as head coach of the Ducks, succeeding RICH BROOKS, who signed last week to coach the National Football League's Rams.
Bellotti signed a four-year contract at $175,000 a year. (AP)


Being 'Arrogant' Pays Off for Bulldog
This is a tale of three bulldogs, two of them the real thing and one of them, Cody Sickle, an honorary member of the species, for never was there a human being this bullish on the jowly, growly and infinitely stubborn breed.
Sickle, a banker from Merrick, L.I., has been fanatical about bulldogs for the last 40 years.
He is 45 now, and when he was 5, he began saving for a bulldog of his own.


Howard Geld, 42, Advocate for Mentally Ill, Dies
Howard Geld, known as Howie the Harp to the mentally ill and homeless to whom he committed his life after spending time in institutions for the emotionally disturbed while a teen-ager, died on Feb. 5 at his home on the Lower East Side of Manhattan.
He was 42.
The cause was apparently a heart attack, said Steve Coe, executive director of Community Access, a nonprofit housing and advocacy agency for the mentally ill.


Corrections
A report in the Pop Life column on Thursday about Soundscan, a company that tabulates national sales of recorded music for Billboard magazine, misattributed a statement that the company had probably not done "a really good job" of enlisting stores that sell Latin music.
The comment was made by Dave Palacio, a vice president at EMI Latin Records, not by John Lannert of Billboard.


Author Faces Up to a Long, Dark Secret
Interviewing Anne Perry, the detective novelist who harbored the dark secret of her identity as an adolescent murderer, is frustrating.
It's like trying to capture the mist that rolls off the mountains in the Scottish Highlands where she makes her home.
It is not that she is reluctant to talk.
Far from it.
The words come out in compulsive torrents.
With little prompting she speaks about her early years, her childhood pneumonia and bronchitis, the "courage and love" of her parents, her deep attachment to her father, a time of trial in prison, her epiphanic conversion to the Mormon church in Northern California.


2 Held in Fatal Kidnapping of Teen-Ager
Two days after 16-year-old Jasmine Barker disappeared in Harlem, her mother said she received a note -- sealed in an envelope with the teen-ager's house keys -- demanding $2,500 ransom.
A family member went to a subway station to pay, the police said, but Miss Barker had already been killed.
On Sunday, investigators arrested one man in the killing, three days after charging another with kidnapping.
The police said the teen-ager was killed just hours after she disappeared on Feb. 2, and her body was found on Sunday stuffed in a plastic garbage bag in St.
Nicholas Park, six blocks from her home in the St.
Nicholas Houses.


The Rise And Fall Of a Modern Drug Lord
Crime stories have a way of bringing out the tabloid in television producers.
Even "Frontline" can succumb, as evidenced by tonight's account of the swift rise and prolonged fall of Pablo Escobar, the late head of the Medellin drug cartel.
The 90-minute report, heavy on atmospherics (planes, motorboats and motorcycles speeding along on presumably nefarious missions), relies on investigators and informers (particularly one Max Mermelstein in black wig, thick mustache and dark glasses) who have a vested interest in turning their man into a legend.
Still, with due allowance for exaggeration, his career was impressive.


Quick, Before the Bus Arrives!
Like most big cities, Newark has some century-old works of architecture to be proud of.
It is not proud of its 19th-century sewers.
An incident a decade ago, when a bus fell into a hole caused by a sewer collapse, is remembered here the way the plunge of a truck through the crumbling West Side Highway two decades ago is recalled in New York.


Can They Recycle DiMaggio?
"Plastics." Three decades ago, Dustin Hoffman's character in "The Graduate" heard that one-word key to prosperity.
The Stevens Institute of Technology just got the same message.
A $2.3 million Federal grant, announced yesterday, will go toward the construction of the Center for Lifecycle Product Management.
Its mission: to develop plastics that can be recycled more easily than those now in use.


A Japan Offer Of Billion-Bit Chips for '98
Two Japanese electronics companies say they have developed the first computer chips capable of storing more than one billion pieces of information.
Both Hitachi Ltd. and the NEC Corporation are scheduled to announce separately prototypes of billion-bit memory chips at a semiconductor industry conference in San Francisco this week.
One such thumbnail-sized piece of silicon can store 10 copies of the complete works of Shakespeare, four hours of compact-disk quality sound, or 15 minutes of video images, NEC said.


Warburg's Chief Quits In Turmoil
In the latest sign of the turmoil that has plagued the S. G. Warburg Group since the collapse two months ago of its plan to merge with the Morgan StanleyGroup, the British investment banking firm said today that its chief executive, Lord Cairns, had quit after an emergency board meeting late Sunday night.
Lord Cairns had been the primary engineer of the proposed deal between Warburg, Britain's largest investment bank, and Morgan Stanley, which like other American firms has been seeking to expand its business in Europe.
The breakdown of the merger talks after they had been made public left Warburg suffering from top-level executive defections and plummeting morale and lacking a clear strategy for competing around the world against the giant American firms and other big rivals.


Discussion of the O. J. Simpson Murder Trial Is On-Line as Well as on the Air
Hard to believe, but there are some people who cannot get enough information about the O. J. Simpson murder trial from newspapers, magazines, television, books and radio.
The Internet and other computer-based on-line information services are emerging as global repositories of trial news and trivia:
*What was the name of Nicole's dog? (No, not Plaintive Wail or Bloody Paws, but Kato, after O. J.'s house guest, Kato Kaelin. The dog now lives on the Simpson compound and has been renamed Satchmo.)


What Real-Life String Players Provide
To the Editor:
The string players not being hired for "Smokey Joe's Cafe," the Broadway revue of Leiber and Stoller songs, would not have been "walkers" (Arts page, Feb. 8).
These players, as you report, are being replaced by synthesizer.
They may not have played in every number, but few Broadway shows feature every cast member in every scene.


Treasuries' Prices Mixed; Trading Thin
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday in thin trading, as investors worried that economic reports this week would show that the Federal Reserve had not raised interest rates enough to reduce the threat of inflation.
Few traders were active ahead of today's report on retail sales for January; that report could set the direction of interest rates for the next few days.
Among the other data due, are reports tomorrow on consumer prices, industrial production and capacity utilization.


Bob Randall, 57, TV Producer And Broadway Playwright
Bob Randall, the author of the Broadway comedy "6 Rms Riv Vu" and the head writer and co-producer of the television series "Kate and Allie," died yesterday at his home in New Milford, Conn.
He was 57.
The cause was AIDS, said Gary Pratt, his companion.


In Performance; DANCE
Episodes of Fun and Mystery, Half of Them for Men Only  New York City Ballet New York State Theater
"Episodes and Sarcasms" is all too episodic.
Although Richard Tanner's choreographic suite to piano music by Prokofiev has charm, fun and mystery, its disparate parts never form a coherent whole.


TRIBUNAL CHARGES GENOCIDE BY SERB
The United Nations tribunal investigating war crimes in the Balkans charged the Serbian commander of a concentration camp in Bosnia with genocide today, explicitly using a term for the mass killing of Bosnian Muslims that Western governments have sought to avoid.
In the first genocide indictment ever handed down by an international tribunal, the court charged Zeljko Meakic, the overall commander of the Serbian-run Omarska camp in northwestern Bosnia, with "genocide and crimes against humanity." It also charged 20 other Serbian commanders, guards and visitors at the camp with war crimes.


Hatch Hopeful on Antitrust Repeal
Congress may not want to settle baseball's labor dispute by imposing binding arbitration on the players and owners, a prominent Senator said yesterday, but that doesn't mean Congress won't pass any legislation dealing with baseball.
"I think it's changing," Orrin Hatch said of the mood in Congress.
"People are starting to get the idea that some of these owners are being unreasonable."


Clinton Calls Yeltsin, Urges Peace in Chechnya
President Clinton appealed personally to President Boris N. Yeltsin for the first time today in urging the Russian leader to find a peaceful settlement to the conflict in Chechnya.
Mr.
Clinton had previously appealed to Mr.
Yeltsin in writing, and the President has publicly urged an end to the fighting in Russia's secessionist region.
But White House officials said Mr.
Clinton expressed that message in person today after telephoning Mr.
Yeltsin for the first time since Russian forces invaded Chechnya in December.


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


Dodgers Sign Japanese All-Star


Police Slow Inquiry, Prosecutor Asserts
Two years after he began investigating evidence tampering by the New York State police, a special prosecutor says corrupt troopers will escape prosecution because some of their colleagues "have done everything they possibly can to frustrate the investigation."


Sports of The Times; Point Has Been Made By Rutgers Protesters
IN one part of Rutgers University yesterday, Gary Castaline, in charge of operations at the basketball arena, was arranging to have his security force beefed up for the next men's basketball game, against Temple Thursday night.
Somewhere else, Terry Giambalvo, Rutgers's assistant athletic director, was saying, "We've heard the rumors about another demonstration, but that's all they are right now, as far as I know."


Finding the Advantages In Some Mind Disorders
AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS Seven Paradoxical Tales  By Oliver Sacks  Illustrated. 328 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
The stories related in this volume are so odd, so perplexing, so philosophically resonant that the reader is immediately reminded of fictions by Borges and Calvino.
We are introduced to a man, reminiscent of Borges's Funes the Memorious, who obsessively remembers everything about his youth in a small Italian village and who seems incapable of thinking about anything else.
We meet another man whose memory has stopped in the 1960's, imprisoning him in a time capsule defined by early rock-and-roll.
And we meet a successful scholar and businesswoman who attributes her worldly success to her ability to ape normal human behavior and who describes herself as "an anthropologist on Mars."


Giuliani's Battle Planning Angers Some Commissioners
As Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani prepares to present a budget plan that is expected to be the most austere since the city's fiscal crisis of the 1970's, he has angered several of his commissioners with the wave of staff dismissals that began last week and a decision-making process that some say has increasingly shut them out.
Several commissioners said yesterday that they had barely received details of what will be in the fiscal plan to be released today, although it will contain at least $600 million in agency cuts and pose significant management challenges for the year ahead.


Seton Hall Continues On Sinking Course
At the most critical juncture of its season, Seton Hall is starting to play the way many expected when the Pirates were picked in a preseason coaches' poll to finish last in the Big East Conference.
A week ago, a berth in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament seemed like a realistic possibility.
But after successive losses, including a 77-53 whipping at the hands of Providence tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the Pirates are looking more like pretenders than contenders.


Sports of The Times; Nat Holman 'Taught Team Basketball'
IF he saw one of his City College basketball players make a mistake in practice, Nat Holman would blow his whistle, or sometimes put his fingers in his mouth and whistle.
In the hollow silence of the gym, he would address the player.
"Why didn't you give and go?" he might ask.


COMPANY NEWS: Reporter's Notebook; For Car Dealers, Familiar Medicine
It may be of some comfort to anyone who has ever bought a car that few people fall for a sales pitch as easily as auto dealers do.
"They're fish," said Jim Edwards, a Ford dealer from Louisville, Ohio.
"The easiest mark in the world is salespeople, because they're unable to stand the pressure."


Market Place; Olde Discount's Unusual Ways Draw Complaints
The Olde Discount Corporation, the nation's fourth-largest discount brokerage firm, positions itself as the high-frills participant in a no-frills business.
But customers' complaint letters, internal memorandums, interviews with former employees and a damaging report by a law firm about the Olde research department paint a strikingly different picture of the fast-growing firm with 200 offices in 36 states.
Commission-free trading "without markups of any kind" is among the marketing promises Olde makes, but customers tell of surprise "nuisance fees" tacked on to every transaction.
A "Personal Private Brokerage representative" will tend to customers, a brochure says, yet former brokers for Olde said customers' accounts could be stolen by another broker if six months went by without a commission being generated.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BANK OF BOSTON CORP., Boston, a bank holding company, has completed the purchase of privately held Ganis Credit Corp., a consumer finance company based in Newport Beach, Calif., for $21.5 million in stock and an additional $14 million to be paid in the next several years based upon Ganis reaching certain performance goals.


After Bad Year, Two Firms Will Cut Investment Staffs
Wall Street is not exactly in a loving mood these days, and two investment firms underscored that yesterday by letting some employees know they are more likely to be getting pink slips than Valentines.
In separate announcements, CS First Boston and Salomon Brothers said they were closing down business lines and would lay off employees.
Analysts said the moves were the latest manifestation of an industrywide effort to cut costs and shed unprofitable businesses in the wake of very poor financial results last year, Wall Street's worst since 1990.


New League to Name 6 Clubs
The United Baseball League, which plans to begin play next year, will announce the selection of its first six franchises today.
The cities, or areas are New York, Los Angeles, Washington, New Orleans, Vancouver, British Columbia, and San Juan, P.R., said a person familiar with the league's plans, adding that specific playing sites for New York and Los Angeles have not been determined.
The New York area team could play in Brooklyn, Long Island or northern New Jersey.
Los Angeles sites under consideration are the Coliseum and the San Bernardino-Riverside area.


A Call for Guns To Fight Crime
Representative Helen Cheno weth, who described herself as a "simple country girl from Idaho," was among several Republicans who held a news conference today on firearms issues.
She said that more guns, in the hands of law-abiding citizens, might offer a better solution to crime.
Following are excerpts from her remarks, as recorded by The New York Times.
If we take a walk back through history and if we look at the country of Switzerland, where there's a requirement, in Switzerland, that every household have a gun and have someone in the household who's trained to handle a gun properly, the last time Switzerland was conquered was during the time of the Roman Empire.


Corrections
A chart labeled "Detour of the Week" in some copies on Sunday, with an article about traffic problems around Princeton, N.J., was published in error.
It was a test design for a future article.


Recently Promoted, Friend Of Mayor Faces Inquiry
One week after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani promoted the head of the Community Assistance Unit, his administration said yesterday that the Department of Investigation is looking into charges that the official piled up more than $100,000 in debt and held two driver's licenses at the same time.
The official, Louis Carbonetti, was promoted from director to commissioner of the agency, which serves as the Mayor's liaison to various neighborhoods and ethnic communities.
Officials are investigating whether Mr.
Carbonetti still owes more than $130,000 in debts from when he owned a photo store in Manhattan, as well as a small amount in state taxes.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 6 about Francis L. Lawrence, the president of Rutgers University, misstated the increase in black enrollment at Tulane University in New Orleans during the years he was an administrator there before coming to New Jersey in 1990. (The error was repeated in articles published Feb. 10 and again yesterday.) Eamon Kelly, president of Tulane, who provided the initial information, says a recalculation shows that black enrollment grew under Mr.
Lawrence from 5 percent to 8.6 percent (not from 1 percent to 10 percent); total minority enrollment grew to 15.95 percent, from 11.5.





Bomb Tipster Is Reported To Hate U.S.
The South African Muslim man who set up the arrest of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the man accused of being the mastermind of the World Trade Center bombing, was described today as an Islamic fundamentalist who hated the United States.
The accounts given by friends who studied at the Islamic University here alongside Ishtiaque Parker, the 25-year-old South African, included clues suggesting that Mr.
Parker may have been more than a casual friend of Mr.
Yousef.


Mexican Army Restricting Access to Rebel Zone
As the Mexican Army advances deeper into the dense forests of southern Mexico in pursuit of fleeing rebels, the military insists it is operating strictly within the law.
But since the military action ordered by President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon began in the southern state of Chiapas on Friday, the army has restricted access to the zone of conflict, making it impossible to verify reports from people identifying themselves as Indian rebels that the army has dropped bombs on at least two villages.
The reports led the International Red Cross to pull its medical staff out of the area.


Balanced-Budget Vote
Democrats in the Senate mounted their most concerted challenge to the proposed balanced-budget amendment supported by Republicans, but lost in a close vote.
The effort by Democrats, which lost on a vote of 57 to 41, was intended to keep the billions in the Social Security trust fund out of the hands of those trying to reduce the deficit.
Article, page A14.


Letting Wall St. Off Easy
Several themes run through the Contract With America: promotion of free markets, objection to government regulation, concern for the middle class, strengthening of property rights.
But when it comes to the passage on reforming securities law, the contract is oddly in conflict with those objectives.
Adam Smith, in the most famous sentence in economic literature, said that "it is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker, that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest." It is significant that the examples Smith used all refer to daily purchases.
If the baker puts sawdust in my bread I will know it immediately, I will not buy from him anymore and I will tell my friends not to buy from him anymore.
So it is in his own interest not to put sawdust in the bread.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Business Technology
Microsoft's settlement with the Government was thrown out by a Federal judge, who said the deal failed to address a number of the antitrust issues.
The ruling is an embarrassment for the Justice Department and a setback for Microsoft.
The case affects technology used on more than 50 million personal computers.  [ Page A1. ]


Federalists Defeat Quebec Separatists in Canadian By-Elections
Federalists trounced separatists in two parliamentary by-elections in Quebec on Monday, signaling continued trouble for the separatist cause in a referendum campaign expected later this year for Quebec independence.
The elections increased the Liberal majority in Parliament by only one, to 177.
But the two contests had been widely portrayed as a preview to the referendum on independence, and were a clean sweep for Prime Minister Jean Chretien, who is trying to keep the Canadian confederation intact.


When Hog Hunting Replaces Anothger Sport
Bret Saberhagen will be in Hawaii with his 9-year-old son, Drew, who will be attending a baseball camp.
Bobby Bonilla will be in Bradenton, Fla., at his warm-weather home.
Todd Hundley will be baby-sitting for his two young children at his place here while his wife attends a family funeral in Tampa.
And Jeff Kent might head back to south Texas, where he went hog hunting last week.


The Neediest Cases; Children's Aid Society Helps Single Father Cope
The predawn ritual was rigid and exhausting.
Get up at 3:30.
Leave the apartment by 5.
Drive from Washington Heights to Brooklyn to leave the baby with her grandmother, then return to Manhattan to drop the older girls at school.
Before his youngest child could talk, Bruce M.'s stamina was running out.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Villanova Tops Syracuse in Overtime  Chuck Kornegay scored 6 of his 14 points in overtime and hit a reverse layup with 8.7 seconds left to give No. 15 Villanova an 89-87 Big East home victory over No. 11 Syracuse last night. (AP)


Showalter Settles In for a Chilling Spring
The charts that adorn Manager Buck Showalter's office walls at Fort Lauderdale Stadium would normally be filled with names.
Today, they were empty.
Showalter's eyes would usually be filled with excitement because of a new spring training.
Today, they were empty.


Have Gun, Won't Travel
In a move to trace illegal guns to their sources, the state and Federal governments announced an agreement yesterday under which county prosecutors will give the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms information on all guns used in crimes.
The New Jersey Attorney General, Deborah T. Poritz, and Faith S. Hochberg, the United States Attorney for New Jersey, said the Federal agency may then find it easier to go after dealers who sell guns -- or trade them for drugs -- knowing they are likely to be used in crimes.


Hammering Out a Budget
The release by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of his preliminary spending plan is the beginning of a long process by which the New York City government determines its budget for the 1996 fiscal year, which begins on July 1.
The plan, which is required by the City Charter, gives projections of spending and revenue for the next four years, but its details focus primarily on the next fiscal year.
Beginning March 8, budget officials and agency heads will appear before City Council committees to discuss details of their initial proposal.
In addition, Mr.
Giuliani and his aides -- as well as City Council leaders -- are expected to lobby state legislators over the next two months concerning the Mayor's proposals for changes in Medicaid and welfare financing and other matters that require state approval.


CHRONICLE
They're saying "Happy Birthday" to LOUISA SANCHEZ, too.
Mrs.
Sanchez, who is the maternal grandmother of the late entertainer Sammy Davis Jr. and lives at the Mary Manning Walsh Home on the Upper East Side, turned 111 years old yesterday.
Not as much fuss was made over the occasion as last year, said ELVERA DAVIS, Mrs.
Sanchez's daughter and the entertainer's mother.
Then, greetings came from the President, the Governor and the Mayor.
But there were flowers and a cake yesterday, and her friend PAGE MORTON BLACK sang "Happy Birthday" on the telephone.


Congressional Roundup: Welfare; Republicans Keep Overhaul Intact
House Republicans showed powerful unity today in fending off Democratic assaults on their plan to overhaul the nation's welfare system, and the Republicans reacted angrily to suggestions that their plan was cruel to children.
In vote after party-line vote this week, the House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Human Resources has upheld the most contentious elements of the Republican bill, which is intended to curtail dependence on welfare and reduce births to unmarried women.


Book Notes
Walker Follows Her Editor
After 25 years with Harcourt Brace, Alice Walker is switching publishers.
Her next book, "The Same River Twice," is to be published in 1996 by Scribner, a division of Simon &amp; Schuster.
Ms.
Walker's move, which was not unexpected, is a coup for Scribner, which has been trying to augment its fiction and nonfiction lists.
But it is also something of a blow to Harcourt Brace, which has seen its adult trade division shrink considerably in the past year.


The Last Phillips Retires From Phillips-Van Heusen
The last Phillips has left the Phillips-Van Heusen Corporation.
Lawrence S. Phillips, whose great-grandfather founded the shirt maker 114 years ago, retired from the company's board yesterday, saying he and other Phillips family members had sold their 11 percent stake in the company to an investor.


Irreversible Punishment
To the Editor:
Re "Death Penalty Affirms Rights of Victimized" (letter, Feb. 12): Charles Bins writes that "if a murderer is guilty beyond a shadow of a doubt, he or she should not have an opportunity to kill again."


Grisly Trial In England Unsettles A Village
"It's a very quiet town, actually quite boring," said Steve Law, 25, assistant manager of the Dursley swimming pool and sports center.
"You do get your lads riding up and down on Saturday nights. But as far as things to do, it's the pits."
Mr.
Law was speaking of a time before the arrival of Rosemary West, a 41-year-old housewife charged with the grisly killings of 10 people, including her 16-year-old daughter.
Many of the victims were sexually assaulted, tortured, murdered, dismembered and buried in the basement of the home in Gloucester, about 15 miles from here, that Mrs.
West shared with her husband, Frederick, who was her codefendant until he he hanged himself in his prison cell on New Year's Day.


GIULIANI SEEKS DEEPEST CUT IN CITY SPENDING SINCE 1930'S
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday proposed a financial blueprint for New York City that included the largest percentage reduction in overall spending since the Great Depression and that together with state cuts would drastically reshape municipal government and slash its services to the poor.
Embracing the philosophy of Gov.
George E. Pataki's austere budget for the state, Mr.
Giuliani said that the city would reduce for the first time public assistance and health care for the city's poorest residents.
In fact, he called on the Governor to go further to cut those costs, which the city and state share.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In a new campaign for an Italian liqueur, niche marketing shuns the standard niches.
IN an unorthodox twist on niche marketing, a liqueur with a colorful label is eschewing labels for the consumers who are meant to become its customers.
The Hiram Walker &amp; Sons unit of Allied Domecq P.L.C., the international food and beverage marketer, is introducing in this country an unconventional campaign for Tuaca, an orange-flavored, 70-proof liqueur imported from Italy.
At about 30,000 cases a year, American sales of the premium-priced brand, which costs $20 or so for a 750-milliliter bottle, are growing, though still tiny.


Retail Report Pushes Bond Prices Up
Prices of Government debt securities surged yesterday as a Government report on retail sales eased concerns over inflation.
As prices rose, the yield of the 30-year bond fell to a five-month low.
The Commerce Department reported yesterday that retail sales rose just two-tenths of 1 percent in January, less than expected.
Analysts said that the data provided further evidence that the economy was slowing.


Clinton Vows to Oppose Cut in Student Loan Program
Throwing down another gauntlet to the Republican Congress, President Clinton vowed today to oppose any efforts to scale back direct Federal loans or interest subsidies for college students.
And he implored leaders of the nation's colleges to help fight for his proposed tax deductions for post-high-school education.
Though Mr.
Clinton made no mention of the word "veto," his speech to a sympathetic group of officials from more than 1,600 colleges and universities meeting here today was the latest in a series of efforts to define the ground on which the White House will fight -- from crime to welfare to foreign policy -- to preserve the President's priorities and prerogatives in the face of Republican alternatives.


Janina Domanska; Children's-Book Author, 82
Janina Domanska, an author and illustrator of children's books, died on Feb. 2 at Naples Community Hospital in Naples, Fla.
She was 82 and lived in New Fairfield, Conn.
She had suffered a stroke recently, said her stepson Robert Nossen.


Departures at Paper Ignite A Debate on News vs. Profit
The resignations of the two top editors of The Des Moines Register, which was once routinely described as one of the country's best newspapers, have reopened a bitter debate in American journalism about whether corporate pressure for profits is stripping the quality from many American newspapers.
With their resignations on Monday, The Register's editor, Geneva Overholser, and her managing editor, David Westphal, have quickly become public symbols of a battle between news professionals and business executives that is raging behind closed doors at many of the country's newspapers.


GIULIANI'S SPENDING PLAN: THE AGENCIES Schools and Hospitals Are Among the Hardest Hit in the Budget Slashing; POLICE
The Police Department is one of the few agencies that will actually receive more money under Mr.
Giuliani's budget.
The department is slated to receive $2.04 billion in 1995, and its budget will increase to $2.18 billion in 1996 and $2.21 billion in 1997 before leveling off at $2.24 billion in 1998 and 1999.
The substantial increase, however, will be accompanied by an increase in enforcement responsibilities once carried out by the Taxi and Limousine Commission, as well as added expenses for merging the transit and housing police forces into the Police Department.


Judge Rejects U.S. Antitrust Pact With Microsoft
In a decision that throws the Federal Government's biggest antitrust case into turmoil, a Federal judge here rejected today the Justice Department's agreement to settle allegations that the Microsoft Corporation, the world's biggest software company, unfairly competed with its rivals.
The decision is a considerable embarrassment for the Justice Department, which last July described its settlement as a victory that would rein in one of the most feared companies in the computer industry and which now must rebut criticism that the accord was too tame.


Excerpts From Opera Based on Ruskin's Life
Excerpts from David Lang's new opera, "Modern Painters," are to be performed on March 4 and 5 at 8 P.M. at Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, as part of the Works and Process series of the Guggenheim Museum.
The opera, with libretto by the art and music critic Manuela Hoelterhoff, is based on the life of the 19th-century art critic and philosopher John Ruskin.
The performances are to be interspersed with discussions by Mr.
Lang, Ms.
Hoelterhoff and the director Francesca Zambello, who is to stage the work at the Santa Fe Opera in July.


'Love!' Hits Broadway Running, Like a Broadway Hit
The Manhattan Theater Club's production of Terrence McNally's "Love! Valour! Compassion!" was enthusiastically received when it opened Off Broadway in November.
At that time even its admirers, including me, could not have dreamed that this proudly gay play stood a chance of becoming a mainstream hit.
That seems a distinct possibility now that "Love! Valour! Compassion!" has transferred, virtually intact (one cast change), to the Walter Kerr Theater, where it opened last night.


Study Finds Sexual Biases in Doctors' Choice of Pacemakers
Men are more likely than women to receive the most sophisticated type of permanent heart pacemakers, and the choice of the device apparently affects a patient's survival, a study of more than 36,000 patients in the Medicare program shows.
Findings from the study, which is believed to be the largest of its kind, point to important biases in how doctors choose the pacemakers they implant in patients, the authors said in a report being published today in Circulation, a medical journal of the American Heart Association in Dallas.
But the study was not designed to determine the cause of any such biases, the authors said.


GIULIANI'S SPENDING PLAN: THE AGENCIES Schools and Hospitals Are Among the Hardest Hit in the Budget Slashing; SANITATION
Proposed cuts at the Department of Sanitation, about 10 percent of its budget, would not affect residential garbage pickup, street cleaning or street wastebasket collections, said Michael T. Carpinello, the first deputy commissioner of the department.
"Core services would remain the same," Mr. Carpinello said.


Yankee Stadium Plan Stirs Criticism
A plan by New York City to transform Yankee Stadium into a garage-surrounded preserve drew sharp criticism yesterday from community leaders, who said it would separate the South Bronx neighborhood from the ball park to satisfy the team's need for centralized parking.
The proposal, which would cost an estimated $600 million, would include the construction of three new garages on Macombs Dam Park, which is adjacent to the ball park, adding 6,000 parking spaces.
An existing garage would be enlarged to hold 4,500 spaces.


Mexican Chief Orders Army to Halt Offensive on Rebels
Turning sharply from the hard line he adopted less than a week ago to stamp out a rebel uprising in the southern state of Chiapas, President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon today ordered the Mexican Army to halt all offensive actions and urged rebel leaders to restart negotiations toward a permanent peace.
Rather than tightening a nearly complete military noose around the remnants of the fleeing Zapatista National Liberation Army in the dense forest of eastern Chiapas, President Zedillo said he would convoke Congress on Wednesday to approve an amnesty for rebels who put down their arms.


INSIDE
Mexico Lets Up on Rebels
Mexico's President ordered a halt to army attacks on rebels in Chiapas and urged the rebels to reopen talks.
He pledged to seek an amnesty if they laid down their arms.
Page A6.
Progress on Ulster Peace
Britain and Ireland said they had reached accord on major proposals for a framework intended to lead to a permanent settlement to halt the strife in Northern Ireland.
Page A8.
Cancer Test in Limbo
Bone marrow transplants are the treatment of choice for advanced breast cancer, but tests of their efficacy are stalled and scientists may never know if they work.
Page C8.
Judge Admonishes Ferguson
A judge refused to grant Colin Ferguson more time to prepare his defense, saying he had spent too much time giving interviews.
Page B1. 'Hoop Dreams' Is Blocked
The admired documentary was given short shrift by the Oscar voters, who rewarded "Forrest Gump" with 13 nominations.
Page C9.


Fewer Women Are Said to Use Contraceptives
After many years of increasing contraceptive use in America, the number of women who say they use contraceptives has begun to drop, according to Government figures made public today.
The National Center for Health Statistics, a part of the Department of Health and Human Services, issued the study on contraceptive use by women from 1982 to 1990, the latest year for which data have been analyzed.


In Slow-Growth Sign, Retail Sales Inch Up
Fresh signs of an economic slowdown appeared today as retail spending at department stores, auto dealers, supermarkets and the like rose in January by a relatively small amount for the second straight month.
"It seems as if consumers have slowed up on their purchases," said Kenneth T. Mayland, chief financial economist at the Keycorp National Bank in Cleveland.
"Something has changed."


Mehta and the Israel in Similar Spirit
Zubin Mehta and the Israel Philharmonic together present an enigma of unfulfilled expectations.
The orchestra, which played under Mr.
Mehta's direction on Sunday and Monday at Avery Fisher Hall, was founded in 1936 as a utopian, self-governing ensemble of European emigres; Toscanini conducted its first concert to great fanfare.
Mr.
Mehta was born the same year and became an international podium celebrity while still in his 20's.
Neither conductor nor orchestra has achieved a consistently high level of musicianship, but both are capable of great things when the spirit moves them.
You could say they are made for each other, although just the opposite might be true.
The Israel Philharmonic digs into the music with great enthusiasm, but it does not possess a polished or precisely unified sound; it needs the taskmasterly attentions of an orchestra builder.
Mr.
Mehta, as New York Philharmonic audiences know too well, is no orchestra builder.
He gets his best results with virtuoso European groups like the Vienna Philharmonic or the Berlin Philharmonic, with whom details tend to take care of themselves.


Multicultural Muddle
Three years ago, New York City's Board of Education was engulfed in controversy over a curriculum guide that tried to teach tolerance for homosexuals.
The guide ignited a distracting fight that tied up the board for months and contributed to the ouster of Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez.
Fortunately that furor has subsided, and the school system is now desperately trying to cope with budget cuts and a power struggle with Mayor Rudolph Giuliani.
So why is the board president, Carol Gresser, stirring up old passions by proposing a new policy on multicultural education?


Manhattan Runs Away With Victory
No, Manhattan College is not among the elite of men's college basketball.
It seems unlikely the Jaspers could stand up to the likes of Connecticut, Massachusetts or North Carolina.
But they are a quick, exciting, up-tempo team, hawking the ball with a clawing man-to-man defense and flinging it the length of the court when they get a turnover.
Those qualities helped Manhattan rout St.
Peter's, 73-50, last night in a game that was expected to be closer.
The victory was Manhattan's 12th straight and ended St.
Peter's winning streak at seven.


Coast Guard Plans Big Bite
The Coast Guard station in this Monmouth County community would be one of four New Jersey installations to be eliminated under a Federal plan intended to improve rescue services, the Coast Guard said yesterday.


Food Notes
Jefferson Market's Move
Jefferson Market, a fixture in Greenwich Village for 35 years, has moved across the street to 450 Avenue of the Americas (10th Street).
While its new storefront is not as wide, the space is actually larger, accommodating a bakery department and an enlarged prepared-foods section.
The basics -- produce, meat and fish -- are as attractive and high-quality as ever.
Earlier this week, the fish department had fresh smelts ($5.98 a pound) and lovely coho salmon ($7.98 a pound).
The bakery carries about two dozen kinds of bread, plus pastries.
The prepared food is merely decent.


GIULIANI'S SPENDING PLAN: THE AGENCIES Schools and Hospitals Are Among the Hardest Hit in the Budget Slashing; CHILD WELFARE
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has proposed reducing welfare benefits even more sharply than Gov.
George E. Pataki, but the most startling reductions enumerated yesterday were in child welfare services, an area that Mr.
Giuliani has tried to protect in past rounds of budget cutting.
Mr.
Giuliani would eliminate preventive services to 8,000 troubled families who are believed to be in danger of mistreating their children -- half the 16,000 families now being served.
In such families, caseworkers supervise the homes and connect parents and their children to counseling, parenting classes, day care and other social services.


Fortune Magazine Gets New Editor in Shake-Up
In the first editorial shake-up at Time Inc. since Norman Pearlstine took over as editor in chief on Jan. 1, John Huey was named the top editor of Fortune magazine yesterday.
He replaces Walter Kiechel 3d, who has been managing editor only since May.
Six months ago, Mr.
Kiechel appointed Mr.
Huey, a former reporter and editor for The Wall Street Journal and a senior editor at Fortune, to be his No. 2 editor.
Yesterday, at a hastily called meeting in the hall outside the editors' offices, Mr.
Kiechel told staff members that Mr.
Huey was their new boss.
The two men, both former naval officers, saluted one another, and Mr.
Huey relieved Mr.
Kiechel of the command.


Two Faces of Mexico
Mexico's near-term political future will be shaped by two events this week -- the decisive opposition electoral victory in the state of Jalisco and the Government's military drive against Zapatista rebel leaders in Chiapas.
The Jalisco results, which have been accepted by a ruling party once notorious for defrauding successful challengers, signals a step toward political pluralism.
Jalisco will be the fourth and most important state to come under the rule of the conservative National Action Party since 1989.
Chiapas, however, represents an ill-considered effort to solve political problems through military force.


Peru and Ecuador Halt Fighting Along Border, Claiming Victory
With each side claiming victory, a cease-fire between Peru and Ecuador went into effect at noon today and appeared to halt border fighting that had raged for the past 20 days.
"The Peruvian flag waves in Tiwinza," Peru's President, Alberto K. Fujimori, said in a speech televised Monday night, asserting that Peruvian commandos had occupied Tiwinza, the last of three border posts Peru says it has taken back from Ecuador.


City Denies Basic AIDS Benefits, Suit Contends
The New York City agency in charge of providing services for people with AIDS is in such disarray that many recipients are effectively being denied benefits that they are entitled to, said a class-action suit filed in Federal court yesterday.
Three advocacy groups that filed the suit in District Court in Brooklyn contended that thousands of people with AIDS were going without basic services like food, shelter and medical care because the agency, the Division of AIDS Services, has been hurt by budget and staff cuts.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
A couple of Thursdays ago, when our high school was on semester break, Becky Treston and I were walking along 34th Street toward Sixth Avenue, looking for bubble-bath gel, when this man and short lady, both dressed in police-officer outfits, came up to us, said they were truant officers and asked us where we went to school.
We said, "Hunter," and the woman said: "We are truant officers. Can we see some ID?"
We showed her some Hunter cards with our names on them (I'm 12; Becky's 13) and she said, "O.K., we're going to call your school anyway," and we said, "O.K., go ahead." But she didn't call the school.
Instead, they tossed us into this parked van -- there were already two kids in it -- which was blue and white and had 11 seats and a siren.
We asked the officers to turn it on.
They wouldn't.


Frederick Fuller; Baritone, 86
Frederick Fuller, a singer, writer and teacher, died on Feb. 3 at his home in Eastbourne, England.
He was 86.
Mr.
Fuller, a baritone, was known for his sensitive interpretations of lesser-known vocal works, from early troubadour songs to 20th-century Serial works.
He gave his first public recital at the National Gallery in London in 1940 and went on to perform and teach in the United States, Europe, Latin America and China.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $200 million medium-term notes due in 1998 through CS First Boston Corp.
The notes, which are callable in a year, carry an interest rate of 7.84 percent and are priced at par.
Also through CS First Boston, Fannie Mae is selling $100 million in medium-term notes due in 2000.
Callable in three years, the notes carry an interest rate of 7.89 percent and are priced at par.


Hoping a Mouse Can Find a Cure


Plans for Park Ads and More Taxies Draw Fire
Despite all the attention devoted to budget cuts, the financial plan presented yesterday by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani includes a variety of new measures to raise money, including several ideas -- like selling advertising in city parks or increasing the number of taxi medallions -- that seem likely to provoke a fight.
Fines for all parking-meter violations would rise by $10, according to the Mayor's proposal, and fines for recycling violations would double to $50.
The Landmarks Commission would impose a new fee to inspect and examine plans to renovate landmark buildings, and anyone found violating the law on apartment window guards would have to pay $480, compared with $250 now.


Simpson Defense Lawyers Unleash Sharp Assault on Police Inquiry at Murder Scene
Defense lawyers in the O. J. Simpson murder trial opened their assault on the Los Angeles Police Department today, unleashing their most celebrated courtroom interrogator on the sergeant who initially supervised officers on the scene where Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were killed.
Waking up a courtroom grown sleepy with tedious testimony about police comings and goings following the killings, the defense lawyer F. Lee Bailey suggested that inept police officers had trampled over or otherwise obliterated important evidence, overlooked crucial areas of inquiry, failed to summon a coroner quickly enough and neglected to warn Mr.
Simpson himself that whoever had just killed his former wife might well be out to kill him, too.


Dr. Foster Exercised Judgment on Abortion
To the Editor:
"The Tainted Foster Nomination" (editorial, Feb. 10) further skews the distorted debate over the nomination of Dr.
Henry Foster Jr. to be Surgeon General.
No one has disputed that Dr.
Foster is qualified, and you agree that he is a "good choice."


Upsets Flow Amid Dog Show Tears
When Valentine's Day dawned yesterday at that midtown hub of dog show land known as Madison Square Garden, the place was teeming with broken human hearts on behalf of the 1,340 canine champions who did not survive the tenuous, strenuous, upset-packed first day of competition at the Westminster Kennel Club show.
By the time the day was over, 1,181 more dogs hadn't had their day and just three more canine champions had strutted their way to breed and group honors and completed the field of seven hopefuls for the most coveted seal of approval in dogdom, best in show.


CHRONICLE
MARIANNE GINGRICH, wife of Speaker Newt Gingrich, visited the Knesset, the Israeli Parliament, in Jerusalem yesterday while continuing to stress that her trip had no political overtones, The Associated Press reported.
Mrs.
Gingrich had been asked repeatedly during her weeklong visit to Israel whether her job with the Israel Export Development Company, an Israeli company that is building an industrial park in the southern part of the country, posed a conflict of interest for her husband.
Both Gingriches have said that her $2,500-a-month-position seeking American commercial tenants for an Israeli free-trade zone did not involve any lobbying or other dealings with the United States Government.


Scottish Terrier Reigns at Westminster
A perky Scottish terrier, Ch.
Gaelforce Post Script, who answers to the name Peggy Sue, was chosen the supreme winner of the 119th annual Westminster Kennel Club show last night in Madison Square Garden.
The 4-year-old bitch is owned by Dr.
Joe Kinnarney, a veterinarian from Apex, N.C., and Dr.
Vandra Huber, a professor of business at the University of Washington, and she is handled by Maripi Wooldridge.


A Stolen Homer Returns Home, But Less Authentic Than Before
Now you see them, now you don't.
Any way you look at it, there are two extra sailboats and some flying sea gulls in a Winslow Homer watercolor that weren't there when the American master painted the seascape in 1880.
The ghostly additions materialized sometime after the painting, "Off Gloucester Harbor," was stolen in 1969 and before it reappeared in 1992.
Thereby hangs a bittersweet tale, one that ended yesterday with the return of the defaced painting to its owner more than a quarter-century after its theft but with a central mystery still unsolved.
"They're not dead sure it can ever be restored," said Sophia L. Truslow, the lawyer for the owner, Ellen Jennings of Ipswich, Mass.
Insurance companies, she said, won't touch the painting now.
"It's not a Homer," she said.
"It's a Homer and Joe Blow."


They Aren't Dog's Best Friends
At first, the view from the bridgekeeper's booth Sunday looked like something out of a picture postcard: a bridge over the Delaware River and a winter sunset with a man, a boy and a dog in silhouette.
After a few minutes, the man and the boy bicycled back to Belvidere -- alone.
The dog, a handsome black animal with traces of Irish setter, was struggling in the icy waters 25 feet below -- thrown into the river, the police believe, by the man and boy.


New Team To Grow in Brooklyn? It's Possible
The United Baseball League plans to begin play in 1996 with one team in the New York area, but at least one more could be in its future plans here, league founders and investors indicated yesterday.
The league announced the specific sites of four of its franchises -- Washington, New Orleans, San Juan, P.R. and Vancouver, British Columbia -- and the general areas of two others, greater New York and Southern California.


Sports of The Times; Baseball's Harmonious Environment
THE best professional baseball teams in the United States are conducting spring training in this flat Phoenix suburb, morning through night, rain or shine.
Their seasons begin April 1.
There will be no strike, no lockout, not this season, not any season.
"Not for 2,000 years," said Ito Yanagi, in a soft rain outside the Chiba Lotte Marines clubhouse.
He waved his hand, as if in disgust.
"We don't have that stuff."


Going From Dreadful To Simply Defeated
By the time the Knicks stopped embarrassing themselves tonight, it was too late to avoid a disturbing loss.
Pat Riley's face was red after the game, and it had nothing to do with Valentine's Day.
According to several players, Riley broke the blackboard with his fist at halftime.
He may want to break the videotape of this game, too.


We Still Need a Strong Food and Drug Agency
To the Editor:
"F.D.A. Becomes Target of Empowered Groups" (news article, Feb. 12) exposes attacks calculated to weaken and even dismantle the Food and Drug Administration.


Allies Agree On a Proposal To Belgrade
Officials of the five-nation working group seeking peace in Bosnia agreed today on the outline of a plan to suspend most of the sanctions on Serbia in exchange for its recognition of Bosnia and Croatia, a French Foreign Ministry official said.
"The principle of an exchange of sanctions relief for Serbian agreements in other areas is accepted by everyone," said the official, who insisted on not being identified.
Those other areas, he said, include Serbian recognition of Bosnia and Croatia, formal acceptance by Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic of the five nations' peace plan for Bosnia, and an agreement to use an American-backed peace plan for Croatia as a basis for negotiation.


Could a Pipeline Bring Peace?
Oil, so often the cause of war, could be a lubricant for peace here, or so diplomats hope.
That is because the best route to get oil from the Caspian Sea to consumers in the West lies through Armenia.
One diplomat spoke of a "peace pipeline," because such a project would require peace between Azerbaijan and Armenia over Nagorno-Karabakh, an enclave whose ethnic Armenians are fighting for independence from Azerbaijan.


Trying to Knock Down a Bridge
A Congressional watchdog group plans to use a news conference today to ridicule as pork barrel spending the Ellis Island footbridge, a $15 million project pushed by Senator Frank R. Lautenberg.
Citizens Against Government Waste berates the bridge and other Federal projects in its annual "Pig Book."


Tales of Times Square: Rowboats and Ice Cream
HERE are three final stories from Times Square:
BOATS.
If it were not for guerrilla activity in the Kurdish regions of Turkey, Mike Davis would probably not be building 25-foot-long rowboats on the ground floor of the old McGraw-Hill Building on 42d Street.


The Invasion of the Chinese Truffle
THE prized, richly fragrant black truffles of France have been called black diamonds.
But for some swanky dishes this season, zircons may be more like it.
Another, cheaper kind of black truffle, the tuber himalayensis from China, has been flooding the market.
This influx has created a problem because unscrupulous dealers in France have been mixing the two and selling them all as French truffles, tuber melanosporum, to restaurants.
Dealers in the United States have been doing the same.


Mixed Signals Cause Stocks to Barely Move
The financial markets went in different directions yesterday.
Bond prices went up, the dollar went down and stocks were little changed.
It is rare for the three markets to diverge in their judgments since traders all examine the same economic data at virtually the same time.
Usually the currency market, which trades around the clock, influences the bond market, which influences the stock market.


Serbian Genocide at Omarska
The Serb-run Omarska detention camp in Bosnia became notorious in 1992 as the site of mass killing, torture and sexual assault of Muslims with the intent to drive them from northwestern Bosnia.
Yet the United Nations and the U.S. were slow to confirm what their own officials in the field reported, and were loath to call it by its proper name -- genocide.
Now a U.N. tribunal has brought formal charges of genocide against the camp's commander, Zeljko Meakic, and accused 20 other Serbs of war crimes.
So far only one of the indicted Serbs is in custody.
Others remain at large in Serbia or in Serb-held areas of Bosnia.
While the U.N. tribunal cannot try them in absentia, prosecutors can present evidence against any of the accused who fail to appear and establish a record of their crimes.


Germans Split on Forgiving Cold War Crimes
The files of the former East German secret police have held this country in thrall for five years, spilling new and painful secrets every few weeks.
Now some prominent Germans are urging that the files be closed and that those who committed crimes while serving the Communist Government be granted amnesty.
"The lessons of the Communist dictatorship with its gigantic corrupt system and its thousands of informers must become and remain a permanent part of our consciousness," one of the country's most respected figures, former President Richard von Weizsacker, asserted in a recent interview.
"But we have to be ready to talk about an end to the punishment of individuals."


Love This Barbecue or Leave It, Stranger
THE smart-aleck television reporter could not have hurt Pete Jones any worse if he had run over his dog.
"He slandered me was what he done," said Mr. Jones, an indignant man.


Foreign Affairs; Exodus Part II
As Middle Eastern shouting matches go, the one last weekend at Blair House between Egypt's Foreign Minister, Amr Moussa, and the Israeli Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, was probably in the top ten, said one observer.
While their host, Warren Christopher, watched in pain, Mr.
Moussa and Mr.
Peres ripped each other apart.
Mr.
Moussa told Mr.
Peres that Israel had started the 1967 war, fulminated that Israel, with its nuclear weapons, still wanted to dominate the Middle East, and insisted that Israel was entitled to "normal" relations with Egypt, not a "special relationship."
Mr.
Peres lashed back that Egypt was trying to "destroy" the peace process, and with a voice rising in anger told Mr.
Moussa that before Egypt got the whole Arab world riled up about inspecting Israel's nuclear facilities, Cairo should inspect Iran's.


In America; Cruel Homeless Policy
The night air was stupefyingly cold.
If you walked directly into the wind it felt as if someone were holding cubes of ice against your forehead.
The easiest thing in the world to imagine was that someone could freeze to death out there.
The man in the wheelchair had only one leg.
With his back against the frigid wind that whistled through the intersection of Vanderbilt Avenue and 46th Street, not far from Grand Central Terminal, he waited in a long line for the small meal being served by volunteers from the Coalition for the Homeless.
An orange.
A plastic cup of chili.
A half-pint of milk.


Corrections
A film review in Weekend on Friday about "Shallow Grave" misidentified its locale in Scotland.
It is Edinburgh, not Glasgow.


Congressional Roundup: Democrats; A Rebellious 23 Back G.O.P. Pledge
In a major break with their leadership, 23 moderate-to-conservative House Democrats announced today that they had formed a voting bloc to support much of the Republicans' Contract With America and set their own agenda on a host of other issues.
Though they have voted with the Republicans on several issues in this Congress, their battles with the generally liberal House Democratic leadership have up to now been waged behind closed doors.
But today the group, consisting largely of Southern conservatives, issued a public challenge over the control and direction of the Democratic Party.


Congressmen Make a Visit To City Council In Washington
A rare visit today by Federal lawmakers to Washington's City Council, billed as a get-acquainted courtesy call, exposed a growing rift between the Council and Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. over how to solve the city's budget crisis quickly enough to keep Congress from taking more control of the municipal government.
After the hourlong meeting in which Representatives James T. Walsh of New York and Thomas M. Davis 3d of Virginia, the Republican chairmen of the House District subcommittees, told the Council members they were waiting for evidence that Mr.
Barry had begun to take prudent action, several Council members criticized the Mayor for his failure to meet even the minimum demands requested by Congress last year: $140 million in spending cuts and the elimination of 2,000 government jobs.


Another Tarpley Problem
ROY TARPLEY, who dropped a five-gallon water bottle on his foot, can't practice for the next week or so, the Dallas Mavericks said yesterday.
The team said the 7-foot forward severely bruised his right foot Monday -- but did not break any bones -- before his first scheduled practice with the Mavericks in more than three weeks.
Tarpley has been on the injured list with tendinitis on his right knee.
He had expected to be activated this week but then injured his foot injury before he left home for practice.


A Tenor, Paul Groves, Wins the Tucker Award
The Richard Tucker Music Foundation has chosen Paul Groves, a tenor from Louisiana, as the recipient of its 1995 Richard Tucker Award.
Mr.
Groves, 30, is a graduate of the Juilliard Opera Center.
He made his Metropolitan Opera debut in 1992 as the Steersman in Wagner's "Fliegende Hollander," and will appear there this season in "The Ghosts of Versailles," "Parsifal" and "Der Rosenkavalier."


American Express and PNC Become Favorites of Buffett
Warren E. Buffett, the widely followed Omaha investor, is betting $2 billion that there is money to be made in money.
He disclosed yesterday that his holding company had purchased stakes in two major financial services companies: 9.8 percent of the American Express Company and 8.3 percent of the PNC Bank Corporation of Pittsburgh.
Many investors like to mimic Mr.
Buffett's investments, and shares of both companies surged yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.
The stock of American Express rose $1.375, to $33.50, its highest level in eight years.
Shares of PNC, the nation's 12th-largest banking company, jumped 87.5 cents, to $25, a high for the year but well below the $31.50 level reached last June.
PNC has suffered unusually large investment losses resulting from the rise in interest rates.


Cuban Refugees Detained On Florida's Central Coast
More than 40 Cuban refugees were taken into custody this morning when they reached Florida's central Gulf coast aboard rafts after a five-day voyage from Grand Cayman Island in two power boats, one of which they said sank a half-mile off the United States coast.
The Coast Guard said tonight that an additional 16 refugees were apprehended at sea and were being held in a Coast Guard patrol boat.
Like the 41 who made it to shore, they had made the five-day trip from the Cayman Islands, where hundreds of Cuban refugees have been stranded since a mass exodus from their homeland last summer.


Delay for Hearings On Clinton Nominee
Citing unfinished F.B.I. background checks, the White House said it would not send the nomination of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. to be Surgeon General to the Senate until mid-March.
Administration officials said the delay in the start of hearings would leave Dr.
Foster in better shape to confront his critics.
Article, page A14.


Gauging the Impact
An agency-by-agency look at the impact of the cuts proposed in Mayor Giuliani's spending plan.
Page B5.


Humphrey Bogart in New HBO Film
Parody?
Tribute?
Rip-off?
Tonight's HBO edition of "Tales From the Crypt," starring Humphrey Bogart, is a tantalizing blend of all three.
The director is Robert Zemeckis, who in the film "Forrest Gump" showed how deftly he could blend a contemporary star into archival material.
Now, in a fiendishly clever episode called "You, Murderer," Mr.
Zemeckis, one of the original executive producers of "Tales From the Crypt," sets a contemporary tale in motion with a character extracted from old movies.
I'm not sure that Bogie would have been thrilled.
Pop references are underlined.
Crypt Keeper, the skeletal host of the series, is found sitting, like Gump, on a bench as a single feather drifts above him.
"Care for a chocolate?" the Keeper asks a stranger who just happens to be, courtesy of a computer, Alfred Hitchcock.
"Scary is as scary does," cackles the Keeper as he introduces the story about someone "just dying to get out of the mess he's in -- literally."


GIULIANI'S SPENDING PLAN: THE AGENCIES Schools and Hospitals Are Among the Hardest Hit in the Budget Slashing; THE ARTS
The proposed city budget calls for an 17 percent reduction in the budget of the Department of Cultural Affairs, from $96.1 million this year to $80.2 million next year.
The largest chunk -- $11 million -- would come from the budget for the Cultural Institutions Group, which consists of 31 cultural organizations that occupy city buildings -- from the Metropolitan Museum of Art to the Brooklyn Academy of Music and the Queens Botanical Garden.


GIULIANI'S SPENDING PLAN: THE AGENCIES Schools and Hospitals Are Among the Hardest Hit in the Budget Slashing; HOSPITALS
The proposed cuts in Medicaid reimbursement rates would "speed up dramatically" the reorganization of the city's public hospitals and reduce the services they offer, said Dr.
Bruce Siegel, president of the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation.
It could also force the closing of one or more of the city's 11 municipal hospitals.
The corporation, an independent agency that operates the public hospitals, would see its $3.8 billion budget slashed by about 25 percent, Dr.
Siegel said, if the cuts proposed by the Mayor and those proposed earlier by Gov.
George E. Pataki are adopted.


Antibiotic Hide-and-Seek
WHEN patients who have had Lyme disease complain of persistent neurological or psychiatric symptoms, many doctors insist that these effects must be unrelated to the Lyme spirochete because the patients were treated appropriately with antibiotic therapy known to be capable of wiping out the organism.
But Dr.
Brian Fallon, a specialist in Lyme disease at the New York State Psychiatric Institute, points to several characteristics of Borrelia burgdorferi, the spirochete that causes Lyme disease, that may help it resist eradication by standard antibiotic therapy and enable it to cause chronic or recurring neuropsychiatric symptoms.


Now, to the Shores of Somalia With Beanbag Guns and Goo
The American forces who evacuate the last United Nations peacekeepers from Somalia in the next few weeks will be armed not only with M-16 rifles and helicopter gunships, but also with an array of new "non-lethal" weapons from guns that fire tiny beanbags to sticky foam that immobilizes rioters.
As the United States joins more peacekeeping operations that require controlling crowds, military commanders are searching for alternatives to using deadly force to avoid civilian casualties and protect American troops.


The Struggle for Women's Suffrage, in Pictures and Song
The early years of the struggle for women's suffrage were also the early years of the camera; they evolved together, leaving behind a rich photographic record made to order for "The American Experience."
"One Woman, One Vote" begins in 1848 in the Methodist chapel in Seneca Falls, N.Y., where Elizabeth Cady Stanton stirred up a meeting on women's rights with the radical demand for the vote.
The campaign would be carried on for more than 70 years, in state legislatures, in Congress and, as tonight's pictures and rousing songs recall, in the streets:


Armfuls of Affection


Out at Home: UMass Falls to Colonials
George Washington University, Chelsea Clinton's favorite basketball team, accomplished tonight something no other school could do over a span of 41 games going back more than three years.
The Colonials beat Massachusetts on the Minutemen's campus court, 80-78, in a tingling, bruising match that followed by 10 days a George Washington victory over the Minutemen in Washington.
President Clinton and his daughter saw that one, a 78-75 upset that came at a time when UMass was ranked No. 1 in the land.


Eating Well
FRESH FIELDS food stores, which provide health-conscious consumers in Washington, Philadelphia and Chicago with good-looking organic produce, excellent fish, hormone-free beef and additive-free packaged goods, will arrive in the New York area on March 3.
But patrons will not be able to buy the dietary supplements like ma huang and chaparral that are still sold in many other natural-food supermarket chains and health-food stores around the country.


Congressional Roundup; Senate Democrats Fail to Shield Social Security Fund From Deficit-Cutters
The most serious Democratic attempt to alter the proposed balanced-budget amendment, one that would have excluded the vast Social Security trust fund from being tapped for future deficit reduction, went down to solid defeat today in the Senate.
Whether that signaled fresh support or trouble for the budget amendment depended mostly on which senator was talking.
But the closeness of the contest was undisputed, and it was hammered home by the Republican National Committee.
It moved into the states of seven wavering Democrats today with broadcast advertisements implying that they might oppose further deficit-cutting for political reasons.


The Jewel in Foreman's Crown? Tyson
George Foreman has found the fight to crown his remarkable career before he reaches his 47th birthday.
The world heavyweight champion said yesterday that Mike Tyson's release from prison on March 25 could mean the two boxers will meet by the end of the year.


Nuclear Plants to Become de Facto Radioactive Dumps
For the foreseeable future, more than 70 communities near nuclear generating plants will become repositories for spent nuclear fuel, the most radioactive of all atomic wastes, without any public hearings or environmental studies of the sites.
Utilities have no choice but to build de facto permanent repositories near their plants, because after decades of searching for a centralized nuclear waste site, the United States is still at least 15 years away from a solution and has found nowhere else to store the roughly 30,000 tons that have already accumulated.


Corrections
A report in the music column of the Westchester Weekly on Sunday about a concert by the Manhattan String Quartet at the Presbyterian Church of Pleasantville misstated the time.
It is this Sunday at 3 P.M., not 4.


Judge Scolds Defendant In Rail Trial
After several busy days calling radio and television stations and granting exclusive telephone interviews from his jail cell, Colin Ferguson told the judge in his murder trial today that he needed more time to prepare his legal defense.
Speaking of himself in the third person, the man who is charged with killing six people on the Long Island Rail Road and has insisted on defending himself, said: "The defendant is faced with a tremendous workload and with a pile of transcripts that he must read to prepare his defense. I believe it is only fair the defense be given more room and more latitude to prepare its case."


No Headline
"We must choose between pulling ourselves into the late 20th century or remaining mired in the tired and abandoned policies of the Great Society. MAYOR RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI  [ A1:4. ]


GIULIANI'S SPENDING PLAN: THE AGENCIES Schools and Hospitals Are Among the Hardest Hit in the Budget Slashing; YOUTH SERVICES
Programs for young people in New York City will be sharply affected by the Mayor's budget plan.
Nearly all youth programs will be eliminated, except for the Beacon Schools program, which keeps city schools open in the evenings for youth activities.
Indeed, the fate of the Department of Youth Services itself might seem to be in question, as the agency does not even appear in the Mayor's budget documents.


Tracing a Nuclear Risk: Stolen Enriched Uranium
Acting on a tip from an anonymous female telephone caller, the Prague police swooped down on a smart blue Saab on a crowded shopping street at midday just before Christmas.
As they were told they would, the police found highly enriched uranium stashed on the back seat in metal canisters -- 2.7 kilograms, or about 6 pounds' worth.
Since the uranium was seized, Czech investigators and Western officials interviewed have determined that the Prague cache was was 87.7 percent uranium-235 in oxide form, and the smugglers were former nuclear workers who knew what they were handling.


Red Sox Drop Easler
MIKE EASLER, who did not want to work with replacement players who make more money than he does, was dropped yesterday as hitting instructor of the Boston Red Sox.
General Manager DAN DUQUETTE said the team made the move after Easler indicated he wouldn't work without a raise in the salary he signed for three months ago.


DELAY IN ALBANY ON DEATH PENALTY
Coaxed by Gov.
George E. Pataki, the State Senate today backed off a plan to pass legislation that would have made almost all murders in the state capital crimes and would have given New York one of the most extensive death-penalty laws in the country.
Instead, Mr.
Pataki brokered a temporary cease-fire between the Democratic-controlled Assembly and Republican-led Senate.
All sides agreed tonight to redouble their efforts to draw a narrower bill that would be more likely to survive expected constitutional challenges.


Finding Comfort in Zeffirelli's Sets
In this season's first performance of "La Traviata" on Monday night, the Metropolitan Opera proved a general principle that justifies its awe-inspiring, hyper-realist productions by Franco Zeffirelli.
On an average evening, in a familiar mainstream work, extravagant sets do not eclipse the singers; instead, they compensate for flaws.
Vocal lines may be fragile, characters may be insufficiently defined, there may even be signs of sclerotic acting, but the sets leave no doubt that this is an imposing universe where much is at stake.
That much was evident, in this case, in the heavy draperies, the gilded decorations, the weighty mirrors, the flickering gaslights and the velvet, burgundy costumes.
This production is as overstuffed as its pillows and cushions, but on Monday night it was just as well.
There were a few nicely turned-out phrases and even a bit of effective acting, but for the most part, memory and image, not sound, made this performance work.


ITT to Sell 3 Units for $1.8 Billion
Continuing a restructuring that began slightly more than a year ago, the ITT Corporation said yesterday that it would sell three businesses from its ITT Financial Corporation subsidiary to the GE Capital Corporation for $1.8 billion.
ITT said last October that it intended to sell its financial services subsidiary and raise a net of $3.3 billion to $3.5 billion in the process.
The deal with GE Capital would be the third sale since then.


Britain and Ireland Agree On a Framework for Ulster
The British Secretary for Northern Ireland and the Irish Foreign Minister said tonight that they had agreed on the major proposals in a new framework intended to lead to a permanent political settlement to halt the sectarian strife in this British province.
After a five-hour meeting, Sir Patrick Mayhew of Britain and Dick Spring of Ireland said that only "presentational and drafting" details remained to be worked out and that a meeting between Prime Ministers John Major of Britain and John Bruton of Ireland was likely before the publication of the document, which could be as early as the end of next week.


Women Resist Trials to Test Marrow Transplants
ALTHOUGH many women with advanced breast cancer are convinced that bone marrow transplants are the best available treatment for their disease, and many of their doctors agree, scientists say the efficacy of the therapy is far from proved.
The National Cancer Institute is sponsoring three large national trials to study whether this treatment, which involves a very high dose of chemotherapy followed by the transplant, is preferable to the chemotherapy regimes that are now standard treatment.
But so many women turn to this grueling, risky and expensive treatment that they are having a hard time enrolling participants.
And scientists say they are worried that without proper studies no one will ever know whether the new treatment is actually better.


William Lloyd, 86; Founded Newsletter
William Bross Lloyd Jr., a conscientious objector who founded the newsletter Toward Freedom, which follows the progress of new countries, died of pneumonia on Saturday at his home in Rochester, Vt.
He was 86.
Mr.
Lloyd, grandson of the 19th-century social reformer Henry Demarest Lloyd, was a lifelong Quaker.
In the early 1950's he wrote a book, "Waging Peace: the Swiss Experience."


Despite Efforts, Building-Site Violence Still Occurs
The shooting yesterday on 42d Street, which the police have tied to crews of extortionists claiming to seek construction jobs for minority workers, comes after prosecutors have worked in recent years to crack down on groups that use violence to demand jobs and money at construction sites.
It could not be determined whether the two groups in yesterday's clash have come under previous scrutiny, but law-enforcement officials said the incident showed that despite attempts to crack down on the crews, violence by such groups is still common.


Getting This Oil Takes Drilling and Diplomacy
Several billion barrels of oil under the Caspian Sea lie waiting to be tapped off the stony coast of this former Soviet republic.
No technical difficulties preclude a daily oil output that could eventually be equal to a tenth of what is produced each day in the United States.
But a Western-led consortium that is spending $7 billion to develop the huge new oilfields has found itself frustrated by the political realities of a region of Central Asia where Russia, Iran, Turkey and the West have historically competed for influence.


Jimmy Powers; Sports Editor, 92
James J. (Jimmy) Powers, the longtime sports editor of The Daily News who supplemented the reach of his "Powerhouse" column with a parallel career as a boxing commentator on NBC television's Gillette Friday Night Fights, died on Saturday at his home in Bal Harbour, Fla.
He was 92.
He died in his sleep of natural causes, his family said.


New Route for Cubans


Too Harsh a Sentence For Convicted Juvenile?
To the Editor:
A Feb. 9 news article gives the strong impression that vicious murderers in a New York court case received a sentence of only 3 1/3 years.
It takes a careful reading of the article to learn that only one of the defendants was sentenced.


Anderson Comes Back in Winning Form
You are Kenny Anderson.
Your left forearm is sore.
Your teammate drills you in print last week.
You go AWOL from practice earlier this season.
Some of the league's coaches believe you are a rotten, little ingrate unworthy of an All-Star vote.
And your team is headed for infamy.
You are Kenny Anderson.
This is not a good year.
You do not love this game; you loathe it.
And you grow tired of hearing things will be all right, and you finally retreat to the only cleansing device you have ever known:


Market Place; &gt;Some investors think Warburg will still find a merger partner.
WHEN it announced in December that it was in merger talks with the Morgan Stanley Group, S. G. Warburg Group P.L.C. implicitly acknowledged that it was not big enough or strong enough to go it alone in what promises to be a painful consolidation of the global investment banking business.
Two months later, Warburg is even weaker.
The merger negotiations with Morgan Stanley collapsed.
Key executives, uncertain about the British company's future, began defecting to rivals.
On Monday its chief executive, Lord Cairns, the primary proponent of the Morgan Stanley deal, quit.
At the same time, Warburg warned that the outlook for investment banking profits for the year ending on March 31 continued to dim.


Millard E. Gladfelter, 95, Head Of Temple U. in a Crucial Period
Millard E. Gladfelter, a former teacher in a one-room Pennsylvania schoolhouse who ended his educational career as president of Temple University in Philadelphia, died on Sunday at his home in Rydal Park, Pa.
He was 95.
Dr.
Gladfelter served as Temple's fourth president, from 1959 to 1967.
In that time he helped transform Temple into one of Pennsylvania's four state universities, joining Penn State, Pittsburgh State and Lincoln University.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  TRYING TO TRACK NUCLEAR TRAFFIC  Investigators tracking a major cache of uranium-235 seized in Prague say that the smugglers were former nuclear workers who knew what they were doing.
But they have failed to determine where the nuclear material came from, or whom it was intended for.A3  PROGRESS ON NORTHERN IRELAND  British and Irish officials said they had agreed on major proposals governing a new phase of negotiations on Northern Ireland.
A8


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
6.00
3.49
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.77
5.82
3.26
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.06
6.15
3.41
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.48
7.59
5.87
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.59
7.66
6.45
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.47
8.53
7.28
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.53
6.55
5.54
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Mayor's Budget Barrage
New York City has coped with budget crises that have hit like successive artillery barrages since Mayor Rudolph Giuliani took office.
But until now, City Hall has managed to come up with major budget savings without completely shredding the safety net for the poor.
On Monday Mr.
Giuliani said his latest plan for $2.7 billion in new savings was "reality therapy" for New Yorkers.
For the poor, it looked more like shock therapy.
Mayor Giuliani spent the last year cutting services, reducing the payroll and pushing for management improvements, with real results.
He deserves credit for tackling long-deferred fiscal problems.
He also clearly felt he could go only so far in the same direction this year.


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI SEEKS DEEPEST CUT SINCE 1930'S
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani proposed a financial blueprint for New York City that included the largest percentage reduction in overall spending since the Great Depression and that would drastically reshape municipal government and slash its services to the poor.
A1.


Frederic Schwartz, Former Head Of Bristol-Myers, Is Dead at 88
Frederic N. Schwartz, a retired chairman and chief executive of the Bristol-Myers Company, the diversified health care company, died on Monday in New York.
He was 88 and lived in New York and had a summer home in the Berkshires.
The cause of death was pneumonia, a spokesman for the company, now known as Bristol-Myers Squibb, said yesterday.


Clinton Land Mine Policy Falls Short; Include Cluster Bombs
To the Editor:
"Lifting the Land Mine Curse" (editorial, Feb. 8) identifies the problem of land mines and proposes a ban on their sale and production.
I support the initiative to ban land mines, but want to draw attention to unexploded cluster bombs, which pose the same danger as land mines, yet are not included in this ban.


Islanders Are Having Their Problems Playing Catch-Up
At today's morning skate, Islander General Manager Don Maloney was asked about his club, which has been more than a little inconsistent.
"I'm curious to see which team shows up," Maloney said before the Islanders played the streaking Quebec Nordiques.
"Hopefully, it will be the A-team, and not the Z-team."


Louis Schwartz, 92, A Professor of Law
Louis E. Schwartz, a retired New York Law School professor and an authority on personal injury law, died on Thursday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 92.
The cause was cancer, said a son-in-law, Norman H. Dachs of Woodmere, L.I.


Saatchi Brothers Face Agency Suit
In the latest twist to the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi drama, the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company said yesterday that it had filed a lawsuit in London against Maurice and Charles Saatchi, the co-founders of the agency company, contending that the company is entitled to an estimated $40 million from an investment the brothers made in 1993 in Adidas A.G., the German sports apparel and footwear maker.
The brothers bought an interest in Adidas for less than $10,000 from Robert Louis-Dreyfus, the Saatchi chief executive who later became Adidas's chief.
After a dispute over whether the brothers could expand their investment, they filed a suit against him that was settled with a $40 million payment.
Sir Tim Bell, a spokesman for Maurice Saatchi, told Bloomberg Business News that the investment was "a purely private matter" that had nothing to do with the company.


Crew's Error Is Blamed In Jet Crash
A Continental Airlines jet ran off the runway at La Guardia Airport on a snowy night last March because the cockpit crew forgot to flip a heater switch before leaving the gate, the National Transportation Safety Board concluded today.
The heater keeps a tube the size of a drinking straw, part of the air-speed indicator, from being blocked by snow and ice.
Because the heater was not turned on, the air-speed indicator failed to work, and the pilots thought the plane was going too slowly for takeoff.
But it was actually moving twice as fast as the pilots thought it was: almost fast enough to take off, and too fast to stop.


House Easily Approves Vastly Altered Crime Bill
Defying a veto threat from President Clinton, the House today passed a bill that would wipe out the President's pledge to put 100,000 police officers on the streets.
Republicans, though, said the bill would give communities more choices about how to spend money to fight crime.
The bill would eliminate the money for police officers and prevention programs in the anti-crime package passed last year and signed into law by the President, replacing it with lump-sum crime-fighting grants that local governments could spend as they wished.


When Congress Faced Baseball and Struck Out
To the Editor:
Senator Orrin Hatch's suggestion that it is possible the Senate might consider lifting a part of organized baseball's antitrust exemption (some editions, Feb. 9) may mark the end of a 73-year masquerade in which organized baseball pretended it was not in interstate commerce.


U.S. Ban of Chinese Swimmers Criticized
Officials of swimming's world governing body yesterday criticized the United States, Canada and Australia for banning China from a pre-Olympic meet this summer in Atlanta.
In light of seven recent positive drug tests among Chinese swimmers, including two world champions, the three aquatic powers voted on Sunday in Honolulu to prohibit China from swimming in the Pan Pacific Championships in August.
The Pan Pacs, as they are known, will serve as a test event for the 1996 Summer Games in Atlanta.
Japan cast the lone dissenting vote among Pan-Pac charter members.


Dr. Li Zhisui, 75, Who Wrote Memoir Critical of Mao
Dr.
Li Zhisui, the personal doctor of Mao Zedong whose recently published memoirs portrayed the Chinese leader as a manipulative egomaniac with little tolerance of dissent and a penchant for young women, died Monday at his home in suburban Chicago.
He was 75.
The cause apparently was a heart attack, said Jason Epstein, Dr.
Li's editor at Random House.


Wine Talk
FOR most wine makers, selling is the toughest part of the job.
With all the excess wine around these days, the average vintner often spends as much time on the road selling as he does in his cellar.
He slips into town, checks into a hotel and then hits the streets, pitching his wines to bored retailers whose shelves are already overstocked.
It's often tedious, and it doesn't have much to do with making good wine.


Meggett's Maneuvers Include Trip To Foxboro
On the phone was the man of the hour, David Meggett, the Giants' free agent running back, and he didn't have time to talk.
A quick hello, then goodbye.
He was asked where he was.
"I'm in Foxboro visiting friends from Towson State," he said yesterday.
And you could almost hear the smile.
Foxboro.
Home of the New England Patriots and Bill Parcells, former coach of the Giants who loves to steal players from his old team and is interested in Meggett.
Visiting friends from college is nice, but in Foxboro?
Why there?
Meggett laughed, then hung up.


Maxwell Files Lawsuit Over Incident With a Fan
VERNON MAXWELL, the suspended guard of the Houston Rockets, has filed a Federal lawsuit, charging that the fan he punched slandered him afterward.
Maxwell filed the suit in Houston on Monday, contending that STEVE GEORGE, the fan who was struck, and his brother, NICK GEORGE, slandered him by "maliciously" accusing him of a crime, "namely assault." The lawsuit says nothing about whether the attack actually took place.


Personal Health; When Lyme invades the brain and spinal system.
A YOUNG woman, whose doctor declined to identify her, thought she was going crazy.
Suddenly, this once perfectly healthy college freshman developed severe anxiety, panic attacks, insomnia and loss of appetite.
A doctor and a psychologist at her college's health service recommended rest for what they thought were problems in adjusting to being away from home.
Forced to take a medical leave, she underwent an extensive examination that showed no abnormalities except one: evidence in her spinal fluid of infection by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, which causes Lyme disease.
Only then did she recall having had a circular rash characteristic of Lyme disease months earlier, followed by a brief bout of headaches and unusual fatigue.
At the time, she did not take these symptoms seriously and did not seek medical attention.


70 Nuclear Utilities On Path to Become Radioactive Dumps
More than 70 communities near nuclear generating plants will become repositories for spent nuclear fuel, the most radioactive of all atomic wastes, for the foreseeable future as a result of a little-noticed Federal appeals court ruling.
The January decision means that without public hearings or environmental studies, the utilities will build de facto permanent repositories near their plants, because after decades of searching for a centralized nuclear waste site, the nation is still at least 15 years away from a solution and has found nowhere else to store the 30,000 tons that have already accumulated.


Class Notes
At a time when the multicultural heathens are said to have sacked the temples of academia, it's hard to know what to make of Tracy Adkisson, Jamie Edrington, Jeremy Keller and the rest of Prof.
Kenny Morrell's classics commandos at Rhodes College in Memphis.
At the least, the growing cadre of gung-ho classics students is evidence that Latin and Greek, of all things, seem to be making something of a comeback at colleges and high schools around the country.
Along the way, the resurgence of these courses -- to some, the fuddy-duddy backbone of Western civilization curriculum -- is a reminder that the multicultural-P.C. wars can obscure a lot more than they reveal.


Work Crews' Clash Leads to Gunfire on 42d St.
In a bloody clash that saw men chase each other through midtown traffic swinging baseball bats and hurling bricks, two groups of minority construction workers clashed near Times Square yesterday, as long-simmering tensions over hiring of minority groups at construction sites flared into violence.
Two men were shot in the brawl on 42d Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenues, and 15 were arrested.
It was the latest in a long series of violent incidents involving coalitions of Hispanic and black construction workers, who often appear at job sites and demand work, but it was the first involving the redevelopment effort of the Times Square area.


Nostalgia Rules at Drexel Reunion
They basked in success when their firm was the terror of Wall Street and suffered ignominy after it collapsed in disgrace.
But for many former employees of Drexel Burnham Lambert, most of the scars seem to have healed five years after its demise.
More than 250 former employees gathered in two adjacent Manhattan bars on Monday night -- the anniversary of the day in 1990 when Drexel filed for bankruptcy.
They came not to point fingers or commiserate over the millions they lost when their high-flying Drexel shares became virtually worthless, but to catch up, share a drink and reminisce like nostalgic war veterans.


Cortines Renews Attack on City Hall
After tensions between the two men appeared to subside, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines today harshly criticized Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposal to gain greater control over how the Board of Education spends its money.
In testimony before lawmakers here, Mr.
Cortines said Mr.
Giuliani would be creating a "two-headed monster" by cleaving education from the money that pays for it.
He said the schools should not "have to go across the river and genuflect" (City Hall and the Board of Education offices are separated by the East River).
And he suggested that City Hall was "throwing grenades across the river."


Giuliani Transformed
Four months ago when Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani crossed party lines to endorse Mario M. Cuomo in the race for governor, he excoriated George E. Pataki as a candidate who would not provide for the needs of New York City.
But now, with Mr.
Pataki in the Governor's mansion, the Republican Mayor has made such a turnaround that he has not only praised the Republican Governor's lean state budget but has also called on him to seek even deeper cuts in state welfare and Medicaid programs than he has already proposed.


Birthday Tribute To Anna Sokolow
Jerome Robbins and Uta Hagen are among the speakers to pay tribute to the choreographer Anna Sokolow on her 85th birthday tonight at 8 at Kaye Playhouse, Hunter College, 68th Street between Park and Lexington Avenues.
Other speakers are to include Gerald Arpino, Sophie Maslow and Paul Taylor.
The program will also feature a performance by Miss Sokolow's Players Project and guest dancers from Mexico and Israel, and a rare film of her performing in the 1950's.


Forgetting Switch Led To Crash, Study Says
A Continental Airlines jet ran off the runway at La Guardia Airport on a snowy night last March because the cockpit crew forgot to flip a switch before leaving the gate, the National Transportation Safety Board concluded.


Prairie Blooms in Patch Deemed Worthless for Factory or Farm
The poetry of the rural Midwest sings of the prairies, abloom with wildflowers and tallgrasses, nourished by the ancient glaciers that flattened the land but also made it rich.
For the most part, however, the prairie now lives only in poetry.
The plow, which began busting the earth for farming in the early 19th century, has obliterated virtually all of the magnificent garden that once swept the Illinois countryside, replacing it with neat rows of cornstalks and soybeans.


3 Ex-Phillies Coming Back
The former Phillies outfielder JEFF STONE is leaving his job at a steel mill to play as a replacement for his old team, The Philadelphia Inquirer reported yesterday.
Stone, 34, became the first of the Phillies replacement players to identify himself.
The Inquirer, quoting a source close to the team, said that the 39-year-old infielders KEN OBERKFELL and TODD CRUZ, and pitchers KEN DIXON, 34, MARTY BYSTROM, 36, and GEORGE RILEY, 38, will also play for the Phillies.
Bystrom and Cruz are also former Phillies.


More Prospective Obstetricians Will Be Taught Abortion Skills
The group that supervises graduate medical education voted yesterday to require that with certain exceptions prospective obstetricians and the teaching hospitals where they work as residents include abortion skills in the training programs.
The new requirement, approved unanimously by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education, applies only to programs that train obstetricians and gynecologists.
It does provide alternatives for doctors and hospitals with moral or religious objections.


Real Estate
THE Walt Disney Company has leased 170,000 square feet in an office building here, in a move that buttresses the company's position as the city's largest office tenant.
The lease has also underscored the position of Burbank, which is 10 miles northwest of downtown Los Angeles, as one of the tightest office markets in Southern California.
Disney already occupied 70,000 square feet of the Tower office building before it agreed late last year to take an additional 100,000 square feet in the same building, following a decision by Warner Brothers Inc. to vacate the space.


World News Briefs; C.I.A. Blocks Release Of Documents on Japan
The Central Intelligence Agency has refused to release Kennedy Administration documents detailing covert operations to support conservative politicians in Japan, State Department officials said today.
The State Department, which ruled last month that the release of the papers poses no threat to national security, wants to publish them as part of the official record of foreign policy.


Djenne journal; Desperately Poor Malians Loot Their Rich Past
In the shadow of a 14th-century mud-walled mosque, Bamoye Guitteye's wares, reproductions of some of this continent's most treasured art forms, crowd the tight confines of his back-alley gallery.
To believe Mr.
Guitteye, a dandy who is perhaps the only man in this town to wear a suit regularly, he sells only reproductions of the original terra-cotta figures, wooden masks and cast bronzes that regularly fetch tens of thousands of dollars for the dealers in Paris and Brussels who specialize in fine African art.


LIMITED INC. (LTD,N)
At long last, the Limited Inc. has had a spot of good fortune.
The specialty retailer, which has struggled to manage its maturing core businesses, yesterday reported a 31 percent increase in its fourth-quarter earnings and significant improvement in its profit margins.
But analysts still hesitate to say the company has turned the corner.
While Limited's younger businesses, like Structure, Bath and Body Works and Victoria's Secret, flourished, two of its biggest businesses, Limited and Lerner, failed once again to make their quarterly profit and sales targets.


U Nu, First Premier of Independent Burma and Democracy Advocate, Dies at 87
U Nu, the magnetic but star-crossed Prime Minister who led Burma through 12 of its first 15 years of independence and helped found the nonaligned nations movement, died yesterday at his home in Yangon, formerly Rangoon.
He was 87.
In announcing his death, his family did not disclose the cause, The Associated Press reported.


No. 1 UConn Rolls to 20th Victory
If ever the Connecticut Huskies faced a formula for defeat, this was it.
They brought the first No. 1 ranking in team history into the Bermuda Triangle by the Beltway, in the area where Massachusetts and North Carolina were knocked from similar pedestals in the previous 10 days.
They were facing a Georgetown team that had never lost consecutive home games to Big East opponents in the 14 seasons since the Hoyas moved to the suburbs.
Whether the antiseptic building was called the Capital Centre or USAir Arena, opponents called it something else.
The Huskies had spent themselves two days before, in an emotional victory at Syracuse that pushed them into a number one spotlight.


G.O.P. Backs Merging Foreign Policy Agencies
Republican leaders in Congress endorsed a plan today to consolidate three independent foreign policy agencies into the State Department, a proposal the White House has already rejected.
Under the proposal, the Agency for International Development, the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and the United States Information Agency would be taken over by the State Department.


AT LUNCH WITH: Elisabeth Maxwell; Questions Without Answers
SHE arrives, apologizing.
The driver took her first to the old La Goulue and she had to ask directions to the new La Goulue, and that is why she is late.
"I don't know the town," Elisabeth Maxwell says in her French-accented English.
"When I've come I've had to rely on other people's experience. Like a parcel, really, in the hands of my hosts."
As she sits, the women at the surrounding tables don't recognize her.
In fact, they look right through her.
The royal blue suit and watercolored silk scarf at the throat are on the wrong side of chic for the Upper East Side (where it's taupe or die), and her level of concentration is too grim even for the would-be business lunchers, male and female alike, who sneak admiring glances at their own profiles in the mirror as soon as their guests look down.


Loughery Fired, but Heat Wins
Heat 112, Bucks 99
Kevin Loughery was dismissed yesterday after three and a half years as head coach of the Miami Heat, just one day after the team's new owners took over.


Dishes to Warm A Winter's Night
LIKE a stagy socialite, winter made a flamboyant and fashionably late appearance this season in the New York City region.
Residents may not have been quite ready for the show, but chefs certainly were.
For months they have been turning out a flurry of stout, cold-weather dishes, only to find weather more suitable to gazpacho than game.
Finally, their time has come.
At the beguiling, five-month-old French-American restaurant Verbena, on Irving Place, Diane Forley, the chef and owner, has been sustaining customers with braised beef ribs cooked in dark beer and red wine, with horseradish dumplings.
It is the most popular dish on her menu.


Alfred Steinberg, 77; Wrote Biographies
Alfred Steinberg, a journalist and biographer, died on Feb. 6 in Silver Spring, Md.
He was 77.
The cause was a stroke, said his wife, Florence Schoenberg Steinberg.


State Supreme Court Reviews Child Support
Like many divorced fathers, James Pascale pays child support.
And like a growing number, he helps care for his children a few days a week.
Today, Mr.
Pascale's lawyer went before the New Jersey Supreme Court to argue that because such "nontraditional" arrangements are becoming more common, it is time for the state to re-examine the guidelines that determine child-support payments.


Sabres' Trade Makes Them a Dangerous Foe for Rangers
Five games in seven nights is a difficult assignment for any hockey team, but the Rangers will begin such a stretch in Buffalo Wednesday with an extra force against them.
They will be playing a Sabres team that has just completed a major trade, which can give a team momentum, at least in the short term.
"Hopefully, it won't be an immediate impact for Buffalo," said Adam Graves, the Ranger left wing, who will return to the lineup after missing one game with an infected elbow.


Burrell Is Added To Nynex Roster
The Nynex Corporation said yesterday that it had expanded its agency roster by naming Burrell Commmunications Group in Chicago as the first agency to handle advertising aimed at black consumers.
The billings were not disclosed.
Janet B. Keeler, Nynex managing director for marketing communications in New York, said Burrell was awarded the account after a monthlong review that also included "a few agencies" she declined to identify.
A television commercial is scheduled to begin running tomorrow, followed by a radio and direct-mail campaign.


Defendant Decides Not to Testify
Scott R. Johnson changed his mind yesterday.
The man accused of raping and killing Gail Shollar decided not to testify, after all.
The 25-year-old defendant admitted to the November 1992 carjacking, rape and killing in a taped statement to the police, but last week he told the judge that he had not killed Ms.
Shollar and wanted to testify in his own defense.


Few Turn Out in Protest
Journalists outnumbered protesters by more than 10 to 1 yesterday during a noontime demonstration against the Rutgers University president, Francis L. Lawrence, at the State House.


Tolstoy to Sporting News?
Maureen Copetto gave the Yankees and the Boston Red Sox a chance, and the San Francisco Giants and the Cincinnati Reds.
It's hardly her fault their personnel executives were a bit slow.
It's too late now.
As soon as the Atlanta Braves found out that Copetto had the top Russian catcher living in her house in Waterbury, Conn., her work as a freelance sports agent was done.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 10
Feb. 3
Feb. 11
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.4
7.0
Distillate production, daily
2.9
3.0
3.3
Gasoline stocks
219.6
218.4
228.8
Distillate stocks
130.6
135.7
113.4
Crude imports, daily
7.2
6.0
5.6
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.4
2.0
Crude stocks
318.5
323.7
331.3
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.7
Refinery utilization (%)
89.6
89.8
90.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL GROUP INC., New York, an insurance holding company, acquired a property and casualty insurance company in the Republic of South Africa from a consortium led by Rand Merchant Bank Ltd., for an undisclosed amount.
McDONALD'S CORP., Oak Brook, Ill., the fast-food chain, will open 15 restaurants in Poland this year at a cost of $20 million, and will spend $12 million to $15 million annually on its Polish expansion after 1995.


Clinton Land Mine Policy Falls Short
To the Editor:
While I commend the Clinton Administration for progress on nuclear disarmament, its land mine strategy is counterproductive to the ban you advocate (editorial, Feb. 8).


Fourth Mayoral Commissioner Resigns Under Fire
The commissioner of the city's community assistance unit, under investigation after allegations that he owes business debts and back taxes and holds two driver's licenses at the same time, resigned yesterday.
The resignation of Louis Carbonetti, a lifelong friend of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, came just one week after the Mayor raised his rank from director to commissioner of the agency, which serves as the Mayor's liaison to neighborhoods and ethnic communities.


CHRONICLE
Susan B. Anthony would have been 175 years old today, and LYNN SHERR, a correspondent for the ABC news program "20/20" and the author of a new book about the leader of the women's suffrage movement, has been celebrating her birthday at one party after another.
"Her birthday is not a national holiday as it should be, but nonetheless a number of people have managed to pay tribute to her and wish her a happy birthday," Ms.
Sherr said yesterday.
Her book "Failure Is Impossible: Susan B. Anthony in Her Own Words" is being published today by Times Books.


Terror Case Informer Is No Hero in His Homeland; Man's Actions in Capturing Accused Trade Center Bomber Draw Scorn in South Africa
In some communities a young man who turned in a man accused of being a terrorist and became eligible for a $2 million bounty would be pointed out as an example of virtue rewarded.
Among South African Muslims, however, the prevailing view of Istiayaak Parker, the Cape Town student who reportedly betrayed the man accused of masterminding the World Trade Center bombing, seems to be disbelief and scorn.


GIULIANI'S SPENDING PLAN: THE AGENCIES Schools and Hospitals Are Among the Hardest Hit in the Budget Slashing; EDUCATION
The Board of Education will suffer more than many other agency.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has proposed cutting $290 million, almost 9 percent of the $3.3 billion the city contributes to the school system's overall budget of $7.7 billion.
School officials say it is too early to say what the proposed cuts will mean to students and teachers, but the school system barely averted teacher layoffs this school year when it was ordered to cut a total of $540 million since last June.
Union officials said yesterday that further cuts would almost certainly lead to bigger class sizes, as the city's student population is growing by about 20,000 a year.


Student Aid Is a Prime Target of G.O.P. Cost-Cutters
As the new Republican-controlled Congress searches for ways to reduce Federal spending, the $32 billion-a-year Federal student aid programs, which affect nearly half the college students in the nation, are coming under scrutiny for cuts or elimination.
Although there are no formal proposals yet to reduce Federal aid for education, the Republicans in Congress are already including such cuts in their Contract With America.


'Gump' Leads the Pack in Academy Award Nominations
To the surprise of absolutely no one, "Forrest Gump," the hugely successful Paramount film about a simpleton's journey over 40 years, was the big winner today when the 67th annual Academy Awards nominations were announced.
The movie received 13 nominations, just one shy of the record set by "All About Eve" in 1950.
They included best picture, director (Robert Zemeckis), actor (Tom Hanks) and supporting actor (Gary Sinise).
But to the amazement of almost everyone, "Hoop Dreams," one of the most acclaimed documentaries in years, a film that several critics called the best of 1994, was not nominated for best picture or even best documentary.
It was nominated in one category, film editing.


Fight Nears on Limiting U.S. Activity Abroad
Digging in their heels against a main tenet of the Contract With America, President Clinton and his top national security advisers have ratcheted up their opposition to a bill that would significantly alter American foreign and military policy.
In a series of letters and public statements in recent days, senior Administration officials say the Republican-sponsored bill, the National Security Revitalization Act, would strain America's alliances, doom United Nations peacekeeping operations and hamper the White House's flexibility in dealing with foreign policy crises.


White House Is Counting on Month's Delay to Dull Criticism of Nominee for Surgeon General
The White House will not ask the Senate to begin hearings on the nomination of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. as Surgeon General until at least mid-March, a timetable that Administration officials believe will leave the nominee in better shape to confront his critics.
The four-week delay was described by White House aides today as necessary to let the Federal Bureau of Investigation complete its check into Dr.
Foster's background.
But they also made clear that they were not at all unhappy about such a waiting period.


Three Jet Starters in Draft
Three Jets starters -- including the high-priced running back Johnny Johnson -- will be exposed in the expansion draft today.
But Johnson, who could again become a productive runner under Coach Rich Kotite, has a $2.1 million salary for 1995.
It may be too much for the new teams, Carolina and Jacksonville, to bear.
The expansion teams will have to fit players under salary caps of about $37 million.


Legal Aid Lawyers Don't Delay Arraignments
To the Editor:
"New Charter for Legal Aid" (editorial, Feb. 6) hails the signing of contracts between the Legal Aid Society and New York City, and the society and its two unions.
To the extent it implies that the society's lawyers unnecessarily delay the arraignment of clients, it is in error.


Athena Neurosciences Makes Itself Heard in Fight Against Alzheimer's
It was a rare piece of good news from the beleaguered biotechnology industry.
Scientists around the world hailed the achievement as a landmark last week when researchers from tiny Athena Neurosciences Inc. and the pharmaceuticals giant Eli Lilly &amp; Company reported the development of a strain of laboratory mice containing the human gene associated with Alzheimer's disease.


Editors' Note
An article in Business Day on Monday discussed CBS's declining prime-time television ratings.
Unidentified current and former CBS executives cited causes that included decisions by Jeff Sagansky, who was the network's chief of programming until he joined the Sony Corporation last summer.
The executives asserted, for example, that Mr.
Sagansky chose prime-time programs for CBS with the objective of making the network No. 1 in total household ratings, even when those programs often had little appeal to the young-adult viewers sought by advertisers.


No Sympathy for Labor or Management on Capitol Hill
Baseball owners and players, threatening to log more time on Capitol Hill than Everett Dirksen and Strom Thurmond combined, put in another full day today as a Senate subcommittee heard renewed arguments as to whether baseball should retain its antitrust exemption.
But even as the four-hour hearing, under the chairmanship of Thurmond and held in the building named for Dirksen, unfolded, two things seemed evident.
First, the subcommittee on antitrust, monopolies and business seemed not at all close to sending to the full Senate a pair of bills designed to partly roll back the 73-year-old exemption so coveted by club owners and so vilified by striking players.


Trail Plans Make Headway
A bicycle and pedestrian trail along the west bank of the Saddle River has long been one of the jewels of the Bergen County parks system, following the river as it winds its way from Ridgewood to Rochelle Park.
But there has been a gap nearly a mile long in the 6.5-mile trail where Route 4 and Paramus Road cross overhead, forcing nature lovers to detour onto busy roads.


Giants Wanted Simms as Coach
While the Giants made it official yesterday that the former quarterback Steve DeBerg, 41, will join the staff to help coach the quarterbacks, there is an interesting aside to the story.
The job was first offered to the former Giants quarterback Phil Simms.
According to several people with knowledge of the situation, the Giants wanted Simms to become the co-quarterbacks coach with the offensive coordinator, George Henshaw.
But Simms, saying he wasn't ready to put in the late-night study hours so soon after retiring, turned it down.
Also, the money he would have been made as an assistant couldn't compare with what he is being paid as an analyst with ESPN.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $60 million notes due in 1998 through Chase Securities.
The notes are noncallable, carry an interest rate of 7.31 percent and are priced at par.


St. John's Kaiser Retiring
JACK KAISER, vice president and director of athletics at St.
John's for the last 22 years, announced yesterday that he would retire on June 30, ending a 42-year association with the university as a student-athlete, coach and administrator.
"I've been blessed with good health, and I feel like I'm 28 instead of 68," said Kaiser.
"But with the Big East Conference expanding next year and radio and television heading into a new era, maybe it's time to bring in a person with a different viewpoint."


Vice President Tours Camden


A French Contralto's American Debut
Nathalie Stutzmann's recital on Monday evening was her American debut, but a handful of recordings have won the French contralto a following here.
There were, in any case, more listeners interested in hearing her than could be shoehorned into the Walter Reade Theater, and half an hour before the sold-out concert there were several dozen eager ticket-seekers outside the theater.
In the Mozart songs that opened the program, Ms.
Stutzmann's voice seemed surprisingly small.
But there are small voices and small voices, and Ms.
Stutzmann's was the sort that drew a listener toward it.
There was a real elegance in her Mozart, and occasionally a touch of drama.
And in songs by Schumann, Mahler, Debussy and Poulenc, she produced a sound with a dark inner glow and a lovely, silken texture in her middle and upper ranges.
Only the very lowest reaches of her voice sounded slightly forced.


Kennedy Center Expands Ballet Project
The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts has extended its three-year Ballet Commissioning Project to include additional companies.
The Miami Ballet is to present a new work in April and the center is to commission other works for American Ballet Theater, Dance Theater of Harlem and the Joffrey Ballet.


Three Favorites Draw Outside Post Positions
The three top choices drew outside post positions today when a field of 12 was named for Saturday's Fountain of Youth Stakes, the second race in Gulfstream's three-race series for Kentucky Derby horses.
Thunder Gulch, who was scheduled to arrive Friday from California with his trainer, D. Wayne Lukas, drew the No. 9 gate and was quoted at 4-1 for Saturday's $200,000 race, at a mile and a sixteenth.
Next to him will be the East Coast star Jambalaya Jazz, the favorite at 3-1.
And another slot over, on the extreme outside, will be Suave Prospect, one of Nick Zito's herd of candidates for Kentucky, at 5-1.


Well Cushioned On Two Wheels
THE new generation of bicycles may offer evidence of a swords-to-plowshares conversion of technology.
The latest thing is a full suspension, with shock absorbers front and rear, in a lightweight mountain bike.
Such models have now become relatively affordable (only expensive as opposed to staggeringly expensive).
Trek's Y-22, inset, is $1,800 and has a frame made of carbon fiber first developed for the aerospace industry.
Cannondale's Super-V series -- the basic model, top, is $1,400 -- is made of fat but lightweight aluminum tubing originally designed by an engineer who worked on Trident submarines.


Giuliani Cuts Raise Issue Of City's Soul
In explaining his painfully austere vision of municipal life this week, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said it was time New York became more like other cities, scaling back its traditionally generous services to something more like an American norm.
But as New Yorkers confronted his spending plan yesterday, even those who found something attractive about those cities wondered whether the price of resemblance was too high.
City residents interviewed yesterday generally agreed with the Mayor's assertion that New York had been far too profligate for too long.
But they also worried that by cutting government so deeply, Mr.
Giuliani may have placed in jeopardy the city's soul, the urban largesse that has defined New York and made it the world's destination.


Russians Ask if Illness Is Eroding Yeltsin's Political Judgment
As President Boris N. Yeltsin prepares to go before a joint meeting of Parliament on Thursday to ask the country "to believe in him again," as one newspaper put it, there are muted but growing concerns about his health.
Alarm bells went off last month when the Central Intelligence Agency alleged that Mr.
Yeltsin has a worsening problem with alcohol.
They rang louder last weekend when video footage of Mr.
Yeltsin at a meeting in Almaty, the Kazakh capital, showed him walking unevenly, grabbing an aide for support; he also had difficulty speaking.


Tiger, Tiger Burning Bright, You Are Still Divine
SPELL OF THE TIGER The Man-Eaters of Sundarbans  By Sy Montgomery  Illustrated. 230 pages.
Houghton Mifflin. $22.95.
"The tiger's future looks so bleak that some people have already given up on it," writes Sy Montgomery in her fascinating new book, "Spell of the Tiger: The Man-Eaters of Sundarbans." She continues, "Today tigers are slaughtered for parts previous poachers left behind: the whiskers, sinews, penis, blood and, especially, bone, all of which are sold to supply a seemingly bottomless market for so-called elixirs."


Accounts
*
Kinko's Service Corp., Ventura, Calif., to Hal Riney &amp; Partners/ Heartland, Chicago, to handle its account, previously at Stein Robaire Helm, Santa Monica, Calif.
Billings were estimated at $12 million. *
Yamaha Motor Corp., Cypress, Calif., to Ground Zero, Venice, Calif., to handle its water vehicles division account, previously at Hoffman York &amp; Compton, Milwaukee.
Billings were estimated at $4 million to $5 million.


CHRONICLE
The character JEFFREY DEMUNN plays in the new HBO movie "Citizen X" makes Hannibal Lecter seem lovable.
Mr.
DeMunn portrays Andrei Chikatilo, who was executed in Russia last February after a 12-year murder spree in which he killed 52 boys, girls and young women.
The murders were unusually vicious, involving in many cases rape and cannibalism.
The film is based on one of several books about the case and will be shown on Feb. 25.
Mr.
DeMunn described how he transformed himself into Mr.
Chikatilo during filming in Hungary last fall.


Emilio Collado, a Creator of the World Money System, Dies at 84
Emilio Gabriel Collado, an economist and oil company executive who helped design the international post-World War II monetary system and served as America's first executive director of the World Bank, died at the Jupiter Medical Center in Jupiter, Fla., on Feb. 9.
A resident of Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., since 1993, he was 84.
Mr. Collado died of heart failure, said his wife, Maria.


Oldenburg Revisited
FOOTLONG baked potatoes made of burlap, gigantic vinyl vacuum cleaners, doorway-size Dacron-stuffed light switches: in giving formal significance and architectural scale to simple objects from the home, Claes Oldenburg explores the language of domesticity and toys with the contrast of hard and soft materials.
Now much of that work has been collected in "Claes Oldenburg: An Anthology," which opened Sunday at the East Building of the National Gallery of Art in Washington.
The exhibition will travel to Los Angeles and New York, where it will open at the Guggenheim Museum on Oct. 7, and then on to Bonn and London.


To One Mets Hopeful, Promotion Is a Hardship
Ricky Otero has never been a major league player.
Last season, he played Class AA ball for the Mets in Binghamton, N.Y., and earned the standard salary -- $1,600 a month.
This season, he is expected to move up to the Class AAA level, and could start in center field for the Norfolk (Va.) Tides.
Normally, Otero would be preparing to report to the Mets' minor league camp this week; in fact, he was at the minor league facility on Monday, hitting balls in the cage, just as he has done five days a week since moving here in the fall.
But because of a necessary paper move made by the Mets this winter, Otero is about to become a quiet casualty of the baseball strike.


U.N. Helps Rwandan Refugees to Return
To the Editor:
Alain Destexhe of Doctors Without Borders says (Op-Ed, Feb. 9) that aid agencies assisting Rwandese refugees are caught in a "lose-lose" situation in which they are forced to continue being "reluctant accomplices" of the former Hutu leaders responsible for the genocide in Rwanda last April or to pull out, leaving in the hands of the killers the majority who fled from fear of persecution and revenge back home.


Episcopal Church Suspects Financial Irregularities
After a tumultuous month within the Episcopal Church, in which church officials disclosed past sexual improprieties by a bishop who had committed suicide and 10 bishops sought to bring a colleague to trial for ordaining a homosexual, the church finds itself facing yet another trauma: accusations that its former treasurer may have misused church funds.
In a statement to the church staff yesterday, the church's top official, Presiding Bishop Edmond L. Browning, said "evidence of certain irregularities" had been discovered in the treasurer's office after the resignation of the treasurer, Ellen Cooke, on Jan. 31.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK TO RESTORE DEATH PENALTY Governor Pataki and state legislative leaders announced agreement on legislation that would restore the death penalty, making New York the 38th state to revive capital punishment.
A1.
The agreement ultimately may be judged by its scope, its protections against inequity and inadequate defense, and its cost.
B4.


A-Arms in the Mideast: U.S. Tailors Its Appeals
Even though Israel has refused to sign the worldwide treaty limiting nuclear arms, the Administration is largely ignoring Israel's position and is pressing Egypt to vote for an indefinite extension of the treaty.
Egypt says it will oppose extending the treaty unless Israel signs it.


Parke Dickey, 85, Petroleum Geologist
Parke Atherton Dickey, a petroleum geologist and retired educator, died on Feb. 3 at his home in Haverford, Pa.
He was 85.
He had been in declining health for several years, said a son, Thomas M. Dickey of Lincoln University, Pa.


Let's Just Look at Who Wants U.S. Leadership
To the Editor:
Re "Look Who Wants U.S. as a Leader" (Week in Review, Feb. 12):


Corrections
The continuation of a front-page article in Business Day yesterday, about the ITT Corporation's sale of three businesses to the GE Capital Corporation, was omitted from some copies.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


House Panel Takes Step 1 In Plan to Revamp Welfare
A Congressional subcommittee approved sweeping legislation today to overhaul the nation's welfare programs as Republicans and Democrats angrily accused each other of perpetuating poverty.
The action today was the first big step by the new Congress to pare back the social welfare programs established over 60 years.


Cool Weather, Hot Trumpet


Index Shows A Slight Rise For Inflation
A whiff of inflation hit consumers in January just as the industrial economy was clearly starting to slow down from its breakneck 1994 pace, Government reports showed today.
Consumer prices climbed three-tenths of 1 percent, the most since summer, as housing costs accelerated, and clothing, air fares and home furnishings turned up after prolonged declines.


Rangers, at .500, Appear to Be Picking Up Steam
Patient and opportunistic, the Rangers pounced on the Sabres in the final five minutes tonight to escape with a 2-1 victory that raised their record to .500.
That won't raise any eyebrows, but there are optimistic factors to consider as the Stanley Cup champions begin the second quarter of this lockout-shortened season.


Kodak Plans New Cameras That Will Be All-Electronic
The Eastman Kodak Company is planning to produce all-electronic cameras costing $200 to $300 that may bypass photofinishers by printing images on printers costing about $300.
"I think it is inevitable," George M. C. Fisher, the chairman of Eastman Kodak, said in an interview yesterday.
"We do not know exactly when, but the day will come."


Classical Isn't Elitist
To The Home Section:
While I am pleased to see an article about the recent classical work of architects  [ "Architecture's Young Old Fogies," Feb. 9 ] , I was disappointed that it portrays the growing number of people who are practicing classical architecture as elitist white males.


Clinton Stirs Protest Over Archivist Post
Word that the White House is considering a former Kansas governor as National Archivist has prompted protests from historians and archivists who say the candidate, John W. Carlin, lacks the necessary credentials.
They also say choosing Mr.
Carlin, who helped in the 1992 Clinton campaign, could politicize the job.
White House officials, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said today that Mr.
Carlin was among the top choices to head the National Archives and Records Administration.
In a letter to Mr.
Clinton the American Historical Association said Mr.
Carlin lacked "the scholarly and professional qualifications required by law" for the job.
The Organization of American Historians also opposes Mr.
Carlin.


Michael Shall, 45, American Expert on Origami
Michael Shall, a leading American expert in origami, the popular Japanese art of paper folding, died on Feb. 9 at New York University Medical Center.
He was 45 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said a brother, David Shall, of Harrisburg, Pa.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.25
5.82
3.34
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.72
5.77
3.26
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.00
6.06
3.41
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.42
7.48
5.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.55
7.59
6.45
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.43
8.47
7.29
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.49
6.53
5.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


McMurdo Station; Navy's Days of Glory in Antarctica Dwindle Down
Little by little the United States Navy is fading away in Antarctica, and with its passing, venerable polar traditions as old as the human presence on this continent are dying out.
Some of the changes -- the acceptance of women, the advent of a civilian administration less tied to military traditions and the supposedly greater efficiency of the new regime, among others -- have been hailed as positive.
But many Navy men and women lament the passing of an era and the shift to reliance on civilians.


The Neediest Cases; Helping Troubled Teen-Agers Learn to Trust Again
The steep narrow staircase leads to a tiny office over a shoe store, where anger and tears are the major topics of conversation.
A small group of 16- and 17-year-olds sits closely, looking inquisitively at their group leader and at one another, searching for answers and words of support.
Chris Shanky, a case worker at the Midwood Adolescent Project in Brooklyn, leads the adolescent support group, made up of teen-agers from schools in the area, every week.
His goal, he said, is to create an environment where the participants can trust one another.


U.S. Sets Rules on Au Pairs
The Clinton Administration issued new regulations today for the nation's 10,000 foreign in-home child-care workers that set new standards for those who care for children under 2 years old and bar them from caring for infants under 3 months.
The rules also require families employing the au pairs to pay them a weekly stipend of $115, up from the current $100 but considerably less than the $155 the Administration proposed in its initial revision of the rules in December.


Gingrich Explores New Way To Limit Terms in Congress
Recognizing that a Constitutional amendment to limit the terms of members of Congress has little chance of passing, Speaker Newt Gingrich is exploring an alternative -- a statute to allow states to set their own term limits -- that may fare better.
Mr.
Gingrich, a Georgia Republican, met on Tuesday with grass-roots proponents of term limits to discuss the new approach.
He would still allow votes on the amendment, since such votes were promised in the Republicans' Contract With America, his spokesman said.


Alberto Burri, Prominent Artist Of Postwar Italy, Is Dead at 79
Alberto Burri, the Italian artist whose abstractions in burlap, plastic, corroded metal and charred wood made him one of the pioneers of postwar European art, died on Monday at Pasteur Hospital in Nice, France.
He was 79.
The cause was respiratory failure, the Italian news agency ANSA reported.
Mr.
Burri suffered from emphysema.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  IRAQ IS SAID TO BREAK EMBARGO  Iraq set up a secret system to bypass United Nations sanctions barring it from exporting oil, industry officials said.
They said the sales generated as much as $800 million for Iraq's crippled economy.
A1


Serbia Has Earned No Reward
The five-power negotiating group on Bosnia, which includes the United States, is offering to suspend all remaining United Nations economic sanctions on Serbia.
In return, it asks Belgrade to recognize the independence of Bosnia and Croatia and cut off supplies to rebel Serbian armies in both countries.
That might be a reasonable proposal if Serbia's President, Slobodan Milosevic, had a record of honoring his commitments, or if the five-power group had a record of insisting on compliance with its deals.
Neither is true.


German Publisher Drops Book on Postwar Camps for Nazis
After complaints by a leading literary critic and other figures, a German publisher has ordered the withdrawal and destruction of the German-language version of a book asserting that Jews ran internment camps for Germans in post-war Poland.
The book, "Eye for an Eye" by John Sack, had been labeled "anti-Semitic fodder" in a review by one of Germany's leading literary critics, Eike Geisel.
News of its impending publication stirred charges that the book would be exploited by neo-Nazis likening the treatment of Germans to the killing of six million Jews.


Dent Released by 49ers
Defensive end RICHARD DENT, sidelined for most of the 1994 season after tearing knee ligaments, was released by the San Francisco 49ers.
Dent, 34, would have earned $1.65 million this year, and the 49ers are running up against the salary cap, said DWIGHT CLARK, the team's vice president and director of football operations.


Risky, Yes, but Jets Get Back Their Man
The Jets gambled and won yesterday when they made Johnny Johnson, their No. 1 running back, available in the National Football League expansion draft.
The team also got away with dangling safety Brian Washington, who, like Johnson, is a former team most valuable player.


New Telephone Scam: 'Hijacked' Accounts
DO you know which long-distance telephone company provides service to your home?
Gerard and Donna Moreno of Manhattan thought they did: AT&amp;T.
But in late December Mrs.
Moreno noticed that long-distance calls were taking up to 45 seconds to go through, and sometimes when she tried to call her mother in Boca Raton, Fla., all she heard were "horrendous beeps."
So Mrs.
Moreno called Nynex to complain and was in turn connected to AT&amp;T.
"AT&amp;T turned around and said, 'You are not a subscriber,' " Mr.
Moreno said.


Economic Scene; Getting credit for deficit-cutting, or the onus for not doing it.
PRESIDENT CLINTON'S 1996 budget, disclosed last week to a chorus of sighs and worse, seems destined to be the least-read best seller since "The Bell Curve."
But before all 1,100 pages are erased from the nation's memory banks, they are surely worth one quick look.
For while this budget has been dismissed as a political place marker, it is also the opening gambit in what promises to be a battle over who gets credit for cutting the deficit -- or, more likely, the onus for not cutting it.


Fulbright's Legacy
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 10 obituary of former Senator J. William Fulbright listed my name as a Fulbright Scholar.
Not true; like Senator Fulbright I was a Rhodes Scholar.
We both served in Congress, overlapping some 15 years, and I admired him greatly, especially for his vision in creating the scholarships that bear his name.


Washington Bond Rating Falls, Adding to City's Fiscal Woes
Expressing serious doubt that city leaders can balance the municipal budget in the current fiscal year, Moody's Investors Service, a Wall Street credit rating firm, today lowered Washington's rating to junk bond status.
The decision by Moody's to drop the city's rating on about $1 billion in general obligation bonds to below investment-grade levels followed similar action on Tuesday by Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, which lowered the District of Columbia's rating to one level above junk bond status.


Women's Crew Beats Conner
Good fortune on the America's Cup race course has become an opening-day habit for the America
team in the defenders' trial series.
The all-women's team defeated Dennis Conner and his Stars &amp; Stripes team by 1 minute 26 seconds today, the opening day of Round-Robin 3 in the Citizen Cup defenders' trials.
The women also won their first race in Round 1, defeating Stars &amp; Stripes by 1:09, and the opening race in Round 2, beating Young America by 0:14.
The team has lost its eight other trial races.


CHRONICLE
Famous Amos is coming to town.
But WALLY AMOS doesn't use that name much anymore, and therein lies the sad tale that he will relate to an audience on Wednesday at the Barnes &amp; Noble bookstore on Fifth Avenue at 48th Street.
Mr.
Amos, who made his name in chocolate-chip cookies almost 20 years ago, gradually lost control of his company in the mid-1980's through poor management, he said yesterday.
The company was subsequently sold four times.


Conservatives Forge New Strategy To Challenge Affirmative Action
An effort by two San Francisco-area academics to eliminate affirmative-action programs in California has set off a debate over civil rights that is rapidly spreading across the country and threatens to be one of the most divisive national dialogues in years.
The two professors, Glynn Custred and Thomas Wood, who describe themselves as "staunch conservatives," want the issue of affirmative action put to a popular vote in California sometime next year.
It is an approach that poll takers and political analysts already say has a good chance of overturning the state's affirmative-action laws.


Losses Seen At Morrison Knudsen
Only days after the tumultuous resignation of its high-profile chief executive, the Morrison Knudsen Corporation is expected to announce that it lost about $150 million in the fourth quarter of last year and may face a prolonged period of financial distress, people close to the company said today.
The loss report, expected as soon as Thursday, will be an estimate, with the final results for the last three months of last year to be announced in several weeks, company officials said.


Nelson in Black Tie, With Strings
Willie Nelson's Valentine's Day concert at the Beacon Theater may be the only time New Yorkers will ever see the Texan singer and songwriter dressed in black tie.
The occasion was a special performance in which the 61-year-old country music legend sang selections from his recent album, "Healing Hands of Time" (Liberty).
This lushly produced collection of ballads, released last fall, is the first album Mr.
Nelson has recorded with a string section.
Strumming his guitar in front of a full orchestra at the Beacon on Tuesday evening, the singer looked as uncomfortable in his formal get-up as he sounded performing drastically slowed-up and sweetened versions of several of his most famous songs.


Occasional Tables For Any Occasion
WHETHER used as a place to rest a magazine, a cup of tea or a remote control, stylish, affordable occasional tables are a necessity of life that can be hard to find.
A New York furniture designer, Chad Jacobs, has made a line of two end tables and a coffee table with sturdy wire bases in charcoal gray enamel.


Mexican Rebels Link Talks to Army Pullout
In the first response to the Government's call to renew peace negotiations in Chiapas, an Indian leader said today that the Zapatista rebels were willing to talk on the condition the Mexican Army withdraws from more than a dozen villages that it has occupied since Friday.
In a meeting today with reporters, the Indian leader who calls herself Major Ana Maria said the Government would also have to drop charges against the rebel leader Subcommander Marcos and other Zapatistas.


The Once And Future Brush
THE rendezvous site was perfect: the men's room at the Paramount Hotel on West 46th Street.
Finally, the two would meet again face to face: Philippe Starck, the French superstar designer, and Alan J. Heller, an American housewares manufacturer.


Riley's Tough Drills Just Got Tougher
It was during one of Pat Riley's nine mostly successful coaching seasons with the Los Angeles Lakers.
Magic Johnson approached him and said, in essence, that the Lakers were winning, but they weren't having fun doing it.
Johnson suggested that Riley ease up.
So the next day, midway through practice, Riley stopped all activity, pulled out a chair and asked everyone to gather around.


I.O.C. Alters Publicity Staff
In an unusually public move, the International Olympic Committee said yesterday that it had dismissed its high-profile public relations director and shuffled its media and publications departments.
The changes included the dismissal of ANDREW NAPIER, hired less than two years ago to direct publicity for the committee, and the reassignment of MICHELE VERDIER, the I.O.C. spokeswoman for the last decade and the director of information for most of that time.


Douglas Steere, 93, Author, Professor And Quaker Leader
Douglas V. Steere, an author and philosophy professor at Haverford College from 1928 to 1964 who helped organize Quaker relief efforts in Finland, Norway and Poland after World War II, died on Feb. 6 at his residence in the Quadrangle, a retirement community in Haverford, Pa.
He was 93.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, said his wife, Dorothy Mac Eachron Steere.


A Blues-Dipped Voice That Celebrates the Fleshly
There are few more lascivious sounds in popular music than the voice of Johnny (Guitar) Watson.
When he sings "Booty Ooty" or "Hot Little Mama," it isn't just come hither he's singing.
It is something much more joyous, and completely unprintable.
The sound is the calling card of the Gangster of Love (his nickname, taken from the song of the same name), and a celebration of music's ability to convey carnality.
Mr.
Watson isn't a bad guitarist either.
Frank Zappa, who used the 60-year-old Mr.
Watson on several recordings, once described his guitar sound as "an icepick to the forehead," and credited Mr.
Watson's solo on the 1957 recording of "Three Hours Past Midnight" as the reason he started playing guitar.


Sensitivity Over an Image Sinks a Women's Tennis Sponsor Deal
Women's professional tennis, which has been without a sponsor for the past year after prematurely ending its contractual relationship with the Philip Morris Corporation, has officially turned down an offer from Tambrands, the manufacturer of Tampax tampons, to become the sport's global sponsor.
The decision was an emotional one, prompting waves of debate in a sport already perceived as a questionable investment because of its internal factions and unpredictable product base: a cache of top players whose marketability remains unproven.


Cooperstown Calling Wolff To the Broadcasters' Wing
BOB WOLFF, the onetime voice of the Washington Senators and the former play-by-play announcer of the Rangers and the Knicks, has been voted the Ford C. Frick Award, placing him in the Baseball Hall of Fame's wing for broadcasters and writers.
He will be inducted on July 30 in Cooperstown, N.Y.
Wolff was told Monday of the vote.
"I woke up Tuesday morning hoping they hadn't done a recount," said Wolff, who began in radio at Duke in 1939.


A Second Chance to Get to First Base
There was a bartender, a liquor salesman, a shoe salesman, an office-equipment salesman, two baseball coaches, two bullpen catchers and a batch of cautious minor leaguers.
Instantly, many inched closer to being players in today's tainted version of major league baseball by reporting to spring training as part of the Yankees' replacement team.
The setting was often surreal as 27 players underwent physicals, answered questions about their medical history and were fitted for uniforms in preparation for the first workouts on Thursday.
There was pitcher Pat Russo dressing at Don Mattingly's locker.
There was pitcher Frank Eufemia wearing Mike Pagliarulo's old pants.
There was catcher Juan Velazquez joyfully exchanging his ragged Angels cap, which he had turned backward, for a fresh Yankees cap.


Low-Cost Medication Bill Signed
Elderly citizens worried about their budgets have a little less to worry about today.Governor Whitman has signed a law to preserve low-cost prescription drugs for hundreds of people who lost their eligibility Jan. 1 because Social Security was paying them more.


Police Leaders Are Disturbed by G.O.P. Crime Bill
Officer John Bartholomew was sitting at his desk in this city's Precinct Three today, laboriously entering arrest records into his own personal computer.
The Buffalo Police Department has been too financially pressed to buy computers or to hire civilian assistants to do data processing.
Gil Kerlikowske, the Police Commissioner, thought help was finally on its way when President Clinton's crime bill passed last fall, since it allocated $8.8 billion over five years for hiring 100,000 police officers -- seed money for community policing programs across the nation.
After months of planning, Mr.
Kerlikowske was about to apply for $1 million to replace Officer Bartholomew with a secretary and put him and 19 other officers on the street walking beats.


Loughery Feels Betrayed
KEVIN LOUGHERY is upset with ALVIN GENTRY, whom he hired as an assistant coach with the Miami Heat and who replaced Loughery as head coach on Tuesday.
"Things have developed over the last year, have developed over the last week or so, that really surprised me," Loughery, who was dismissed Tuesday by the Heat's new ownership, told WTVJ-TV in Miami last night.
"I think the biggest trait you can have as an assistant coach is loyalty, and I think Alvin failed in that area."


Wellpoint Health Networks
Shares of Wellpoint Health Networks rose sharply yesterday after The Wall Street Journal reported that as many as five potential buyers were studying the health maintenance organization.


Men and Women Use Brain Differently, Study Discovers
Using a powerful new method for glimpsing the brain in action, researchers have found the first definitive evidence that men and women use their brains differently.
The investigators, who were seeking the basis of reading disorders, asked what areas of the brain were used by normal readers in the first step in the process of sounding out words.
To their astonishment, they discovered that men use a minute area in the left side of the brain while women use areas in both sides of the brain.


End the Dodging on Ron Brown
Confronted with suspicious-looking financial dealings by one of his highest-profile Cabinet officers, President Clinton has responded with a debatable non sequitur.
Ron Brown, he has said, has "been a great Commerce Secretary."
Yet, as Mr.
Clinton should have learned at considerable pain, slippery language is no way to treat a serious ethics question.
Whether or not Mr.
Brown engaged in shady practices, the Presidential brush-off suggests that the Administration thinks it has something to hide.
Abner Mikva, the White House counsel, met with Mr.
Brown's attorney but, oddly, did not press for a detailed explanation.
Clearly, Mr.
Mikva has a duty to dig harder for the facts and the President has an obligation to come forward with a thorough public accounting.


Arafat Critic Is Detained In Gaza
The Palestinian police detained a prominent human rights lawyer in Gaza today after he criticized a decision by Yasir Arafat to set up a military court to try people suspected of security offenses.
The lawyer, Raji Sourani, was held for about 16 hours, questioned, and then released.
Mr.
Sourani is the director of the Gaza Center for Rights and Law, an affiliate of the International Commission of Jurists in Geneva.


China's Known Brands Are Most Often Japanese
American companies eager to win allegiance from China's 1.2 billion people are fighting an uphill battle, according to a comprehensive new poll of consumer attitudes on the Chinese mainland that was released yesterday.
Six of the top 10 foreign brands identified by the survey's respondents were Japanese, even though those surveyed were asked to pick from a list containing twice as many American as Japanese names.
Four of the Japanese brands -- Panasonic, Hitachi, Toshiba and Toyota -- were also the ones the respondents said they held in highest regard.


Tommy Valando, Broadway Show Backer, 72
Tommy Valando, a music publisher and backer of Broadway musicals who also became a major figure in horse racing, died on Tuesday at St.
Mary's Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 72 and had homes in Palm Beach and Greenwich, Conn.
His wife, Elizabeth, said the cause was complications of pneumonia.
He was admitted to the hospital two weeks ago.


Actress Nudges Women in Poland to Wake Up
When she heard a debate on her car radio about whether mothers should buy toy cars or dolls for their daughters, Krystyna Janda, the cerebral but witty Polish actress, knew the time was finally right in her conservative country for theater about contemporary women.
"I thought, 'This argument is so absurd, I should do something about real feminism,'" Ms.
Janda said, as she prepared in her dressing room for her performance of "La Femme Rompue," Simone de Beauvoir's play about a cultured French woman, Monique, who is deserted by her husband for another woman.


Challenge to French Front-Runner Is Stronger Than Expected
France's presidential election campaign got into high gear this week with the presumed front-runner, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, facing a stronger challenge than expected from the candidate of the Socialist Party.
Lionel Jospin, the candidate to succeed his fellow Socialist, President Francois Mitterrand, could win as much as 23 percent of the vote, a new public opinion poll predicted.


When Government Goes on Autopilot
Americans have looked longingly at California for all sorts of reasons: for the climate, for the natural beauty, even, at one time, for our unmatched system of higher education.
But as far as can be determined, of late no American has lusted for our contorted government structure, our declining public services or our penchant for fiscal gridlock.
So why is the new Congress rushing so resolutely to copy the mess California has created for itself?
At the core of California's mess is a constitutional provision (one of two in the nation, and unique among the major states) that requires a two-thirds majority in each house of the Legislature to approve the state budget, any appropriation and any tax increase.


How a Computer Sleuth Traced a Digital Trail
It takes a computer hacker to catch one.
And if, as Federal authorities contend, the 31-year-old computer outlaw Kevin D. Mitnick is the person behind a recent spree of break-ins to hundreds of corporate, university and personal computers on the global Internet, his biggest mistake was raising the interest and ire of Tsutomu Shimomura.


Michael Shall, 45, American Expert on Origami
Michael Shall, a leading American expert in origami, the popular Japanese art of paper folding, died on Feb. 9 at New York University Medical Center.
He was 45 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said a brother, David Shall, of Harrisburg, Pa.


Mending Fences, Giuliani Shifts Stance on U.S. Crime Bill
Last year, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York City campaigned hard for the Democrats' crime bill, stumping alongside President Clinton and lending the shield of his considerable conservative credentials to proponents of a ban on assault weapons.
But now the political universe has shifted, with the Republican Mayor struggling to mend fences within his own party.
And he has been largely silent and even cautiously supportive, as the legislation he helped write is being dismantled.


Events: History as Seen In Interiors and Artifacts
World War II Theme  Piers 88, 90 and 92, 12th Avenue between 48th and 55th streets; (212) 685-4641.
An antiques and collectibles show, highlighting jewelry, clothing, posters and postcards from the World War II era, starts Saturday and Sunday.
There will also be "trench art," items made by soldiers from shell casings and bullets, like cigarette lighters and picture frames.
The show will continue on Feb. 25 and 26.
Open Saturdays, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sundays, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Admission, $10.


Many Democrats Accuse Clinton of Incompetence
Already smarting from an election debacle for which many blame President Clinton, Democrats on Capitol Hill and across the country have reacted angrily to what they see as White House bungling on the nomination of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. as Surgeon General.
It is not Dr.
Foster's record of having performed a substantial number of abortions that has caused the most damage, but the seeming inability of Mr.
Clinton's aides, not for the first time, to handle a nomination cleanly and quickly, and thus to keep the focus on experience, temperament and the capacity to serve effectively.


The 'Big Bang' Approach
When Gov.
John G. Rowland delivered his budget address today, it was the culmination of an intricate effort to control the coverage of his proposals and to limit the immediate response from opponents.
David Boomer, a former Rowland Congressional aide who is now a top aide in the Republican-controlled State Senate, described a "big bang theory." Rather than reveal new initiatives piecemeal, he said, Mr.
Rowland wanted to save all his proposals for today when he presented the budget in its entirety.


Anderson Taking Care of Business for Nets
Kenny Anderson is on a Derrick Coleman-like crusade.
He wants to redefine himself, make people remember the old Anderson, who passed and scored and never said a foul word about the franchise.
"I want to put everything else behind and move on," Anderson said today after practice at Fairleigh Dickinson University.
"We've got to worry about playing, and that's it."


Stream of Cubans Highlights Restiveness in Cayman Refugee Camp
They looked healthy; they carried duffel bags; some wore earrings and necklaces.
They certainly did not fit the ragged image people like Muriel DeLuca form when they think of the Cuban refugees who come to Florida's shores by raft and boat.
"They seemed very clean shaven," said Ms.
DeLuca, a resident of South Venice on Florida's west coast who ran into a group of refugees shortly before 8 A.M.
Tuesday during her daily eight-mile walk on the beach.
"They had jewelry. They didn't look like they were lower-class. All they kept doing was smiling and nodding their heads. They were just so happy to be here."


Keeping Vow, in Deed Not Magnitude
In the modest tax cut proposals announced during his budget presentation to the General Assembly today, Gov.
John G. Rowland fell short of the dramatic oratory of his gubernatorial campaign.
A big reason the cuts didn't approach the revolutionary levels some residents were expecting is Connecticut's economy, which has still not come back to life.
Politically, Mr.
Rowland is already compared regularly with other Republican governors in the Northeast, from Christine Todd Whitman in New Jersey to George E. Pataki in New York to William F. Weld in Massachusetts, all of whom have promised or succeeded in pushing through cuts in taxes and spending.


New Afghan Force Takes Hold, Turning to Peace
After a decade of a Soviet military occupation and five more years of ruthless civil war, Afghanistan has taken a sudden and startling turn toward peace.
In a military campaign that has lasted barely four months, a new force of professed Islamic purists and Afghan patriots known as the Taliban, many of whom were religious students until they took up arms last fall, has taken control of more than 40 percent of the country.


Chancellor Says Pataki Cuts Will Raise Tuition and Force Layoffs of 1,000 Professors
The City University of New York will have to raise tuition by $1,000 a student and lay off more than 1,000 full-time professors, a quarter of the full-time force, if the state budget cuts proposed by Gov.
George E. Pataki are enacted, CUNY Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds intends to tell Albany legislators at a budget hearing today.
Faculty leaders and educators say the system faces the worst financial crisis since the city's fiscal crisis 20 years ago, when the City University was forced to start charging tuition.
The layoffs would be the first since 1992, when two dozen people were dismissed because of budget problems.


What Readiness to Fight Two Wars Means
To the Editor:
"The Two-War Fantasy" (editorial, Feb. 5) suggests that the United States would never face two major regional conflicts at once.
In fact, twice last year President Clinton was prepared to commit troops against well-armed adversaries to protect foreign policy goals.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about the Phillips family's sale of its 11 percent stake in the Phillips-Van Heusen Corporation misstated the estimated value.
Based on Monday's closing price of $16.50, the stake would appear to have been worth more than $45 million, not $450 million.


No Headline
"Hello, Tsutomu. I respect your skills." -- KEVIN D. MITNICK, meeting the computer expert who tracked him down.  [ A1:2. ]


Don't Count on the States
The fate of the balanced-budget amendment is likely to be determined over the next few days as wavering Democratic senators make up their minds.
If any senators are tempted to hold their noses and vote for the amendment in the belief that enough states will later block ratification, they may be recklessly misguided.
The amendment would require the approval of 38 of the 50 states, meaning any 13 could block it.
Many experts predicted the amendment would have a tough time gaining approval once states realized the impact on their economies of a trillion-dollar Federal cutback.
But the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a liberal research group, has made a preliminary assessment.
Only five states appear firmly opposed to the amendment.
With hard work, its opponents might take nine more states.
An additional nine are possible but improbable opponents.
That means rejection by the states is far from assured.


Saying Goodbye: The Uses Of Grief
Margie Gillis, usually robust, flamboyant and sensuous, has devoted her new and atypically sober dance program at the Joyce Theater to a meditation on loss and healing.
Grief, as poets have proved through the ages, is one of life's most potent emotions, surpassed only by love, with which it is inexorably entwined.
Such was the subtext on the program (five solos and two duets) that opened Ms.
Gillis's weeklong engagement on Tuesday night at the Joyce (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Suns' Ainge Is Injured  A. C. Green hit a layup in overtime to give host Phoenix its first lead since the first quarter, then put the game out of reach with two free throws with 29 seconds left as the Suns beat the Portland Trail Blazers, 120-113, last night.
The victory was not without cost for the Suns, who lost shooting guard Danny Ainge after he injured a ligament in his right knee during a scramble with Portland's Chris Dudley.
The Suns said Ainge strained the medial collateral ligament and was to be evaluated further today.
Charles Barkley had 35 points and 14 rebounds and made two crucial baskets early in overtime before he was ejected for his second technical with 2:17 left. (AP)
CAVALIERS 100, MAGIC 99: Terrell Brandon scored a career-high 31 points and sank the 2 winning free throws with 21.8 seconds left in overtime as Cleveland beat visiting Orlando.
The Cavs improved to 5-1 in overtime games and made Mike Fratello the 24th N.B.A. coach to reach 400 career victories. (AP) PACERS 114, PISTONS 88: Reggie Miller scored 31 points on 10-of-15 shooting to help Indiana defeat Detroit.
Indiana won its fourth consecutive game at home over the Pistons. (AP)


Essay; Iraq's Threat: Biological Warfare
With Iraq's nuclear and poison-gas production capability limited by the scrutiny of U.N. inspectors, Saddam Hussein is developing the means to produce a terror weapon much harder to find: the deadly micro-organisms of biological warfare.
Thirty quarts of cultures of cholera, tuberculosis and plague bacteria were discovered in the past few months.
At the Sepp Institute in Methana, in underground storage at the Ghazi Research Institute in Amiria, at Salman-Pak and Al-Hakem, the necessary fermentors, lyophilizers for freeze-drying and centrifuges for separation of bacteria are in place.


An Original Sam
To The Home Section:
Re: "Outsider Art Comes In," Jan. 26.
Anyone who was on the Columbia University campus in the 1970's would remember Sam.


Corrections
A headline in some editions yesterday about a study of heart patients who received pacemaker implants referred incorrectly to the findings.
Researchers reported a disparity in the numbers of men and women selected to receive pacemakers.
As the article stated, the study was not intended to determine the cause of that disparity; it did not find a sexual bias on the part of doctors.


While Gingrich Attacks Critics, Ethics Panel Prepares Its Inquiry
As Speaker Newt Gingrich denounced his Democratic critics, saying they have made spurious charges of misconduct against him, the House ethics committee said today that it was close to agreeing on a procedure for investigating those accusations.
Members of the bipartisan panel said they had yet to make a critical decision in the inquiry: whether to hire an outside counsel to investigate Mr.
Gingrich's finances and conduct.


Agent 99 On the Trail Of Romance
Even love has its longueurs, and one of them, sad to say, is Barbara Feldon's little show, "Love! For Better and Verse," at the Theater at St.
Peter's Church until Feb. 26.
Ms.
Feldon, of course, is best known as 99, the secret agent of the "Get Smart" television series, and at the outset of "Love! For Better and Verse" she tells her audience that in reality Agent 99 spent much of her time in her dressing room, reading.
So Ms.
Feldon's guided tour of the prose, poetry and song that sketch the passions and pitfalls of romance draws on some splendid collaborators, among them Yeats, Rilke, Millay, Cummings, Judith Viorst, Liszt, D. H. Lawrence, Kern and Hammerstein, Stephen Sondheim and Johnny Mercer.


The Once and Future Penalty
The agreement between Gov.
George E. Pataki and state lawmakers would not so much usher in an era of the death penalty, as one foe of capital punishment put it, but rather return New York State to a position it once held.
Although the majority of executions in recent years have taken place in the South, New York for decades executed convicted killers more or less routinely, as did many other states.
When Eddie Lee Mays was put to death in 1963 for killing a woman in a Harlem saloon robbery, he became the 614th person executed in New York State.


Richer Helps Keep Devils On the Rise in Division
Spread the news.
The division that includes the defending Stanley Cup champions now has two teams without a losing record.
The Devils joined the Rangers in reaching that elusive .500 plateau tonight with a 4-2 victory over the Washington Capitals.
The game at Byrne Meadowlands Arena was between the two least productive teams in the National Hockey League and the Devils prevailed thanks to a couple of brilliant individual plays by Scott Niedermayer and Stephane Richer, their most talented players.


Bridge
In the early days of the game, about 1930, there was a struggle among bridge authorities for public attention.
The winner was Ely Culbertson, who sold millions of books while his rivals, with their Official System, sold practically none.
The fates took revenge.
Nobody liked Culbertson's Asking Bids, and his Four-Five No-Trump convention soon gave way to Blackwood.
And on two issues Culbertson was wrong and his rivals were right.
His complex Honor Trick method of valuation was replaced by the simple and effective 4-3-2-1 point-count, and his strong two-bids lost out.
Two clubs, strong and artificial, has long been the popular choice, although the strong two-bid survives in some social games.


Calendar: Learning About Crafts
A Glass Seminar  American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.
A seminar on glass collecting will be offered tonight at 6 in conjunction with "Form and Light: Contemporary Glass From the Permanent Collection," an exhibition on display through Feb. 26.
Reservations are suggested.
No charge with museum admission, $5; for students and those 65 and older, $2.50; members, no charge.


PATAKI AND STATE LEADERS AGREE ON DETAILS OF A PLAN TO RESTORE DEATH PENALTY
Gov.
George E. Pataki and legislative leaders announced agreement today on legislation that would restore the death penalty, making New York the 38th state to revive capital punishment.
While the moment had been predestined by the outcome of last fall's gubernatorial election, the agreement was nevertheless of more than ordinary import in Albany, ending a nearly 20-year legislative struggle to restore executions.


A Default Worsens Mexico Ills
Two weeks after the announcement of more than $50 billion in international loans to rescue the Mexican economy, a new wave of investor concern swept the markets here today as a tourism and construction conglomerate became the first big Mexican company to default on its debt since the financial crisis began.
Dragged down by a plunge of nearly 24 percent in the price of shares of the conglomerate, Grupo Sidek, values on the Mexican stock exchange plunged 123 points, or 6.41 percent.
The market index fell to 1,798, its lowest level in 17 months.


A Most-Wanted Cyberthief Is Caught in His Own Web
After a search of more than two years, a team of F.B.I. agents early this morning captured a 31-year-old computer expert accused of a long crime spree that includes the theft of thousands of data files and at least 20,000 credit card numbers from computer systems around the nation.
The arrest of Kevin D. Mitnick, one of the most wanted computer criminals, followed a 24-hour stakeout of an apartment building here.


First Trial Starts in Harlem Police Corruption Case
In the first case to come to trial in the 30th Precinct corruption scandal, a Federal prosecutor yesterday gave an account of two police officers taking bribes to protect drug dealers in Harlem and stealing drugs from others, sometimes selling the drugs back to the very dealers they had stolen from.
One of the officers, John Arena, sat stoically yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan as a defendant.
The other, George Nova, who has already pleaded guilty to distributing narcotics and civil rights violations and is cooperating with the authorities, was not in court; he is expected to be the main witness against Mr.
Arena.


Company That Does Work On Schools Is Investigated
A construction company that has landed $86.6 million in New York City school construction work is under investigation on allegations that it received illegal kickbacks from subcontractors, law enforcement officials say.
On Feb. 9, investigators from the Manhattan District Attorney's office raided the main offices of the company, the Herbert Construction Company, at 115 West 18th Street, and seized financial records concerning Herbert's dealings with at least seven other companies.


Corrections
A report on Friday in the Daily Briefing column in New Jersey copies referred incorrectly to a man arrested in a molestation case in Keansburg, N.J.
Law-enforcement authorities initially identified the man, Charles W. Mitzenius, abbot of the Holy Redeemer Abbey, as an Episcopal priest.
Canon Jane Henderson, a spokesman for the Episcopal Diocese of New Jersey, said that while Mr.
Mitzenius had served as a lay vicar, he had never been ordained as a priest in the Episcopal Church of America.


Losses Wearing on Thomas
The Islanders are frustrated. No one more so than right wing Steve Thomas.
After Tuesday night's tough 3-2 loss to Quebec at Nassau Coliseum, the Islanders' third setback in their last four games, Thomas seemed to be questioning the efforts of some teammates, though he would not say who.
"You can have hundreds and thousands of team meetings," the first-line forward said.
"You can have 10 a day. But it's up to each individual guy. If they want to come out and play, play hard and contribute for 60 minutes, those are the guys you have to give the pat on the back to."


Case From '56 In Hungary: Time to Forget?
The Hungarian President suggested today that the conviction of two Communist militiamen for firing at demonstrators during the 1956 uprising was a ruling grounded more in revenge than justice.
A life-long opponent of the Communists, President Arpad Goncz was himself jailed after 1956 on charges of treason and served six years of a life sentence.


Judge to Pick New Lawyer For Suspect in Bombing
A Federal judge said yesterday that he would appoint a new lawyer for the man accused of masterminding the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center because personal differences had cropped up between him and his court-appointed lawyer.
Neither the judge, Kevin Thomas Duffy, nor the lawyer, Avraham C. Moskowitz, would describe the nature of the differences, but Mr.
Moskowitz, who is Jewish, said religion was one of them.
The defendant, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, is accused of being part of a militant Islamic group that planned to wage a war of urban terrorism against the United States in part because of its support of Israel.


Missile Defense Divides G.O.P. On Part of Bill Before House
In a stinging setback to the Republicans' legislative manifesto, two dozen Republicans in the House bolted from their party's foreign policy bill today to help hand the Democrats and President Clinton a significant victory on setting priorities for ballistic missile defenses.
The 218-to-212 vote, which exposed serious divisions within Republican ranks, capped a day on which Democrats and Republicans clashed over a far-reaching bill that would change Washington's role in United Nations operations and the NATO alliance, and its its defenses against ballistic missiles.


Schools Drop Multicultural Studies of Gay and Disabled
The New York City Board of Education yesterday narrowed its definition of multicultural education, angering many critics by leaving out such groups as homosexuals and the disabled.
The votes on two resolutions, each 4-to-3, followed several hours of comments from almost 50 people who passionately debated how much the school system should teach children about tolerance and acceptance.


Harlem Sewage Plant Can't Handle Trump's Riverside South
To the Editor:
As one who thinks that the developer Donald Trump's project Riverside South is a grotesquerie against common sense and our common space in this city, I was dismayed to read that New York City granted him a permit to hook up four buildings to the North River sewage treatment plant in Harlem.


Militants Suspected Of Killing Feminist
Suspected Muslim militants killed a prominent Algerian feminist today in the northern Kabyl region, an area of growing opposition to the Islamic militant movement.
The killing of Nabila Djahnine, an architect in her mid-thirties who led a group called The Cry of Women, is in line with the strategy of attacking intellectuals, unveiled women and other people opposed to establishing a strict Islamic state.


Maurice Saatchi's breakaway agency snares its initial two accounts from his former company.
MAURICE SAATCHI dealt a one-two punch yesterday to the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company, which ousted him as chairman in December, by announcing that his breakaway shop had landed its initial two accounts -- both wooed from Saatchi &amp; Saatchi's flagship agency.
The assignments, from American Brands Inc. and Mirror Group Newspapers P.L.C., came two days after Saatchi &amp; Saatchi was denied an injunction against Mr.
Saatchi to prevent him from opening his own shop, tentatively named the New Saatchi Agency.


Rowland Plan Cuts Spending In Connecticut
Keeping his pledge to make government smaller, Gov.
John G. Rowland delivered a budget today that for the first time in more than three decades reduced Connecticut's spending from the previous year.
In his proposal, Mr.
Rowland called for the elimination of 2,200 state employee positions, a 25 percent cut in welfare programs, the consolidation of 31 state agencies into 14 and a delay in the payment of the state debt.
Although he also proposed a cut in the income tax, it was much more modest than what he had promised in the campaign.


School Spending Largely Spared in Cuts
Welfare and education consume nearly half Connecticut's budget, and in trying to rein in spending in those areas, Gov.
John G. Rowland has made his priorities clear.
While there were cuts in education, they were not as severe as many expected, and overall, education spending in the next two years would actually rise slightly in the budget he proposed today.
Social service spending, on the other hand, took some of the heavier hits, including a 9.6 percent proposed cut to the major family welfare program, Aid to Families with Dependent Children, and a 17.4 percent cut in general assistance.


Two Charged in a Fatal Fire
For years, Thomas Scarpa cared for his invalid mother, Natalie, in the family home.
During a family discussion on Saturday, his two sisters and brother talked about finding a nursing home for their 72-year-old mother, who suffered from chronic rheumatoid arthritis and could not get out of bed without help.
Against this backdrop, Mrs.
Scarpa died on Sunday morning as flames swept through the house and she was trapped, screaming and unable to flee her bed in the living room.


Kmart Names Discount Stores Team
The Kmart Corporation said yesterday that it had formed a new team of senior executives to manage the company's various efforts to reverse the fortunes of its faltering discount store business.
The new team will include Charles Chinni, a former senior merchant with R. H. Macy &amp; Company, who will be responsible for merchandising at Kmart.
Mr.
Chinni is considered a shrewd merchant who most recently oversaw the large housewares business in Macy's East division.


Jury Told Simpson Wasn't Suspect at First
A Los Angeles police detective testified today that O. J. Simpson was not initially a suspect in the killing of his former wife and her friend and that, in fact, the department made special efforts to inform him personally of her death, reunite him with his children and protect him from the trauma of seeing the crime scene.
Earlier, prosecutors disclosed that DNA testing revealed traces of Mr.
Simpson's blood on the rear gate of Nicole Brown Simpson's condominium, at the edge of the trail of blood drops and bloody footprints that led away from the bodies of Ms.
Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.
The jury did not learn about the disclosure, however -- at least not yet -- and the defense instantly attacked the new evidence.


For Safety and Ease
SOME products make the most basic tasks of life -- eating or drinking -- easier for everyone.
Last month two new products like this were introduced.
For people who tend to leave pots on the stove unattended, there is the Range Timer, a time-activated safety switch that cuts the power to an electric range after a pre-set time has elapsed.
Inside the Range Timer, which is a white metal box, is a switch connected to a clock.


Man Charged in Girl's Death
In the months after 7-year-old Stephanie Monn of Westville was found suffocated and dumped in a creek near her home, it might have seemed to those following the case that little was being done.
Not so, the authorities said yesterday after a former neighbor, Timothy Daniel MacFarland, 23, was charged in the killing.
"Investigations oftentimes take a long time and a lot of hard work," said the Gloucester County Prosecutor, Harris Y. Cotton.
"Not a day went by when someone wasn't doing something."


Caution: Presidents at Play. Three of Them.
On the brilliant emerald fairways of the Indian Wells Country Club, "How does the President lie?" was a perfectly friendly question today.
The answer, after Bill Clinton's first drive, was "far right and in a sand trap."


Europeans Shrug as Taxes Go Up
Johann Scholtz sits in his white smock, hunched over his workbench 10 hours a day, stringing viola bows, repairing the necks of cellos and, when he has time, carving the maple back and front panels of his handmade violins.
He says that often during his quiet labor, he remembers that more than 30 minutes of every hour go toward paying his taxes.
"I have no idea how much I pay," the 55-year-old master violin maker said.
"It's so much. Only my tax accountant really knows. And the depressing thing is, my taxes are going up again this year."


An Original Sam
To The Home Section:
Re: "Outsider Art Comes In," Jan. 26.
Anyone who was on the Columbia University campus in the 1970's would remember Sam.


AT&amp;T Let Go as Builder Of Bell Atlantic Network
One of the AT&amp;T Corporation's sweetest victories last year -- a multibillion-dollar agreement with the Bell Atlantic Corporation to build an interactive video network that would reach eight million homes -- is about to go sour.
Bell Atlantic will announce on Thursday that it has dropped AT&amp;T as the "systems integrator" supervising the gigantic project in favor of handling the job itself.
The decision follows disputes between the companies over pricing and control.


All That Can Grow In a Frozen World
"Idon't know why you want to come up in the middle of the winter," Wayne Winterrowd had said a bit testily on the phone early this month.
"If I had to choose the worst day for you to come, tomorrow would be it."
But in the book "A Year at North Hill," in which poetry is perfectly at home with the eminently practical matters of gardening, Mr.
Winterrowd and his partner, Joe Eck, recount in glorious detail all four seasons in their Vermont garden.


Executive Changes
BLENHEIM GROUP USA INC., Fort Lee, N.J., appointed Mark Wallisa chief operating officer and Greg Adams chief financial officer.
CUC INTERNATIONAL INC., Stamford, Conn., appointed Jeffrey E. Epstein senior vice president.


A Shelf Full of Videos: Play It Again, Mom
PEOPLE say sex and money are the two things married couples fight about most.
Television, in my opinion, is right up there.
Add a couple of children, and the discussions of what and when and how much is O.K. get more heated than "Crossfire."
But video . . . video is different.
Video gives both parents and children control.
Parents can control what videos come into the house and when they're watched.
You can choose short tapes or long tapes, sleepy tapes or tapes you can dance to.
There are musicals and animal movies, adaptations of children's books, earnestly educational tapes and, of course, the Disney mother lode.
Especially this time of year, video is inevitable; just look outside.
Even schools plug in the VCR's on days when the playground is iced over.


The Pop Life
A Riddle Continues
If you examine the booklet that accompanies the December release of Pink Floyd's 1987 album, "Momentary Lapse of Reason," on minidisk (a digital alternative to the cassette), on the sixth page, in the corner of a picture of a man standing on a cliff, you'll find the word "enigma" printed in small white capital letters.
Eight pages later, printed in the corner of a picture of a man standing in a wheat field with a scythe, you'll find the word "Publius." There is no apparent reason for the recent addition of these words to the packaging, but their presence has stimulated an odd treasure hunt that has been taking place on the Internet since last summer.


Treasuries Rise After Early Selling Is Reversed
Prices of Treasury securities advanced yesterday for the second consecutive day after a batch of Government reports that first raised, than eased investor concerns about economic growth and inflation.
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond increased 15/32 , to 10027/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, fell to 7.55 percent, from 7.59 percent on Tuesday, but up 2 basis points from its low for the day.
A basis point is one-hundredth of 1 percent.


Olympus to Split With DDB Needham
Olympus America Inc. in Woodbury, L.I., said yesterday that it would end its four-year relationship with DDB Needham New York on the company's photo consumer products division account, effective May 5.
As a result, the account, with billings estimated at $7 million, has been placed in review.


Don't Make Border Crossers Pay a Tax
To the Editor:
President Clinton's budget proposal includes a tax on people and autos crossing the border into the United States.
As a dual citizen I can see both the allure and the folly of the proposal.
Though the potential revenue seems attractive, the cost in good will and lost business along the border is not.


Whirlpool Reviews Portion of Account
The Whirlpool Corporation has placed its domestic Whirlpool appliance brand account in review, after 22 years at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
The billings were estimated at $30 million to $35 million.


A Week Without TV
WHAT would Americans do without television?
TV-Free America, a newly established national organization, wants Americans to switch off their sets for a week and find out for themselves.


Microsoft Dilemma for Justice Dept.
United States Judge Stanley Sporkin could not believe what he was hearing, so he looked down once again at the Justice Department's top antitrust official and repeated the question:
What if he could persuade Microsoft Corporation, which was trying to settle charges of unfair competition, to accept a few extra restrictions beyond those the Government had already negotiated?


Dow, Surging, Flirts With 4,000 Mark
The Dow Jones industrial average, the most closely watched but often difficult to interpret of stock market gauges, came tantalizingly close to 4,000 yesterday.
By 1:30 P.M., the Dow, the index of blue-chip stocks, had come within 2.05 points of touching 4,000, and surged four more times past 3,995 before falling back.
The Dow closed at a record high of 3,986.17, up 27.92.


IRAQ SAID TO SELL OIL IN SECRET PLAN TO SKIRT U.N. BAN
Iraq has set up a system over the past year to export crude oil and refined products and thus bypass United Nations sanctions barring such sales, senior oil industry executives and traders said today.
The executives said the sales had generated $700 million to $800 million in revenue for the Iraqi economy, which is crippled by sanctions imposed by the United Nations after the invasion of Kuwait in 1990.


Need Options to Cuts? Find Real Labor Savings
IF you don't like my budget ideas, let me hear yours, says Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
O.K., here's one: Solve the case of the disappearing labor savings.
If he did, maybe Mr.
Giuliani wouldn't have to cut so much from health and welfare programs for the poor, slated to account for more than 40 percent of his budget reductions.


Martin Lang, 67, L.I. Town Supervisor
Martin Lang, a former supervisor of the Town of Southampton, L.I., and the former president of a drainage contracting company, died last Wednesday at his home in Palm City, Fla.
He was 67.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Nancy.


INSIDE
Anger Over White House
Already reeling from the devastation of the election, Democrats in Congress have been angered by what they call the Administration's mishandling of the nomination of a surgeon general.
Page D22.
Step on Welfare Overhaul
Amid harsh partisan accusations, a House subcommittee approved sweeping legislation to consolidate social welfare programs while sharply reducing some on a straight party-line vote.
Page D22.
Episcopalians Struggle
The Episcopal Church, experiencing a tumultuous month, has another trauma.
It is investigating possible financial irregularities by its former treasurer.
Page A16.
A New Force in Afghanistan
Islamic fundamentalists and patriots have taken control of more than 40 percent of Afghanistan, and there are signs that after 15 years of war, peace may be coming.
Page A3.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report in the Company News column of Business Day on Saturday about a decision by SBC Communications Inc. against bidding for a stake in the Czech telephone monopoly misstated the site of SBC's headquarters in some editions.
It is San Antonio, not Santa Fe, N.M.


Alph Peterson, 82, Ex-Chief Executive Who Led Playtex
Alph B. Peterson, a former president and chief executive of the International Playtex Corporation, a consumer products company, died on Feb. 7 at Martin Memorial Hospital in Stuart, Fla.
Mr.
Peterson, 82, lived in Stuart.
The cause was bone marrow disease, said his son, Steven.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  A man suspected in a long spree of computer theft was arrested by F.B.I. agents.
The capture of Kevin D. Mitnick, a 31-year-old computer expert, came after a search of more than two years.
He is suspected in the theft of thousands of data files and at least 20,000 credit card numbers from computer systems nationwide.
"He was clearly the most wanted computer hacker in the world," said Kent Walker, a United States assistant attorney.  [ Page A1. ] Tsutomu Shimomura was the cybersleuth who assisted the F.B.I. in its inquiry that led to the arrest of Kevin Mitnick.  [ D17. ]


So Far, a 60-Page Bill Comes to Just 142 Words
The death penalty agreement reached today by Gov.
George E. Pataki and the state's legislative leaders ultimately may be judged by its scope, its protections against inequity and inadequate defense and its cost to the state and local governments.
But by announcing an agreement today without actually releasing a bill, the leaders made it difficult to assess how New York's death penalty law will be applied.
State officials could offer only a rough estimate of how many of the more than 2,200 homicides in New York last year would qualify as capital cases under the bill, nor could they estimate what the average prosecution of a death penalty case might cost.


Rutgers Fight: Scars of Bias; Episode Spurs Protesters
Francis L. Lawrence did not politicize Manuel Rosa.
That process took place gradually, over the course of Mr.
Rosa's four years as a Rutgers University student and amid smaller, less public events.
For example, there were the comments of his roommates freshman year.
"They were always talking down on minority students," said Mr.
Rosa, one of the students seeking to oust Mr.
Lawrence as president.
"One day they said all Latino women are whores."
It was an eye-opening experience for Mr.
Rosa, this being lumped into someone's blanket view of the world.
Back home in West New York, N.J., where he grew up among Cubans and Puerto Ricans and blacks, everyone knew him as the kid who was part Italian.


First Trial Starts in Harlem Police Corruption Case
In the first case to come to trial in the 30th Precinct corruption scandal, a Federal prosecutor yesterday gave an account of two police officers taking bribes to protect drug dealers in Harlem and stealing drugs from others, sometimes selling the drugs back to the very dealers they had stolen from.
One of the officers, John Arena, sat stoically yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan as a defendant.
The other, George Nova, who has already pleaded guilty to distributing narcotics and civil rights violations and is cooperating with the authorities, was not in court; he is expected to be the main witness against Mr.
Arena.


Speaker Says Mayor's Plan Requires a 'Reality Check'
A day after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani proposed his financial blueprint for New York City, the Speaker of the Assembly, Sheldon Silver, strongly suggested yesterday that his Democratic colleagues would oppose the depth of the cuts in welfare and Medicaid that the Mayor called for from Albany.
"It's really time for a reality check," Mr.
Silver said, echoing the Mayor's description of his proposals as "reality therapy" needed to close the city's $2.7 billion budget gap.


14th-Ranked Wake Forest Upends No. 7 Maryland
Wake Forest 63, Maryland 54
Tony Rutland rescued Wake Forest's offense in the second half last night and finished with 19 points as the 14th-ranked Demon Deacons rallied for a 63-54 victory over No. 7 Maryland in Winston-Salem, N.C.
Earlier this season, Rutland provided a lift for Wake Forest (16-5, 7-4 Atlantic Coast Conference) against Clemson when Randolph Childress couldn't get started.
With the Terrapins (19-5, 9-3) clamping down on Childress with a variety of pressure defenses, Rutland stepped up and negated that strategy in a key stretch of the second half.


Expansion Teams Pick Big Names, No Names
Jacksonville began the National Football League's expansion draft with a flourish yesterday, selecting the veteran quarterback Steve Beuerlein with the first pick.
The Jaguars then ended the draft with a bang by selecting five consecutive players who will earn $1 million or more in 1995.
That group includes a threesome of disappointing first-round draft picks -- Giants' tight end Derek Brown, Washington receiver Desmond Howard and Patriots' guard Eugene Chung.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Save the Salt Marsh Hay
After I wrote late last year about the advantages of salt marsh hay, I learned to my dismay that using this marvelous mulch could damage native wetlands.
A note from Ken Druse, author of "The Natural Habitat" (Clarkson N. Potter, 1994), pointed out that "nobody is farming or growing this grass; it grows naturally in salt marshes and therefore exists in finite amounts."


Clinton's Pick As Top Doctor Seeks Support In the Senate
With a majority of the Senate still undecided on the fate of his nomination to be Surgeon General, Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. went to Capitol Hill today to begin lobbying for support.
As the White House pursued a cautious strategy that it hoped would build up political support for Dr.
Foster's confirmation in the next few weeks, the opposition's plans were also taking shape.


A Look at the Latest From the Toy Fair
MOVE over, Barbie.
This year, if the Walt Disney Company has its way, the queen of the toy kingdom will have to share the throne of plastic pulchritude with Pocahontas.
At the 1995 American International Toy Fair, the annual trade show, which this year attracted 1,640 exhibitors and closes Feb. 20, she is omnipresent, thanks to Disney's planned release this summer of "Pocahontas," an animated movie based on the popular American legend of the Indian princess.


Programs Teach Youngsters ABC's of the Slopes
It is a familiar sight.
Underneath a chairlift, a child with skis the length of a ruler zooms down a slope as if propelled by a rocket booster.
The youngster will go over or around anything, even between an adult's legs, if it's faster that way.
But the question is: how young is too young to place a child on skis?
Experts say that 2-year-olds may be too young.
By starting their offspring skiing as toddlers, parents are not likely to improve their chances of producing another Tommy Moe or Picabo Street.


Belfast and Dublin Politicians Step Up Debate on Peace Plan
Political leaders here and in Dublin accelerated the island-wide debate today over the proposed new framework for peace in Northern Ireland that is intended to achieve a permanent political settlement of the sectarian warfare in this British province.
High-ranking British and Irish officials reported on Tuesday that they had agreed substantially on the major proposals of the framework and that the document would probably be published within 10 days.
Details on "presentation and drafting," they said, would be worked out in the next few days, leading possibly to a summit meeting between Prime Ministers John Major of Britain and John Bruton of Ireland.


AT&amp;T and Lin Broadcasting In Dispute About Valuation
The AT&amp;T Corporation and the Lin Broadcasting Corporation found themselves late yesterday on opposite sides of a $2.66 billion gap in the value of Lin, which AT&amp;T has been planning to acquire in full.
The discrepancy, if not resolved, could raise serious questions about whether AT&amp;T would go ahead with the purchase of the 48 percent of Lin that it does not own or put the cellular telephone company up for sale.


Journal; West Coast Story
Though even at home in New York he is not a household name, there may be no one alive who more embodies Broadway than the playwright Arthur Laurents.
His first drama, "Home of the Brave," opened there 50 years ago.
Two of his musicals, "West Side Story" and "Gypsy," were signature works of Broadway's final golden era, the 1950's.
Even his flops, from the 1964 "Anyone Can Whistle" to the 1991 "Nick and Nora," are legends.
This is why I wasn't surprised to hear that Mr.
Laurents, now 77, is behind an undercover effort to save Broadway.
And given Broadway's current inhospitality to new American dramas, it was also no surprise to discover that I'd have to track him down 3,000 miles from Times Square.
He goes where the work is; the Seattle Repertory Theater is giving his newest play, "Jolson Sings Again," the premiere that Broadway can no longer muster.


RJR Board Announces A Reverse Stock Split
Trumpeting the era of "a new RJR Nabisco," the board of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation yesterday announced a 1-for-5 reverse split of its common stock that would raise the company's shares to the mid-$20 range from the average of about $5 a share this year.
The move was coupled with an announcement of the company's first regular quarterly cash dividend on RJR Nabisco common stock, payable on April 1.
The dividend, worth 7.5 cents a share, or 30 cents a share on an annualized basis, was previously announced by the company last October, when RJR, the maker of Camel cigarettes and Oreo cookies, proposed the spinoff of 19 percent of its food business in a $1.1 billion public offering.


Abortion: The Doctors' Return
America's medical profession has been cowed by anti-abortion terrorists.
Threats, bombings, arson and murders have forced many doctors who perform abortions to run for their lives.
That, coupled with indifference about teaching abortion skills in medical school, has left many women without needed services.
But relief may be coming.
The Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education voted unanimously this week to require that, with certain exceptions, prospective obstetricians and the hospitals that teach them include abortion training in their programs.


ON TOUR WITH: Awadagin Pratt; Knowing What It Means to Solo
"YOU got any tools?" Awadagin Pratt asks in the darkness backstage.
Out front, the high-school students in the audience are either fidgeting at the prospect of an hour of classical music or contemplating a midmorning nap.
Mr.
Pratt, who has been sipping coffee from a very tall plastic cup, is not much more awake himself.
The piano lid is up.
The spotlights are on.
But a screw has come loose in Mr.
Pratt's custom-made blond-wood bench, the one he carries from concert to concert, the one that puts him only 13 1/2 inches off the floor, the one that lets him go eyeball to ivory like a latter-day Glenn Gould.


Jaguars Select a Giant Eager for Change
He wanted to leave.
He asked to leave.
And finally after three years of unfulfilled promise, Derek Brown was given his wish.
About the only big news for the Giants yesterday in the expansion draft was when Brown was chosen by the Jacksonville Jaguars as their 24th pick.
That means the tight end and former No. 1 pick out of Notre Dame will have the opportunity to make a fresh start with another team.


Billboard Space To Be Donated
The Outdoor Advertising Association of America and the American Council of Highway Advertisers said yesterday that almost 1,000 billboards, valued at more than $1 million in advertising space and production costs, would be donated to a public service campaign promoting the early detection of hearing loss.
Heather Whitestone, Miss America 1995, who is deaf, will serve as national spokeswoman for the campaign, which was developed by the Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf and the Miss America Organization.
The signs, carrying the theme "Listen to Miss America," will appear from March through September and promote a free hearing checklist for infants and young children.
The campaign will also include television and radio commercials.


Betty Buckley to Follow Glenn Close in 'Sunset'
Betty Buckley, the American actress now portraying Norma Desmond in the London production of "Sunset Boulevard," will replace Glenn Close on Broadway in July, the composer Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber announced yesterday in London.
Ms.
Close, who created the role of the aging film star in both the Los Angeles and New York productions, receiving rave reviews, is to give her last performance on July 2.
Ms.
Buckley is to take over on July 4.


Dan Quayle Deserved Better on Withdrawal
To the Editor:
I have rarely read an editorial so ill tempered and mean-spirited as yours on Dan Quayle's withdrawal from the Presidential race ("The Dropout," Feb. 11).
November's Republican victory has obviously been difficult for The Times.
But your unhappiness is no excuse for sneering glee at the expense of a former Vice President of the United States.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DIGITAL SOLUTIONS INC., South Plainfield, N.J., a temporary personnel company, bought some accounts of Careerstaff Unlimited Inc.'s Physicians Unlimited unit for an undisclosed amount.
FIRST BANK SYSTEM INC., Minneapolis, a bank holding company, said it planned to repurchase as many as 14 million shares, or 10.4 percent of shares outstanding, in addition to earlier buyback programs.


Three Lost Drawings Returned to Germans
Three drawings from a large collection of German art that disappeared in the final days of World War II were handed over yesterday to the German Consul General in New York after their seizure by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The three lesser works -- a depiction of a bearded figure sometimes called "God Father" or "Father Time," by Pellegrino Tibaldi, a Bacchanal by Raimond La Fage, and a rendering of St.
George and the Dragon attributed to Nicolas Poussin -- were part of the Bremen Kunsthalle collection hidden by the Germans in what became the Soviet zone of occupation.


Workshop on Chopin At Lincoln Center
The pianist Garrick Ohlsson and the writer David Dubal are to conduct a three-hour workshop on Chopin at the Walter Reade Theater, on Saturday from 10 A.M. to 1 P.M.
The workshop, "Chopin in Our Time," is planned in conjunction with Mr.
Ohlsson's cycle of six Chopin recitals at Alice Tully Hall this year and next.
The workshop will include a discussion of Chopin's life and death and his career as a composer and pianist.
The 24 Preludes (Op. 28) will be analyzed, with Mr.
Ohlsson providing examples at the keyboard, and diverse recordings of the Sonata No. 2 in B flat minor will be played and compared.


Sports of The Times; Who, What, I Don't Know, I Don't Care
FOR baseball fans unable or unwilling to tell the replacement players without a scorecard, an abridged version of the Bud Abbott and Lou Costello vaudeville routine is reprinted today as a tribute to what the club owners have wrought:
"I want you to tell me the names," the chubby Costello asks, "of the fellows on the team."


Abrupt End To Defense In Rail Case
Colin Ferguson, the defense attorney, rested his case today without putting Colin Ferguson, the murder defendant, on the witness stand as he said he would last week, and without calling any of the witnesses he had described in an interview on the "Today" program on Tuesday.
Mr.
Ferguson, who is accused of killing six people on a Long Island Rail Road train, pleaded with the judge for still more time to prepare his case, but was not successful.
He was trying to produce witnesses who would prove his innocence, he said, but they had not agreed to come forward because they feared for their safety.


Eve Queler Conducts 'Herodiade,' a Massenet Rarity
For all her charms, the Salome of Massenet's "Herodiade" will probably remain in the shadow of Richard Strauss's lurid incarnation of that misbegotten heroine.
In Massenet's 1881 opera, which was given a compelling performance by the Opera Orchestra of New York at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday night, Salome is almost sweet, a young idealist with a weakness for cultic devotion.
She is strong willed but hardly lustful; her lines soar with yearning for John the Baptist, but she could hardly be imagined serenading his severed head.
Massenet's third opera, though, is far from bloodless.
It is muscular, sometimes intense, and was considered so incendiary by the Paris Opera that it wasn't performed there for 40 years.
Instead, it made its way to Brussels and a successful French tour, where it still managed to upset ecclesiastical authorities who found contradictions with the teachings of the church.


Sunny As a Hot Tropical Beach
WHEN Mary Vinson first heard King Sunny Ade, a pop musician from Mali, in concert in 1987, she said she was inspired by the "incredible costumes" of the performers, each dressed in layers of brilliant color.
Ms.
Vinson, above left, now imports an equally colorful array of hand-dyed batik fabrics and handmade objects from Africa through her Island Trading Company, a spinoff of Island Records, the Miami label founded by her business partner and companion, Chris Blackwell.
"What Chris does with music" -- importing and recombining indigenous art forms -- "I want to do for rooms," she said.


Off-Duty Job Ruled Out of Line
Lots of police officers moonlight and don't get in trouble for it.
But a borough patrolman, Joseph Fusco, and a police dispatcher, Thomas Curtis, have been suspended without pay starting next Monday for their off-duty activities.
Patrolman Fusco's five-day suspension and Mr.
Curtis's 10-day suspension, both for conduct unbecoming a public employee, have to do with the defunct Fastrak Entertainment, which Mr.
Curtis ran with Mr.
Fusco's help.


A 'New' Bratton Tries Out a Lower Profile
He was the man about town, the Police Commissioner who loved to be seen clinking glasses with celebrities at Elaine's, who planned a police parade down Broadway on his birthday and who made a show of chewing out his senior staff in front of a reporter.
That was the old Commissioner William J. Bratton, who with his courtside seats at basketball games and his appearances at other "in" evening events displayed the sort of panache more common in the swaggering world of Damon Runyon.


Piper Jaffray to Settle Suits for $70 Million
Piper Jaffray, the Minneapolis investment firm, said yesterday that it had agreed to pay $70 million to settle class-action lawsuits arising from the plunge in value of one of its mutual funds.
Shares of the mutual fund, Piper's Institutional Government Income Portfolio, fell by 28 percent last year, largely because of investments in complex securities backed by home mortgages that were unusually vulnerable to last year's sharp rise in interest rates.
The suits contended that Piper Jaffray had misrepresented the risks of the fund.


Copter Fitted for Medical Use
The helicopter that became a source of political turbulence for Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman has been refitted as an emergency medical vehicle.
Mrs.
Whitman used the helicopter as a symbol of government waste in her campaign against Gov.
Jim Florio, promising to sell it if elected.
Later, she changed her mind and said she would convert it.


Out Come the Spring Bulbs


The Collapse of 2 Credit Unions Shakes Japan
The collapse of two small credit unions has suddenly erupted into a billion-dollar nationwide scandal, entangling senior politicians and raising questions about Japan's banking system.
A top official from the New Frontier Party, the newly formed opposition movement, stepped down Tuesday after news reports alleged that the credit unions had improperly loaned large sums of money to his family.
And a former Defense Agency chief reportedly lived rent-free in an expensive apartment provided by a company that was run by the head of one of the failed credit unions.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Frederic N. Schwartz, a former chairman and chief executive of the Bristol-Myers Company, named his wife incorrectly.
She is the former Eleanor Haley.


Fan Violence Cancels England-Ireland Match
An outbreak of violence among fans at an England-Ireland soccer game in Dublin tonight forced referees to cancel the match midway through the first half and raised fears in Britain that a scourge of hooliganism was resurfacing after a period of relative calm.
A group of English fans in the upper deck ripped up seats and threw pieces of wood and metal at spectators below and onto the field minutes after Ireland took a 1-0 lead in an exhibition match between the two national teams.


Another Winter Storm Throws Washington Off Its Stride


Market Place; With a Rosy Outlook, Stocks Rally
What do you get when you combine soaring earnings and leaping interest rates?
Yesterday, after more than a year of meandering, the stock market finally propelled the Dow Jones industrial average to a record close.
Since the Dow hit its previous high, the Federal Reserve has moved seven times to push up interest rates.
Bond investors have suffered greatly, but the broad stock market averages have never sold off severely, and in a rally that began in late November they have pushed to new highs.


Court Says Judge Gave Advice on Hiding Loot
When Lorraine Backal, an acting State Supreme Court justice in the Bronx, stepped down quietly from the bench last November, the reason she gave was a desire to return to private practice on Long Island.
But a far different picture emerged yesterday when a state appellate court decided to suspend the former judge from practicing law in New York, describing in its six-page ruling how Ms.
Backal, while sitting as a judge, had befriended a felon and counseled him on how to hide kilos of cocaine and thousands of dollars of laundered drug money.


Yeltsin Blames Army for Failures As He Defends War in Chechnya
President Boris N. Yeltsin today defended the offensive in Chechnya before some of his harshest critics in Parliament, but blamed the army leadership for being unprepared and thus responsible for the heavy casualties.
Mr.
Yeltsin, in his first lengthy public statement since ordering troops into Chechnya in December, spoke clearly and seemed robust during the hourlong speech.
But he named no names, dismissed no commanders for their "failures, setbacks and mistakes in command" and said he would draw no rash judgments.
His aides said he would deliver another address on army reform later, perhaps in two months' time.


Illegal Search Bill Tightens Government's Grip
To the Editor:
On Feb. 8 the House of Representatives, by a better than 2-to-1 margin, passed a bill that for the first time in our history would explicitly allow Federal prosecutors to use evidence in court that was illegally seized by the police without a search warrant.


Margaret Wade, 82, Basketball Coach
Margaret Wade, who coached Delta State to three national championships in six seasons in the 1970's and in 1986 became the first woman named to the Basketball Hall of Fame, died yesterday at the Bolivar County Hospital in Cleveland, Miss.
She was 82.
Her family said the cause was cancer.


Henry James Tale, but With a Bang
THE AGE OF CONSENT
By Geoffrey Wolff
226 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
In his 1897 novel, "What Maisie Knew," Henry James created a deft, disturbing portrait of a young girl's emotional initiation into the manipulative and betrayal-filled world of adults.
Blessed with a "vivacity of intelligence" and an "expanding consciousness," his Maisie somehow managed to survive the fallout of her parents' divorce and their subsequent entanglements with her shining innocence intact.


Lukas Will Test Thunder Gulch, A 2d-Stringer, in Fountain of Youth
D.
Wayne Lukas flew into town today with a horse, and that's usually bad news for the locals.
Never mind that the horse, Thunder Gulch, was a second-stringer in a stable that has stars in every stall, notably Timber Country, the 2-year-old champion of last year, and Serena's Song, who has taken up where the disabled Flanders left off as 2-year-old filly champion of last year.
He is not alone among second-stringers advancing on race tracks in the East in search of soft touches.
The early form among 3-year-old colts suggests there may be plenty of soft touches.


Babbitt Likens Move to Kill Science Agencies to 'Book Burning'
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt said tonight that a Republican-backed proposal to abolish the United States Geological Survey and two other science agencies in the Interior Department was tantamount to "book burning."
"In 17th-century Portugal, after a major earthquake devastated that country, the political leaders responded by burning a few more heretics at the stake," Mr.
Babbitt said in remarks prepared for the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, which opened here this evening.
"Today, the response to California earthquakes is to burn the United States Geological Survey."


Washington Talk; For Couples in Politics, Power (and Immunity)
Since the earliest days of the Republic, prominent senators and representatives have found Government jobs for their friends.
Nowadays, it is not just cronies who get posts in the executive branch but sometimes the lawmakers' spouses.
And that has led to situations for which no protocol exists.


Radio Operator in Rescue
A 10-year-old boy, described by the police as "very shy except when he's on his C.B. radio," helped save a 37-year-old Beachwood man who was threatening to end his life and had already shot himself once.
The boy, John Bottini, was using his citizens' band radio on Tuesday night when he realized that a man with whom he had spoken on the radio before was in trouble.
John kept the man on the air for an hour and learned enough to enable a police helicopter to discover where the man had parked his car near a cranberry bog.





The Old Steinbrenner Still at Yanks' Throttle
Five minutes after the replacement Yankees trotted onto the field for the first time today in front of 25 fans, George Steinbrenner sauntered onto the same field at Fort Lauderdale Stadium and deflected attention away from the collection of minor leaguers and major league failures.
It was the swiftest move of the day.
Steinbrenner's presence forced the throng of 75 news media types to temporarily ignore the 26 pitchers and catchers and focus on him.
Even though Steinbrenner claimed he was not embarrassed by his replacement bunch and was here to support them, his actions were intended to make him the story of the day.
His strategy was shrewd and worked for over an hour.


Art in Review
Dean McNeil
Tenri Gallery  575 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through March 1  Richard Pare
Sander Gallery  19 East 76th Street  Manhattan  Through March 4


Inside Art
Gift of a Delacroix and a Monet
Jayne Wrightsman, a longtime trustee of the Metropolitan Museum of Art and one of its biggest donors, has an eye for recognizing gaps in the museum's collections and then filling them in.
This week the museum received the gift of two important paintings from Mrs.
Wrightsman's private collection.
The rarer is Delacroix's "Portrait of Madame Henri Francois Riesener (Felicite Longrois)." "The museum didn't have a Delacroix portrait," Mrs.
Wrightsman said.
Delacroix painted few portraits and almost all of them were of intimate friends or members of his family.
This one, from 1835, is of his aunt.


A Few Boos for Giuliani From Police at Ceremony
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani was greeted by scattered boos and tepid applause at Police Headquarters yesterday when he joined Police Commissioner William J. Bratton at a promotion ceremony in which they tried to put their recent squabbles behind them.
The less-than-warm welcome was a sign that Mr.
Giuliani's dispute with Mr.
Bratton over the Commissioner's style and management had taken at least a temporary toll on the Mayor's support among the city's 31,000 officers, one of his firmest political bases.


Photo Dealers Show
Photography invades Manhattan this weekend, as 75 members of the Association of International Photography Art Dealers hold their annual show and sale.
Galleries and independent dealers from the United States, Canada, Europe and Japan are to be represented at the event.
This year's show features a survey exhibition of photographs of New York City.
The show and sale will be held at the New York Hilton Hotel, 53d Street and Avenue of the Americas.
Hours are noon to 8 P.M. today and tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. on Sunday.
A three-day pass is $20; daily admission is $10.
Information: (212) 261-6190.


Delay on Removing Fire Boxes Is Vetoed
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday vetoed legislation by the City Council that sought to delay the administration's plan to remove the city's 16,300 sidewalk fire alarm boxes until a more thorough study was done on its impact on fire safety.
He said the delay was unnecessary and would stall the Fire Department's program to begin responding to medical emergencies.
The Mayor has said removing the boxes would save the city $4.9 million.


Art in Review
Robin Hill
Lennon Weinberg Gallery  580 Broadway (between Prince and Houston Streets)  SoHo  Through March 11
East meets West in Robin Hill's drawings and sculptures of interlacing mandala patterns.
The sculptures are floor pieces built up from hundreds of what look like oversized corks cast in plaster from paper cups, dipped into blue paint, and then arranged on the floor with the help of paper templates.
There's something endearing about the contrast between the clunky, familiar shape of the "corks" and the hypnotic patterns constructed from them.


4 Army Ranger Candidates Die in Chilly Florida Swamp
Just days before they were to complete the grueling two-month Army Ranger school, three soldiers who had been training in chest-deep water in a Florida swamp, died of severely lowered body temperature on Wednesday night.
The body of a fourth soldier who had also been training to win the elite Ranger shoulder patch was found yesterday in the swamp in what the Under Secretary of the Army, Joe Reeder, called a "gut-wrenching" incident.


Hacker Case Underscores Internet's Vulnerability
In his final weeks of freedom, Kevin D. Mitnick, the fugitive computer hacker who was captured by the F.B.I. early Wednesday morning in Raleigh, N.C., had been putting severe strains on the Well, a small network used mainly by an eclectic group of about 11,000 computer users here in the Bay Area, investigators say.
And just a few hours before his arrest, they say, he delivered a last electronic blow that nearly destroyed the Well and the electronic community it served.
It was as if the hacker were underscoring the larger meaning of what has been called the most notorious Internet crime spree yet: the vulnerability of any computer on the global Internet network, if a sophisticated computer criminal puts his mind to mischief.


Hewlett-Packard Stock Soars on Profit Surge
The Hewlett-Packard Company's shares soared nearly 10 percent today after the computer maker reported first-quarter financial results that blasted past the most optimistic of Wall Street estimates.
With strong growth in all its diverse product lines, Hewlett-Packard reported a 64 percent increase in earnings and a 29 percent rise in revenue for the 1995 fiscal year's first quarter, which ended Jan. 31.
The company also announced a 2-for-1 stock split and a dividend increase.


A Silent Enemy Invades the Night
In the middle of the night, the hours of vulnerability, the gas apparently began to steal into the apartments.
It made no noise.
It gave off no odor.
This was long after Barbara Gonzalez had seen her three children to bed and turned in early and after Lisa Smith had switched off the midnight movie, "Cool Blue," that she found merely all right and after Pamela McLaurin curled up after finishing the hero sandwich she had bought at a nearby grocery store.


Razors, Soap, Cornflakes: Pirating Spreads in China
Inside a bare, dimly lit concrete building on the outskirts of town, five workers at the Huaxing Razor Blade Factory sit hunched over noisy machines that spit ordinary razor blades into a row of blue kerosene cans.
Upstairs, lounging in an oversized black leather chair, Yin Jiande, the factory manager, snorts at accusations by the Gillette Company that he had made more than 50 million counterfeit copies of razor blades produced by Gillette's joint venture here and sold them in look-alike packaging.


Israel, in P.L.O. Talks, Agrees to Ease Border Closing
In an attempt to give a kick-start to stalled Middle East peace talks, Israel agreed today to loosen border restrictions that have kept many thousands of Palestinians out of work, and said it was ready for "intense negotiations" with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
The Israelis announced that starting next week they would allow 10,000 laborers from the Gaza Strip and 5,000 from the West Bank to return to jobs that they had held in Israel until the borders were shut last month after a Palestinian suicide bombing that killed 21 Israelis.


Toney and Manager Settle
When the world last heard from JAMES TONEY, he was trashing his Michigan home and threatening to shoot his manager.
Tomorrow night in Las Vegas, Nev., the manager, JACKIE KALLEN, will be back in Toney's corner as he returns to the ring following his first professional loss.
"It's better than it's ever been before between us," Kallen said, sitting with Toney at a prefight news conference yesterday.


Defense Rests in Rape Case
The defense for the man who is charged with raping and killing Gail Shollar rested its case yesterday after its mental-health expert endured a withering cross-examination.
Dr.
Jonathan Willard-Mack, a psychologist, was questioned about earlier statements that the defendant, Scott R. Johnson, did not knowingly and purposefully rape Ms.
Shollar on Nov. 3, 1992.


Moorhead Kennedy, Goodwill Executive And a Banker, 93
Moorhead C. Kennedy, a banker who served as one of the first presidents of Goodwill Industries of Greater New York, died on Feb. 9 at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 93 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said a son, Alexander S. Kennedy of Manhattan.


Ainge Suspended and Fined For Slapping an Opponent
DANNY AINGE of the Phoenix Suns was suspended for one game and fined $7,500 yesterday for slapping Portland's CHRIS DUDLEY during a game Wednesday night.
Dudley fell across Ainge's leg under the Suns' basket late in the fourth quarter.
Ainge, who strained a ligament in his right knee during the scramble, retaliated by slapping Dudley in the face while the Portland player was sitting on the floor.
He was whistled for a flagrant foul and ejected, an automatic additional $1,000 fine.


Times Stock Buyback
The New York Times Company said yesterday that it would spend up to $50 million to buy back shares of its class A common stock in the open market and in private transactions.
The latest stock repurchase follows a $100 million repurchase plan announced on Oct. 20, 1994, that has substantially been completed.
The Times Company's shares gained 12.5 cents yesterday to close at $21.625 on the American Stock Exchange.


Record Industry Grew At Its Fastest in 1994
The record industry grew faster last year than it has in any other year since the Recording Industry Association of America started keeping track of it in 1952, the group says in a report being released today.
A 13-year trend of increased revenue continued, with $11.8 billion in albums, CD's and cassettes shipped to retailers, a record-breaking increase of 20 percent over the previous year.
Soundscan, the company that tracks sales of recorded music (as opposed to shipments from manufacturers to stores), reported a similar increase.
The difference between the two organization's statistics, is that where 1.1 billion pieces of music were distributed, according to the recording industry association, Soundscan reported 713.6 million were sold.
But Soundscan does not cover every music retailer.


Bond Firm Thrives in Hard Times
These are tough times in the municipal bond markets.
Fewer bonds are being issued to finance schools and roads and this means more municipal bankers are losing their jobs.
Despite the downturn, Grigsby Brandford &amp; Company, the nation's largest black-owned municipal bond firm, appears headed for one of its best years ever.


Accounts
*
Mason &amp; Madison Inc., Bethany, Conn., was awarded two accounts with combined billings estimated at $5 million: General Motors Corp.
Delco Chassis division, Dayton, Ohio, as the first agency to handle international advertising, and Scandinavian Airlines System, Lyndhurst, N.J., to handle its North American account, previously divided among various agencies.


Sally Field in Three Nights and Seven Decades
Sally Field continues to do remarkably well by television.
She got started 30 years ago as "Gidget" and followed that closely with "The Flying Nun," which she might understandably want to forget.
Then in 1977 her Emmy-winning performance in the drama "Sybil" paved the way for a film career that would earn two Oscars, in 1979 for "Norma Rae" and in 1984 for "Places in the Heart." Sunday she returns to television in the kind of bravura role coveted by actresses everywhere.
"A Woman of Independent Means," a six-hour, three-part mini-series based on a 1978 novel by Elizabeth Forsythe Hailey, follows for some seven decades the story of Bess Alcott, from her Dallas marriage to her fourth-grade sweetheart to the birth of three children to the fussings with grandchildren.
It's a panoramic portrait, crammed with moments of joy and tragedy, all arranged around Bess's getting to the point where she is "finally beginning to understand nothing is given to us for keeps."


Swans' Lake


Chrysler Seeks to Quiet Mini-Vans' Safety Critic
The Chrysler Corporation is seeking a court injunction to silence a former product planner who helped to evaluate the company's new mini-vans and now asserts that they do not meet Federal safety standards.
The product planner, Paul Sheridan, whom the company has dismissed, says in court papers that Chrysler rigged crash tests last year and deceived Federal investigators and company executives.


Mr. Constant's Easy Escape
As head of the paramilitary organization Fraph, or Front for the Advancement and Progress of Haiti, Emmanuel Constant terrorized Haiti while President Jean-Bertrand Aristide was in exile.
Now, after failing to answer a summons in Port-au-Prince, he has been allowed to enter the United States on an ordinary visitor's visa.
American authorities belatedly say they will try to find Mr.
Constant and deport him.
Where were they when he entered the country?
Many Haitians are understandably suspicious.
They believe that as a former paid informer for the Central Intelligence Agency, Mr.
Constant has been given safe haven in the United States, or at least allowed to slip conveniently into obscurity here.


Graf Wins, but Hingis Shows All the Promise
First the news that will have an effect on this year's race for the No. 1 ranking: Steffi Graf appears to be in fine health.
Now the news that just might have an effect on the race in years to come: Martina Hingis does indeed appear to be a major talent.


Clinton Unlikely to Accept Yeltsin Invitation
White House officials said today that President Clinton does not intend to accept an invitation to visit Moscow in May for a meeting with President Boris N. Yeltsin, and the Administration called the war in Chechnya an impediment in Russian-American relations.
The White House aides cited the Chechen war as the main reason that Mr.
Clinton wanted to put off the meeting, which was to have coincided with Russian ceremonies celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Allied victory over Nazi Germany.
But they said a second important reason was the President's reluctance to embark on yet another round of World War II commemorations abroad when he believes it would be more fitting to celebrate V-E Day at home.


Governor Rowland Meets Reality
Connecticut's new Governor, John Rowland, has yielded to fiscal reality and toned down his promise of instant tax relief for all.
His budget offers instead a quick cut -- on borrowed money -- for people with low and mid-level incomes.
He made no mention of his principal campaign pledge, to repeal the state income tax altogether, though his spokesman says repeal is still the goal.
Perhaps in time the Governor will yield the rest of the way and leave that sensible tax in place.
The alternative is a return to dependence on sales taxes, a far less dependable source of revenue.


Corrections
An article by Bloomberg Business News in Business Day on Wednesday about trading in the commodity markets on Tuesday misstated the first day that holders of the cotton futures contract that expires in March can indicate whether they plan to take delivery of the cotton.
It is Feb. 22, not Feb. 28.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  HOUSE CUTS U.N.
PEACE FUNDS  Defying President Clinton's veiled threat of a veto, the House of Representatives approved a bill that would cut payments for United Nations peacekeeping efforts.
It would also give Congress a greater say in committing troops abroad.
A1  PIRATING IN CHINA EXPANDS  Trademark piracy is unlikely to stop soon in factories in China, where counterfeit versions of everything from Lux soap to Kellogg's cornflakes to Shell Oil lubricants are churned out.
A1


James Lawrence Jr., Architect And Preservationist, Dies at 87
James Lawrence Jr., an architect who designed a number of public structures in the Boston area and was a leading preservationist of the city's natural beauty and historical landmarks, died on Jan. 29 at his home in Brookline, Mass.
He was 87.
In a period that spanned 60 years, Mr.
Lawrence helped lead the fight to protect Back Bay's stately elm trees on Commonwealth Avenue from threatened high-rise construction and he advocated legislation to require city utility lines to be buried.


Dollar Falls On Fears in Peso Crisis
The dollar fell yesterday to a 16-week low against the German mark and dropped sharply against the Japanese yen on fears that United States financial institutions could be hurt if President Clinton's $50 billion rescue package for Mexico did not restore confidence in that country's battered economy.
There was also continued concern that Germany might raise interest rates as its economy picked up steam, making its currency more attractive to investors seeking higher returns.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan gallery shows: RACHEL LACHOWICZ, Fawbush Gallery, 76 Grand Street, SoHo (through March 8).
Rachel Lachowicz's appropriations of Donald Judd sculptures in lipstick are by now a familiar feminist statement (thanks largely to Ms. Lachowicz herself).
With her king-size Allan McCollum "Perfect Object" dressed in a raincoat, she seems to be heading in new, less predictable directions.
But at the moment she's still en route (Holland Cotter).


Tbilisi Journal; Georgian Life, Always an Art, Is Now Improvised
Many mornings, Maria Khvedelidze walks to work, a two-and-a-half-hour journey across town, often in freezing temperatures.
She walks because the subway, for lack of of electricity, doesn't run most days.
"I escape from the house because it's too cold," she said, her breath visible, sitting in one of two small rooms she shares with her 80-year-old grandmother; her office has a heater run off a generator.


INSIDE
Cabinet Official Investigated
The Justice Department said it was conducting a preliminary investigation of Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown to see if an independent counsel was warranted.
Page A19. 4 Soldiers Die of Exposure
Four soldiers in training to become elite Army Rangers died apparently of hypothermia during an exercise that had kept them for several hours in a chill Florida swamp.
Page A14.
Oversight Board in Capital?
Congress may be asked to create for the District of Columbia a board like the one that helped New York out of bankruptcy in the 1970's.
Page A25.
A Threat to the System
Prior to his arrest, a fugitive computer hacker erased records of an on-line service, investigators said, showing the vulnerability of any computer on the Internet.
Page D1.


Evidence Rules Toughened For Cases of Drug Dealing
In a ruling that law enforcement officials said could lead to reduced sentences for some drug dealers, the state's highest court has extended tougher rules of evidence to felony drug-sale cases.
In a unanimous decision, the Court of Appeals said today that prosecutors in those cases must demonstrate that defendants not only sold drugs but also knew their weight.
Prosecutors said that when that was not possible -- which they said would be in relatively few cases -- they might have to drop or reduce charges.


Art in Review
'Oblique'
Roger Merians Gallery  76 Greene Street (between Broome and Spring Streets)  SoHo  Through March 4
This is an oblique, sideways glance meant to expand your field of vision: the guest curator, Heidi Zuckerman, has brought together seven artists working in a Neo-Dada, Post-Minimal vein.
Some of this work is amusing but a little tired.
Sarah Seager presents proposals mocking the inflated rhetoric of museum membership categories and entitling the purchaser to collaborate with her on various projects.
Eric Magnuson's elaborate project "Last Work" entitles the purchaser to take possession of his ashes after he has died and been cremated: this includes a legal agreement, a mold for the funeral urn and other paraphernalia. (The artist's parents apparently responded to this piece by asking him, "What are we going to do with your plot?")


2 Big Travel Agencies Will Charge Clients
Responding to a move by major airlines to limit travel agents' commissions, Carlson Wagonlit Travel and American Express said yesterday they would begin to charge their customers for an assortment of agency services.
The imposition of the fees -- which will range from $5 to $25, and go into effect as early as March 6 -- suggested that the airlines had succeeded in their goal of altering their longstanding relationship with travel agencies, which write more than 75 percent of all airline tickets.


Art in Review
'Alternative Visions II'  'Third and Fourth Century B.C.
Greek Vase Painting From Southern Italy and 20th-Century Master Drawings'
Barbara Mathes Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through March 18
It must have sounded like a good idea at the time.
True, the vase paintings are linear compositions using a limited range of colors, and so are the modern drawings.
But the concentric circles in the 1969 Louise Bourgeois have only a distant relation to the geometric decoration on a circular pyxis, or lidded box.
The German art historian Alois Riegl may have argued for the priority of abstraction over realism in the evolution of the ornamental tendril; nonetheless, the loopy shapes in Brice Marden's etching "After Botticelli 4" don't look anything like the vine leaves on the nearby calyx-krater, or wine vessel.
Nor do the leaves in the 1949 Matisse resemble those on the tiny cuplike skyphos next to it. (The owl on another skyphos does look a lot like the owls on Picasso's 1950-51 ceramics, but Picasso's ceramics are not in the show.) The fundamental problem here is that Hellenistic art is dainty, while the modern art in the show is not.


Wiretap Expert Named to Head New York City Office of F.B.I.
James K. Kallstrom, an electronic eavesdropping expert whose technical prowess has bedeviled suspected mobsters and terrorists in New York for more than two decades, was named yesterday to head the Federal Bureau of Investigation's New York City office, the largest in the country.
A former Marine captain and a Vietnam veteran, Mr.
Kallstrom joined the F.B.I. in 1970 and spent most of his career in New York City, heading the unit responsible for electronic monitoring of criminals.
He is replacing William A. Gavin, who is retiring in March to be the security director of U.S.
Healthcare Inc.


U.S. Clears 'Megan's Law'
The New Jersey law allowing the police to notify the community of a convicted sex offender's presence passes legal muster, the Justice Department says.
In a brief filed in a case in Federal court here, Federal attorneys said the statute known as "Megan's Law" -- after a 7-year-old girl who was sexually assaulted and slain last year -- promotes public safety without adding extra punishment.


Restaurants
New York steakhouses were once rough and tumble places where the portions were huge, the seats were cramped, the noise was raucous and the waiters rude.
The only people wearing suits were those who worked there and everybody liked it like that.
But times change.
While the old institutions soldier on in their unpretentious fashion, the new places have all gone posh.
Consider Morton's, where the waiters entertain their well-dressed patrons with a fashion show of steak styles, displaying the uncooked meat with appropriate patter.
Or Ruth Chris's carpeted salon, where polite and pretty servers are trained in decorum.
But neither of those new restaurants has anything on West 63d Street Steakhouse with its leopard-skin-print rug.
A glass-enclosed private elevator whisks patrons up to the restaurant, where they are surrounded by mahogany paneling and beautifully framed art.
The place is as cozy as a millionaire's library.


Union Talks of Solidarity, and of Return
As major league clubs began spring training with replacement players today, about a quarter of the striking major league players gathered off the field to hear and discuss the threat Lenny Dykstra seemed to have posed to union solidarity.
When the nearly five-hour meeting ended, Dykstra, the feisty Phillies outfielder, was nowhere to be seen or heard, but his fellow strikers said they felt comfortable speaking for him.
They said he had expressed his concerns about the strike at the meeting but was satisfied the union was handling negotiations properly and was solidly behind it.


Valentin Mandrajji; Chinaware Designer, 65
Valentin Mandrajji, a designer of fine chinaware, died on Feb. 5 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 65.
The cause was cancer, said Richard R. Gillespie, a former associate at Cartier.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"I SENT A LETTER TO MY LOVE," Primary Stages, 354 West 45th Street, Clinton.
A musical about a brother and sister who search for love in the personals column of a newspaper, based on a book by Bernice Rubens; written by Melissa Manchester and Jeffrey Sweet, with music by Ms.
Manchester; directed by Pat Birch.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $27.50 and $30.
Information: (212) 333-4052.


Serbs to Be Offered Concessions to Recognize Bosnia and Croatia
The five nations pursuing a peace settlement in Bosnia have agreed to offer Serbia more than a suspension of international trade sanctions in exchange for its recognition of Bosnia and Croatia, French officials said today.
The officials said that when the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, arrives in Belgrade on Saturday to present the latest ideas of the five-nation "contact group," he will make clear to the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, that under the proposal, recognition would be accompanied by guarantees for the Serbs living in Bosnia and Croatia.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Polls and Tournaments
With the regular season winding down, the competition and the conjecture are revving up regarding next month's tournaments, particularly the one in Division I. This is how it works: the four winners of the major conference tournaments -- ECAC, Hockey East, Central and Western Associations -- are automatic qualifiers and the National Collegiate Athletic Association hockey committee selects and seeds the other eight.
Usually but not always, three come from each conference.


Spoofing the TV Gurus of Fitness
Steven Brill's scatterbrained family comedy, "Heavyweights," has the distinction of being the first Hollywood film to aim its satirical sights at a particularly juicy target, the self-improvement gurus who proliferate on television infomercials.
As Tony Perkis, a demented fitness fanatic who takes over a summer camp for overweight boys, Ben Stiller gives a hyperkinetic performance that is only a twitch or two lower in spasmodic frenzy than Jim Carrey during one of his seizures.
Tony, who is the only child of a lighting-fixture magnate, boasts that he has slimmed down from his 12-year-old weight of 319 pounds into a svelte grownup dynamo.
Tony's age is his only adult quality.
When he jogs through the woods around Camp Hope, he is a flailing, convulsing coil of neurotic tics.
In taking over the camp from its bankrupt owners, Harvey and Alice Bushkin (Jerry Stiller and Anne Meara), he plans to make a high-powered infomercial that features before-and-after shots of the young campers.
A film crew has been brought in to record their weight-loss miracles.


Democratic Governors Oppose Plan Shifting Welfare to States
Democratic governors said today that they opposed a bill devised by House Republicans to overhaul the nation's welfare programs.
They asserted that it would undermine state efforts to help poor people.
House Democrats said they would draft their own alternative, different from the Republican bill and from one proposed last year by President Clinton.


Oscar Likes Obscure Documentaries Best
To the Editor:
The failure of the popular "Hoop Dreams" to become an Oscar nominee as best documentary (news article, Feb. 15) suggests an unwillingness by voters in the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to honor documentaries that break free of the film festival and museum circuit and play in theaters.


A Private Meeting


Fire Spreads Chaos And Toxic Fumes


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Whether or not the United States and China settle their dispute about intellectual property rights, trademark piracy is unlikely to stop soon at factories in Shanghai and hundreds of small towns in China, where counterfeit versions of everything from Lux soap to Kellogg's cornflakes to Shell Oil lubricants are made.  [ Page A1. ] The Economy
Hours before his arrest by the F.B.I., Kevin D. Mitnick, the fugitive computer hacker, erased the accounting records for the Well, an on-line service, investigators say.
The move underscored the vulnerability of any computer on the global Internet network to a sophisticated computer criminal.  [ D1. ]
The House Commerce Committee approved a bill overhauling the rules governing securities fraud litigation, a key part of the House Republicans' Contract With America.  [ D1. ]
Construction starts on new homes fell in January and new unemployment claims jumped last week, signs that rising interest rates were slowing the economy.  [ D2. ] Companies
Grigsby Brandford, the country's largest black-owned municipal bond firm, appears headed for one of its best years ever.
But as the firm advances, it has also become a lightning rod for attacks from detractors on Wall Street.  [ D1. ]
Microsoft and the Justice Department appealed a Federal judge's decision to reject their antitrust settlement.  [ D1. ]
Responding to a move by airlines to limit travel agents' commissions, Carlson Wagonlit Travel and American Express said they would charge customers for assorted agency services.  [ D2. ]
Hewlett-Packard shares soared nearly 10 percent after it posted first-quarter results far exceeding Wall Street's estimates.  [ D4. ]
Shares of Lin Broadcasting plummeted after investment bankers put radically different valuations on the company.  [ D4. ]
The dollar fell against the German mark and Japanese yen on fears that U.S. financial institutions could be hurt if President Clinton's $50 billion rescue package for Mexico did not restore confidence in that country's battered economy.  [ D1. ]
The Dow Jones industrial average failed again to break through the 4,000-point threshold.
But the index still closed at a record high.  [ D6. ]
Prices of short- and intermediate-term Treasury issues rose after a Fed official raised hopes among traders that the central bank would not raise interest rates again soon.  [ D5. ]
Lumber futures plunged their daily trading limit.  [ D15. ] Today's Columns
Sara Lee makes desserts and sells hosiery.
But analysts say there is more to it than cheesecake and thin thighs.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]
While the global marketplace has become almost a cliche, a less-noted trend is the growth of multicultural marketing.
One agency is finding success developing campaigns to reach ethnic groups in the U.S. and consumers abroad.
Advertising.  [ D16. ]


On Stage, and Off
Stoppard Lock on Lincoln Center
Lincoln Center Theater has talked the cast of "Hapgood," including Stockard Channing, into staying for yet another four weeks -- so now it's a reality: Lincoln Center is to be an all-Stoppard venue this spring, and on Wednesdays and Saturdays it will be possible for a glutton for punnishness to see a Tom Stoppard double feature.
"Hapgood" will play through March 26 at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, "Arcadia" begins previews on March 2 at the Vivian Beaumont.
"It's a caper," said Bernard Gersten, executive producer of the theater.
"We don't make money on this. It means increasing our deficit. But that's what being nonprofit is about. We're doing it because we're proud of the play and a lot of people want to see it."


COMPANY BRIEFS
NEUROCRINE BIOSCIENCES INC., San Diego, said it would collaborate with Janssen Pharmaceutica N.V., a unit of Johnson &amp; Johnson based in Belgium, to develop drugs for treating psychiatric disorders.


Luther M. Noss, 87, Professor of Music
Luther M. Noss, an organist and professor emeritus of music at Yale University, died on Feb. 9 at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
He was 87 and lived in New Haven.
He died after a brief illness, said his wife, Osea Calciolari Noss.


The Death Penalty Rush in Albany
New York's return to capital punishment has seemed inevitable since the election of George Pataki as Governor last fall.
His agreement with legislative leaders on the outlines of a bill now moves the state headlong toward an unhappy day.
A 3-page press release gives hints that the 60-page bill reflects some awareness in Albany of the need for fairness in delivering the ultimate punishment.
But only the fine print, not yet published, will tell whether the promise is met.


New York's Health and Economy Will Feel Home-Care Cuts
To the Editor:
Gov.
George E. Pataki proposes to slash the New York Medicaid budget by $1.2 billion.
His proposals would eviscerate the long-term home care system by eliminating or seriously limiting many programs that provide community-based care.


An Intimate Look at Welfare: Women Who've Been There
The upper room of a community center in a worn corner of Chicago got tense and quiet the other night as a half-dozen women squinted to read about what might happen to a welfare system that perhaps no one knows better than they do.
The women hold respectable jobs: one is a crossing guard, one is a gang intervention worker, a couple work for the city.
They have all been on welfare and hated it more than the ex-husbands and former boyfriends who left them or beat them, or are too broke or apathetic to pay child support.


Nets Bury The Hatchet, And Then Their Foe
How is this for a news flash?
The Nets are feeling good about themselves these days.
It's almost as if the first half of the season, in which the players argued with their coach and each other, has been forgotten.
Suddenly Team Turmoil and has turned into Team Tranquillity with its focus on the playoffs and not pouting.
"I'm a winner and this team is a winner," guard Kenny Anderson said tonight after the Nets defeated the Denver Nuggets, 100-94, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"There's no need for what happened to us during the first half of the season. Now it's time to erase all the doubts in people's minds. The playoff situation is up in the air. If we want it, it's there."


The Foster Implications
To the Editor:
If the United States Senate blocks the confirmation of a doctor on the ground that he performed abortions at a time when they were legal, how long will it be before the Judiciary Committee finds itself asking the next woman nominated for the Supreme Court, Would she now or has she ever had a legal abortion?


Helping an Innocent on Death Row
The crime thriller "Just Cause" includes a scene that shows a man cautiously exploring a dark, sinister house where flies buzz and eerie music plays.
He prowls slowly, only to discover, when the lights go on, that two decomposing bodies are very near him.
This may be attention-getting, but it's hardly credible.
Anyone who knows the morbid particulars of such situations knows that when a corpse attracts flies, the corpse smells.
However, "Just Cause" has been directed so antiseptically that it lacks all sense of lifelike detail.
Despite good looks and some ostentatious technical polish, it offers a textbook example of direction (by Arne Glimcher) that's utterly out of sync with its subject matter.
All the actors are immaculately barbered, whether they are in the groves of academe or on death row.
A Florida swamp, supposedly a murky setting, is photographed so crisply that it seems to have no humidity.
The swamp's alligators look animatronic.
Their eyes are light bulbs.
This police story didn't need alligators, anyhow.


Holiday on Monday
Washington's Birthday will be observed on Monday.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Alternate-side street-cleaning regulations suspended.
SANITATION: No pickups, street cleanings or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and subways on Saturday schedule.
Long Island and Metro-North railroads on holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and trains on Saturday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on holiday schedule.


Pressure Rises For N.A.A.C.P. To Oust Chief
With critics of William F. Gibson claiming that nearly half the board members of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People have turned against him, the group's former executive director, Benjamin L. Hooks, has added his voice to those who would like to see Dr.
Gibson step down as chairman.
Mr.
Hooks termed Dr.
Gibson an "inept leader" who allowed the debt of the civil rights organization to soar.
His comments, the first time he has publicly expressed dissatisfaction with Dr.
Gibson's leadership, come at a time when the nation's oldest and largest civil rights organization is $ 4.5 million in debt, faces an audit of its top officers' spending and is being torn apart by internal bickering.


U.S. Appeals Ruling by Judge on Microsoft
The Justice Department today appealed a Federal judge's decision on Tuesday to strike down its antitrust settlement with the Microsoft Corporation, saying that the judge was "squarely wrong" and had overstepped his authority.
Within a few hours, Microsoft announced that it was joining the Justice Department appeal, a move that now officially places the former adversaries on the same team.


Coyote Found Shot to Death In a Park in the Bronx
A coyote was found shot to death yesterday morning in Van Cortlandt Park, the second dead coyote found in the Bronx in little more than a week.
The two deaths followed sightings of coyotes in the city and in Westchester County, indicating that the animals' range is spreading.
Edward Spevak, the assistant curator of mammals at the Bronx Zoo, said the cutting of Eastern forests, the extermination of wolves and the adaptability of coyotes are all contributing to the species' spread.


Bradley Withdraws Nomination
Senator Bill Bradley withdrew a nomination for a Federal judgeship yesterday after the nominee said he feared that Republicans would use his background in the American Civil Liberties Union to scuttle his chances for confirmation.
"The positions of the A.C.L.U. and those taken in the Republican agenda just don't mix," said the nominee, David L. Harris of South Orange.
Mr.
Harris, 46, who has been active on the A.C.L.U.'s state board, also said he did not want his two children to hear unfair attacks on him.


The Shahn Who Could Break Free Of Politics
The photographs that Ben Shahn made in the 1930's have suffered a kind of double neglect.
Because Shahn is best known as a Social Realist painter, his photographs have sometimes been regarded by art historians as mere pendants to his other pictures; at the same time, he is often overlooked in surveys of Depression-era photography.
In part, this lack of attention may be the result of Shahn's own attitudes toward photography.
He saw the medium as primarily a convenient way to make sketches and notes for later paintings; after the 1930's, he returned full time to painting, and never photographed extensively again.


Democrats Challenge Tax Cut Plan As More Debt
A day after Gov.
John G. Rowland released his budget, top Democrats today began their attack, saying that Mr.
Rowland wants to finance his proposed tax cuts by delaying payments on state bonds.
"How can a Republican borrow money to do a tax cut?" Thomas D. Ritter, the top Democrat in the State Legislature, said.
"It's like taking out a mortgage on a house to take a trip to Hawaii."


Mullin Faints at Home
CHRIS MULLIN, who has missed virtually all of this season with assorted injuries, suffered a mild concussion Wednesday when he fainted and fell at his home.
The Golden State Warriors star was taken to San Ramon Regional Medical Center in Oakland, Calif., where he remained overnight for observation, the team spokesman JULIE MARVEL said.
Dr.
ROBERT ALBO, the team physician, said Mullin was hospitalized as a precaution and was expected to be released late yesterday.
"We ran a lot of tests on Chris," Albo said, "and all the tests are completely normal. He's doing fine, although he does have a little bit of a headache. He hit his head pretty hard."


Autopsies for 30 Scavengers
Hoping to solve a Monmouth County mystery, a pathologist will perform autopsies to determine whether 30 premature deaths might have been caused by poisoning.


Nynex, Ending Monopoly, Would Let Cable Business Offer Home Phone Service
In a move that would end its monopoly on local telephone service in the metropolitan area, Nynex said today that it would cooperate with the Cablevision Systems Corporation's efforts to enter the residential phone market.
If approved by state regulators, the agreement would create the nation's first head-to-head battle for telephone customers between a telephone giant and a major cable television provider.


Parties Rush For Center In Italy Race
Italian politics, never simple, have become amoeba-like, multiplying, merging and mutating at a rate so fast that even the microscope-wielding Italian press has been hard pressed to keep up.
In the space of a few weeks, one centrist party, the Popular Party, has shifted to the right; the old hard-line right, the National Alliance, has joined the mainstream; the Northern League, a pillar in last year's victorious center-right alliance, has split; and a new face, Romano Prodi, a 55-year-old economist, has emerged as a potential leader for Italy's dispirited center-left.


Naslund Ends Retirement
MATS NASLUND, the first European to play for the Montreal Canadiens, is returning to the National Hockey League at age 35, signing for the rest of the season with the Boston Bruins.
"The money was a big incentive," he said yesterday in Stockholm.
"It's also a team that knows what they are doing. Boston is aware I haven't played for a long time and therefore I'm not under great pressure."


Editors' Note
A front-page article on Feb. 5 about drinking on college campuses included a description of a University of Virginia student, Brett Sanders, who was quoted as saying he had moderated his drinking after a trespassing conviction involving alcohol.
In fact Mr. Sanders was not convicted, nor was he ever involved in such an incident.


Law Faculties Need Better Gender Ratios
To the Editor:
Re "Men Found to Do Better in Law School Than Women" (Law page, Feb. 10): The University of Pennsylvania Law School study merely authenticates statistics traditionally circulated among female lawyers and law students as folklore.


2 Sides Set a Date to Vote on Balanced-Budget Measure
Republican supporters of the balanced-budget amendment and their Democratic opponents agreed tonight to a vote on Feb. 28, ending two weeks of slow debate over the measure that Republicans charged today had become a filibuster.
The agreement gives each side 12 days to gain an edge on an issue that once seemed lopsidedly tilted toward the amendment's supporters but that now may be decided by no more than a vote or two.


National Security, Politicized
The National Security Revitalization Act may have seemed like good politics when Republicans pushed it as part of their Contract With America.
But as approved by the House yesterday it is bad policy, and should be rejected by the Senate.
The legislation imposes drastic restrictions on American participation and funding for United Nations peacekeeping activities, mandates early NATO expansion into Eastern Europe and creates a Congressionally dominated commission on national security strategy.
Some of its most extreme language was watered down in committee, and its original call for an early revival of a Star Wars-type missile defense system was turned back by the full House.
What remains is a direct challenge to the foreign policy powers of the Presidency, and the principles of both the Clinton and Bush Administrations' national security strategy.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press on Tuesday about the resignation of South Africa's delegate to the United Nations in Geneva misstated a previous affiliation of his.
The delegate, Allan Boesak, once led the World Alliance of Reformed Churches, not the World Council of Churches.


Playing a Whole Game Is a Victory for Rutgers
A mock cheer went up from the crowd here tonight at the Louis Brown Athletic Center when the second half began.
That was because there was a second half.
With almost five times as much security on hand as there would have been for a normal game, with metal restraints erected to separate the student sections from the floor, and with the back end of the building barricaded in a way that allowed the visiting team to enter unobstructed, Rutgers President Francis L. Lawrence sat in his normal seat just off the aisle in Section 104, clad in a red sweater, watching intently as the game went on as scheduled.


Corrections
An article yesterday about President Clinton's golf game with George Bush and Gerald R. Ford misidentified the President who named Walter H. Annenberg to be Ambassador to Britain.
It was Richard M. Nixon, in 1969.
In some copies the article also misidentified the people who were struck by golf balls hit by Mr.
Bush.
They are John C. Rynd and Norma Earley.


No Headline
"We all just stopped and did a little praising God." DWAYNE CARR, after finding a baby who had survived a tornado in Alabama.  [ A14:1. ]


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Drexler Joins Rockets  Hakeem Olajuwon scored 29 points and grabbed 14 rebounds as the Houston Rockets celebrated the arrival of Clyde Drexler with a 105-89 victory over the Hornets last night in Charlotte, N.C.
The Rockets weren't sure whether Drexler would play at all.
Although he suited up, he couldn't get into the game until results of Otis Thorpe's magnetic resonance imaging exam were complete.
By the time Thorpe's results were confirmed, Drexler and his new teammates were in the locker room trailing Charlotte by a point at halftime. (AP) JAZZ 120, SPURS 113: In Salt Lake City, Karl Malone scored 34 points and Jeff Hornacek added 24 as the Jazz won for just the second time in its last six games, defeating San Antonio.
The victory kept Utah three and a half games ahead of the Spurs in the Midwest Division. (AP)


In Newark Corruption Trial, Two Portraits of Politicians
The two former presidents of the Newark City Council were greedy, the Federal prosecutor argued today, and more than willing to take thousands of dollars in bribes to help a company seek a lucrative city towing contract in 1992.
The lawyer for one defendant, Gary Harris, disputed that portrayal, contending that Mr.
Harris was a rookie councilman with little political clout who was easily manipulated by a vengeful Newark businessman turned informer.


3 Hotels for the World's Crossroads; Dollars, Not Design, Will Decide the Choice for Times Sq.
To some, it may look like the ninth circle of hell, but for others, Times Square is money.
And dollars, not design, are likely to be the deciding factor in the competition to build a new hotel on Eighth Avenue between 42d and 43d Streets.
Designs for three proposals were submitted yesterday to the New York State Urban Development Corporation and the New York City Economic Development Corporation, the agencies responsible for the redevelopment of 42d Street.
In April, the project is scheduled to be awarded to the developer who can persuade these agencies that his is the most attractive financial package.
Even so, the competition's three contenders are worth considering on the basis of design.
Assuming that one actually gets built, it's a building, not a bank account, that we will have to look at.


The Fabulous Kingdom of La Fontaine
FOR children growing up in France before World War II, memorizing fables of the 17th-century poet Jean de La Fontaine was a ritual as familiar as daily afternoon snacks of bread and bitter chocolate, placing report cards under the tree for Father Christmas's perusal, or searching for the tiny white china Jesus buried in our Epiphany cake on the sixth day of the New Year.
Such classics as "The Fox and the Raven" and "The Cricket and the Ant" were our equivalents of Winnie the Pooh and Mother Goose: the earliest tales with which we were read to sleep, the first verses we read and recited in school.
The obligation to memorize La Fontaine's poems, made all the more enticing by Grandville's illustrations of woodland creatures in hilariously formal antique garb, never lay heavily on us.
It was, in fact, a source of constant delight because these fables embodied the rhetorical device to which children are most drawn: the attribution of human thought and discourse to members of the animal kingdom.
But La Fontaine's cautionary verses, the theme of a beautiful little show at the New York Public Library, stamped our consciousness far more deeply than Flopsy, Mopsy and Cottontail affected children of the English-speaking world.
They were composed according to the central agenda of 17th-century French literature -- "To Please and to Instruct" -- and instruct they did, relentlessly.
Continually cited in the classroom or at the family dinner table, they became a code of conduct, a delectably ironic secular catechism programmed toward character building and self-improvement.


Joel Saxe; Merchant, 58
Joel Saxe, who helped to found the Rich's Department Stores chain 33 years ago, died on Feb. 3 at Salem Hospital in Massachusetts.
He was 58 and lived in Marblehead, Mass.
The cause was a heart attack, said a spokesman for the company.


2 Teams Use Each Other as a Launching Pad
With a quarter of the shortened National Hockey League season already gone, the Devils and the Islanders are in unenviable positions in the standing.
But they are also in position to make some headway in a home-and-home series tonight and tomorrow that will give each team a better idea which way it is headed.
The Islanders, who have a 5-6-1 record and 11 points after 12 games of the 48-game schedule, will visit the Devils tonight with four losses in their last five games.


Illuminating a World of Humanist Thought
Since November, a superb overview of Italian Renaissance manuscript painting from 1300 to 1450 has graced the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
This week, "The Painted Page: Italian Renaissance Book Illumination, 1450-1550" arrives at the Pierpont Morgan Library, picking up exactly where the other show leaves off.
The two institutions didn't plan this historical dovetailing.
It was simply an accident of scheduling.
It is also an event of supreme good luck, for the Morgan exhibition is as brilliant as its predecessor (which remains on view until Feb. 26).
While the Metropolitan focuses on the early crossover between panel painting and illumination, "The Painted Page," organized by Jonathan J. G. Alexander in collaboration with the Royal Academy of Arts in London, examines the books themselves, more than 100 bound, hand-painted manuscripts of the later Renaissance.
Many have never been shown in America, and several have been reunited with related works for the first time since the 15th century.


N. W. Ayer Out Of a Kmart Review
N.
W.
Ayer &amp; Partners in New York, one of four finalists in the review of the Kmart Corporation's national image advertising account, said yesterday that it would withdraw, citing the workload for current clients and other new-business efforts.
The account, with billings estimated at $125 million to $175 million, has been at Ross Roy Communications in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., since 1969, but that agency declined Kmart's invitation in November to participate in the review.
Ayer's withdrawal leaves as finalists Ally &amp; Gargano in New York, BDDO New York and Campbell Mithun Esty in Minneapolis.
A decision is expected in mid-March.


Gillette Names Heir Apparent to Its Chief
In an announcement interpreted as a reassuring signal to Wall Street about its corporate succession, the Gillette Company yesterday named an heir apparent to its 64-year-old chief executive, Alfred M. Zeien.
Michael C. Hawley, who is 57 and now the executive vice president of the company's international group, will become Gillette's president and chief operating officer in April.
Mr.
Zeien, the company's chairman and chief executive, will stay on past his 65th birthday on Feb. 25 to oversee the transition.
The position of president has been unfilled at the company since 1987.


Mason's 22 Match 22 By Ewing; Starks Hurt
On a night in which the Knicks produced their best point run of the season and held an opponent under 90 points for the 18th time this season, Pat Riley still had a lot about which to fret.
Mainly, the Knicks' coach was concerned about a recurring left shoulder injury to guard John Starks, who went out midway in the fourth quarter of tonight's 96-87 victory over Miami, grimacing and holding his shoulder.


If Dumb Is a Hoot, Here's a Scream
WHEN the lights go down, the film begins and "The Brady Bunch" song plays over the opening credits, expect the inevitable: your skin will crawl.
As well it should, since queasiness is the right response to a feature-length version of a never-great 1970's television show.
Dorky even in their prime, the Bradys have never had the cachet to warrant a sincere revival on this scale.
Only now, as self-conscious cluelessness enjoys its golden age at the movies, do they lend themselves to post-modern kitsch.
At least "Brady Bunch" cultism remains a marginal phenomenon. (The film's director, the Emmy Award-winning Betty Thomas, and several of its cast members have acknowledged that they hardly knew the television show when they signed on for "The Brady Bunch Movie.") So this film doesn't set its sights solely on homage, despite its way of lining up the Brady children in order of height and sending them cavorting through Sears during a moment of musical glee.
At best -- that Sears outing is as good as it gets -- the movie manages to be painless and pointless in equal measure.


Congress Drafts Bill on Financial Overseers for Washington, Based on New York Plan
In the face of the severe municipal budget crisis here, Federal lawmakers are drafting legislation that would create for the District of Columbia the kind of financial oversight board that guided New York City out of bankruptcy in the 1970's.
Eleanor Holmes Norton, the District's delegate to Congress, said today that the downgrading this week of the city's bond rating coupled with a $631 million budget deficit, made a powerful argument for establishing a temporary independent body to improve the fiscal condition of the city.


Lin Broadcasting Valuations Cause Its Shares to Plunge
Shares of the Lin Broadcasting Corporation plummeted yesterday, after investment bankers put radically different valuations on the company.
Shares of the company, which is based in Kirkland, Wash., fell $10.25, to $130.25, in Nasdaq trading.


CHRONICLE
A journalism center in California is being named for the quintessential New York editor: CLAY FELKER, who, among his other credits, founded New York magazine more than 25 years ago.
The Clay Felker Magazine Center is being established at the Graduate School of Journalism at the University of California at Berkeley.


Israel to Ease Limits On Palestinian Entry
Seeking to restore some momentum to stalled peace talks, Israel agreed to loosen border restrictions that have kept many thousands of Palestinians out of work since a deadly bombing last month.
Progress on the entry ban was a top priority for Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, who secured the guarantee in a meeting with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
Starting next week, Israel plans to allow 10,000 laborers from the Gaza Strip and 5,000 from the West Bank to return to their old jobs.
That compares with 50,000 or more who entered before the Jan. 22 bombing, which killed 21 Israelis.


House Panel Approves Shifts On Securities Fraud Suits
With eight Democrats joining the Republican majority, the House Commerce Committee approved a bill today overhauling the rules governing securities fraud litigation, a key part of the Republican majority's Contract With America.
The final vote was 33 to 10, as three Democrats abstained.
The bill now returns to the House Judiciary Committee, which is handling a companion bill that would modify the rules governing product-liability cases and change certain other rules of civil litigation.
Together, the two proposals make up the "Common Sense Legal Reform Act," which House Speaker Newt Gingrich vowed to act upon within the first 100 days of the Republican-controlled Congress.


For Law Firms, the Shakeout in the Business World Has Finally Hit
It has finally happened: Law firms are going through the same wrenching changes that their corporate clients have endured.
Big firms are getting bigger, small firms are finding niches, medium-sized firms are feeling squeezed.
And the legal world is reacting to the recent demise of Shea &amp; Gould, a blue-chip law firm if ever there was one, with the same shocked horror that corporate America felt when it saw the seemingly invincible International Business Machines Corporation run into financial and marketing troubles.


Algeria Rebels Said to Attack Post in Tunisia
Islamic militants struggling to topple the Government in Algeria have carried their fight across the border to Tunisia, killing at least five Tunisian border guards, according to experts in Algerian affairs.
The details are murky and disputed, but the experts reported today that Algerian militants had crossed into Tunisia last Saturday, killed the guards and seized weapons and a car before returning to Algeria.
News reports said the militants had headed toward Negrine, an oasis on the southern slopes of the Atlas Mountains.


Justice Officials Start Preliminary Inquiry on Commerce Secretary
The Justice Department announced today that it had opened a preliminary criminal investigation into Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown's business dealings and personal finances to determine whether an independent counsel should be appointed in the case.
The decision is the second step along a procedural path dictated by the independent-counsel law.
It follows a 30-day initial review in which the Justice Department was required to determine whether accusations against Mr.
Brown were both clear-cut and from a credible source.


For Children
'How the World Got Wisdom'
On Stage Productions  Emily Dickinson Theater at P.S. 75  735 West End Avenue (at 95th Street)  (212) 666-1716  Recommended ages: 3 and up  Through March 12
If only all greetings were as generous as the one at this show of West African stories.
The audience is greeted with a funga, a traditional welcome dance, in which Tambu, a musician, plays drums and creates an irresistible warm mood.
When the six dancing actors then come across the stage in their earth-colored African costumes, the collective mood flies higher.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
5.95
3.30
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.66
5.72
3.26
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.96
6.00
3.43
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.40
7.42
5.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.57
7.55
6.54
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.45
8.43
7.37
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.48
6.49
5.55
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Dozens Hurt By Gas Fumes Of Cable Fire
Carbon monoxide fumes apparently released when underground Con Edison cables caught fire overwhelmed dozens of residents of a Brooklyn apartment building yesterday.
One building resident died after having a heart attack during a chaotic evacuation, and 24 more were hospitalized, two in critical condition.
Streaming silently through hallways, up garbage shafts and into bedrooms, the carbon monoxide left residents disoriented and staggering into the street, forced police, fire and medical personnel to the hospital, and turned the junction of President Street and Franklin Avenue in Crown Heights into a disaster scene of rescue vehicles and Red Cross trucks.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Realizing that the world does not sing in perfect harmony, YAR marches to each culture's drum.
WHILE the global marketplace has become almost a cliche these days, a less-noted parallel trend is the growth of multicultural marketing geared to individual cultures.
And one New York-based agency is finding success as it devotes its attention to developing campaigns for clients in many languages to reach ethnic groups in the United States and consumers in foreign countries.
The agency, YAR Communications, now creates print and broadcast ads in Polish, Chinese, Ukrainian, Spanish, Greek and dozens of other languages.
It follows the school of thought that people in any market will respond best to communications from advertisers with cultural authenticity -- an authenticity that goes beyond language to encompass core values and traditions.
The other main school of thought in global advertising reasons quite differently: It maintains that one message universal enough to be understood in any language is the most powerful.


Jokes on Rude (Russian) And Stuck Up (French)
The drawing seen at the start of Yuri Mamin's "Window to Paris" looks like a charming French street scene, but it disintegrates before the viewer's very eyes.
As the picture comes to life, stylized Gallic gaiety gives way to Russian reality, with drab colors, clumsy buffoonery, a circus atmosphere and a long line for vodka destroying any suggestion of hedonism or style.
Contrasting such stereotypes of French and Russian culture, Mr.
Mamin makes his countrymen the butt of an extended, wistful joke.
His film asks what would happen to Russians who could suddenly escape their impoverished society and find themselves in the midst of French culture, which they regard with a mixture of suspicion, envy and disbelief.


Honor for Music Professor
A Rutgers University music professor, George Walker, is among the composers to be honored tomorrow by the National Academy of Sciences in connection with Black History Month.


Abroad at Home; Cruel And Unusual
One of the crime bills pushed through the House by the Republican leadership would stop what its sponsors called "frivolous" lawsuits by prison inmates.
Here are some recent examples of lawsuits that would be affected:
*
In Ohio, a 15-year-old girl who ran away from home for one night was put in an adult jail by a judge to "teach her a lesson." There a guard raped her.
Hundreds of other children were put in that jail every year, mostly for minor offenses like truancy.
When a suit was filed in Federal court, local officials signed a consent order agreeing not to put children in the jail anymore.


Brazil Paves Way for More Foreign Investment
Reversing half a century of economic control by the state, Brazil's new President introduced draft legislation today that would allow foreign investment in oil, mining and telecommunications.
"We need private capital," Fernando Henrique Cardoso said in a nationally televised address to explain the change of course to a free market for Latin America's largest economy.


Witness in Corruption Trial Tells of Collection of Payoffs
A Harlem bodega owner testified yesterday that a panicky police officer now on trial on corruption charges came to his store in 1993 to find out whether anyone had been asking questions, ostensibly about illegal acts by officers in the 30th Precinct.
The witness, Dionisio Jimenez, said the officer, John Arena, told him that "someone on 140th Street had been talking," and the officer added "that everyone was panicking in the precinct."


An 85th-Birthday Look At Sokolow's Influence
The Anna Sokolow 85th Birthday Gala on Wednesday night was just that: a warm celebration of the life and work of one of American modern dance's most significant choreographers and dancers.
Uta Hagen, Jerome Robbins, Paul Taylor and Gerald Arpino, like other friends and colleagues, paid tribute to Miss Sokolow's influence and integrity at the Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College; Ruth W. Messinger, Manhattan Borough President, came on stage as well to proclaim Wednesday as Anna Sokolow Day.


Art in Review
Mary Obering
Littlejohn/Sternau Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Feb. 25
Mary Obering's abstract paintings have always looked like an exotic form of sculpture.
Incorporating gilding and succulent encaustic, each work was made up of odd-shaped components strung out like mystical diagrams or exotic pieces of jewelry blown up large.


Whitman Plans Change In School-Fund Formula
Working under a 1996 deadline imposed by the State Supreme Court, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman said today that she planned to fashion a new school-financing formula that will be based on the true cost of the "thorough and efficient" education required by the State Constitution.
The only problem is that no one knows what a thorough and efficient education is.
So, over the next seven months, the Whitman administration will have public hearings to try to figure it out.


Correction
Because of a production error, an article yesterday about government reform in California appeared without its last line.
The ending should have read: "Beware the law of unintended consequences. California has a Constitution full of them."


Home Video
'The Lion King' at Home
On March 3 Disney will release "The Lion King," priced at $26.99.
Though the number of copies in retail outlets isn't expected to reach that of "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" last fall (about 27 million), there should be stacks of cassettes in establishments of every description, from discount chains to gas stations.


Tolbert Tops the Field as Free Agents Go on a Spree
The National Football League teams have made out their shopping lists and today the free agency mall will open its doors.
From now until July 15, all unsigned players with four or more years of experience in the N.F.L. will be available, for the right price.
The Dallas Cowboys made a pre-emptive move earlier this week by signing receiver Michael Irvin to a five-year $15 million contract rather than allowing him to go on sale.
That indicates that they have no hope of signing Alvin Harper, their other top receiver, who is a free agent.


CHRONICLE
SHARON RICH, the author of three books about Jeanette MacDonald and Nelson Eddy, will be making a pilgrimage to Washington next Friday on behalf of the two crooners, who appeared together in eight films.
It's not fair, Ms.
Rich said, that the movie stars' likenesses have never been on a United States postage stamp.
Ms.
Rich, who is also head of Eddy-MacDonald fan club, has collected 20,000 signatures on a petition and will take them to the capital "to toss them on the desk of the person in charge of making decisions" at the Postal Service.
In addition, she will bring with her a contingent of other fans who will march along with her singing "Indian Love Call," the couple's famous duet.


Chaney Uses Tough Love
Temple Coach John Chaney drew boos from the crowd at the Louis Brown Athletic Center tonight when he whipped his junior center William Cunningham with a sweater during a timeout late in the first half.
"The fans don't know," Chaney said afterward.
"They don't know the relationship coaches have with guys. If I had a board, I probably would have hit him with a board. That's what my mother would have done to me.


Murder Trial In L.I.R.R. Case Goes to the Jury For Deliberation
Jurors will begin deliberations Friday morning in the murder trial of Colin Ferguson, who delivered a rambling and sometimes incoherent summation today, arguing that the 19 Long Island Rail Road shooting survivors had conspired with the authorities to convict him.
The judge sequestered the jury for the night.


Bandit Rebels Ravage Sierra Leone
Somewhere just beyond the mountainous peninsula that houses this tumbledown capital lies a war zone that is defined not by battles pitting Government forces against armed rebels, but by the stealthy hit-and-run banditry of a new type of African guerrilla warfare.
In four years of fighting for control of this mineral-rich, but loosely governed country of four million people, the shadowy rebels of the Revolutionary United Front have abandoned their efforts to hold onto conquered territory and have given up all pretense of a political rationale for their struggle.


Dow Inches to Record, But Falls Short of 4,000
The Dow Jones industrial average, which came within two points of the 4,000 mark on Wednesday, failed again to break through it yesterday.
But the Dow still closed at another record high, reaching 3,987.52, up 1.35 points.
Despite the slight gain in the Dow, declining stocks far outnumbered advancing stocks on the New York Stock Exchange, with 886 winning stocks and 1,334 losers.


Shared Hate: Jews and Arabs Mark Mosque Slayings
A year after Dr.
Baruch Goldstein massacred 29 Muslim worshipers in the Cave of the Patriarchs shrine in Hebron, his admirers gathered at his grave today to mourn him.
A few hundred people attended a memorial service marking the Jewish calendar date on which Dr.
Goldstein, a Brooklyn-born physician, was battered to death by survivors of his attack last Feb. 25.


On My Mind; As California Goes
California's plan to fight illegal immigration is all tied up in the courts, and part of it has been ruled unconstitutional.
Around the state, doctors, nurses and teachers say it will turn them into informers and that they will not obey it.
Around the country, some prosecutors say it will not work or would increase crime.
But to most Californians these objections just stand in the way of dealing with a draining of state funds by people who have no business being in America at all.


The Kitaj Show Crosses the Atlantic
THE retrospective that caused the fracas in London has arrived at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
When the American-born painter R. B. Kitaj's exhibition opened at the Tate last year, the reviews were so hostile that he announced he wouldn't show his work in England ever again.
That was saying a lot for someone who had lived there more than half his life (he's 62), and who even coined the phrase "School of London" to describe the group of prominent painters that included himself, Francis Bacon and Lucian Freud.
But Mr.
Kitaj has always been a person to say what is on his mind, sometimes to his detriment.
Now that the retrospective is here you may well wonder what the fuss was about.
If you go to the Met expecting another Freud exhibition, meaning one as galvanic and intense as the show of his work the museum had a year back, you'll be disappointed.
This show has its inspired moments, though Mr.
Kitaj is a painter whose ambitions outstrip his art.
He deserves credit for those ambitions, and certainly not the caning he got in the British press.
But his paintings can sometimes be abstruse and pretentious, and there are too many weak recent pictures on view to come out of the Metropolitan with more than mixed feelings.
A Kitaj exhibition now at Marlborough Gallery in Manhattan includes some better new work that doesn't alter the bottom line.


F.W. Elliot Farr, 85, Investment Analyst
F.
W.
Elliot Farr, a financial analyst and investment adviser in Philadelphia for more than 60 years, died at his home in Gladwyne, Pa., on Sunday.
He was 85.
The cause was leukemia, said his daughter Martha F. Kent of Essex, Vt.


U.S. Settles Suit by Bank
The Justice Department said today that it was ending its opposition to settling a civil suit brought against the Department of Agriculture by Banca Nazionale del Lavoro of Rome.
The suit was an element in the welter of actions resulting from allegations and investigations over whether the Bush Administration had secretly armed Iraq and then tried to cover up its actions after Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait.


Gulf Nations Balk at Proposal for Mideast Development Bank
A proposal championed by the Clinton Administration and Israel to create a regional Middle East Development Bank appears to have been dealt a major blow by Arab countries, with officials saying they will neither finance such a bank nor take part in it.
The unusually forceful position from the diplomatically timid Persian Gulf countries appears to be part of an Arab retreat from further normalization with Israel.


Rangers Again Gain the Upper Hand Before Losing Their Grip
After the Rangers lost a third-period lead and settled for a 2-2 tie with the Montreal Canadiens last night at Madison Square Garden, Coach Colin Campbell remained in the locker room longer than usual, saying more than usual.
"We got sloppy," he said.
"If I sound disappointed, I am. We expected to play this game with aggression and confidence. We sat back."


The Joy of Shopping on 'Ladies Mile'
In Milan, it's Via Monte Napoleone; in Paris, the Rue St.-Honore, and in London, Bond Street.
Every city has its special shopping area where part of the attraction is "just looking," into the windows as well as at other shoppers.
Even in the age of television, shopping remains a form of entertainment.
In New York City, it took its modern turn in the period between the Civil War and the turn of the century in the area that became known as Ladies Mile, extending from Union Square to Madison Square, from what was then Sixth Avenue to Broadway.


McDonald's Adopts A New Theme
The McDonald's Corporation said yesterday that it would make the first change in its advertising theme since 1991, replacing "What you want is what you get" with "Have you had your break today?" A 60-second commercial running tonight during two ABC sitcoms, "Family Matters" and "Step by Step," will promote the new theme, which echoes the "You deserve a break today" theme used by the fast-food chain from 1970 to 1975.


Sports of The Times; A Celebration Of Virtuosity That Is Cosell
NEAR the end of his 1991 book, "What's Wrong With Sports," Howard Cosell wrote, "I am an elder statesman, and will continue to be one, but don't expect me to be quiet and dishonest."
Cosell is quiet now, debilitated by illness.
He has nursing care 24 hours a day.
Few visitors get in to see him.
A generation of viewers has grown up not knowing how he told it like it was.


Market Place; For Sara Lee, a new program to shape up its product line.
FOR any woman who likes sweets, but still wants a shape, the Sara Lee Corporation is a dream company.
Everybody knows its cheesecakes and other treats.
But Sara Lee also sees bottom-line advantages in selling products that make sure its foods do not do too much damage to the waistline.


Sports of The Times; The Pride of the Yankees? Not Exactly
Who were these guys?
Where had they come from?
The answer, in Bill Henderson's case, was from a card buried in Rudy Santin's Rolodex.
Santin, the Yankees' Florida-based scout, pulled that card with Henderson's Miami phone number, and tried his luck at dial-a-catcher on Tuesday afternoon.
"Been playing ball?" Santin asked.
"None at all, not for years," Henderson said. "Sorry."
Nothing to be sorry about, Santin told him.
And less than 48 hours later, Bill Henderson, whose last play was a home-plate collision six years ago, was pulling up his pin-striped pants one leg at a time, just like Joe D., Mickey and the Babe.
This little tale from the crypt once known as the Yankee clubhouse should give you an idea of what's going on here, at the start of replacement spring training, which is a joke, "Star Search" on Broadway.
If the Yankees had this much trouble assembling pitchers and catchers, they may soon be picking position players out of the telephone book.
"Some of these young men could earn positions in our organization," said George Steinbrenner, repeating the line the Yankees obviously fed their pitchers, catchers and dreamers.
"There might be some future star."
Now, there is only one, and he was not in uniform this morning.
After more than two decades of trying, Steinbrenner is finally the biggest of all the New York Yankees.
There is no one around who could possibly upstage the Boss.
That's why journalists grabbed hold of him the moment he hit the field, and Steinbrenner refused to let go.
"O.K, that's it," he would say after a while.
Then he'd move a few feet, and start talking all over again.
His new sultans of swat would pass by, look up at him with reverence and gratitude.
Fans pushed their paper and pens in his face and peppered him with questions and advice.
George signed.
George bantered.
George leaned across the rail and planted a kiss on the cheek of a young girl.
A guy who looked just like Don Mattingly -- honest -- told him the players would soon crawl back.
"George, you've lost weight," an elderly gent told him.
That he had.
A few more pounds, and he might have been out there, jogging alongside the nobodies in the most famous uniform in American sports.
"No, sir," Steinbrenner said to that proposition.
He is the owner.
The players are the players, even if they are not the players.
So who were these guys and where had they come from?
Some were from the Yankees' minor leagues, in career atrophy, hoping to score organizational points.
The others were the unremorseful has-beens we've been reading about these past few weeks, fantasy leaguers on leave from life.
"I was between jobs," said Bill Henderson, holder of a marketing degree.
"My new job starts March 1. The boss said, 'Go for it.' "
Henderson, 26, once went for the money, right out of high school, as the Detroit Tigers' 1987 first-round draft pick.
Two years later, in the Florida State League, he was bowled over in a play at the plate, a season-ending injury that sent him back to school, for good.
At least he didn't sustain a concussion.
"He was out . . . I held on," Henderson recalled.
I'll admit that I'm breaking my personal oath to refrain from this "I have a dream" replacement material that strikes me, depending on the moment, as unpalatable or preposterous.
Couldn't help it, especially after the way Henderson answered the question of how much he missed baseball after last summer's strike.
"Actually," he said, "I've always thought the baseball season was too long. By the time August comes around, I'm watching football."
How's that for expert commentary on the state of the national pastime?
It might even have stopped Steinbrenner, as he blabbed on at the top dugout step, about how much baseball is "interwoven into the American fabric," and how in small Indiana towns, men sit around all winter "arguing who's better, Gehrig or Mattingly."
Meanwhile, journalists were so interested in the first workout of Steinbrenner's replacement Gehrigs that they surrounded the owner, pushing closer until one newspaper reporter, tired of being elbowed from behind, suddenly began landing punches to the head of a stunned magazine photographer.
The reporter was so quick with his right that Steinbrenner yelled out, "Give that man a uniform!"
For once, the reporter could compare himself to the athlete and know he had a better job.


The Neediest Cases; Helping the Elderly to Protect Their Dignity
To some, Gregory N. could be considered an easy target.
He is 80 and legally blind, and has had to depend literally on the kindness of strangers to cross the street.
Mr.
N., an immigrant from Latvia who lives alone on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, lost his sight two years ago, and daily living became a struggle.


Charles Saatchi Is Leaving Agency
Another dispute reached a showdown yesterday between the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company P.L.C. and a co-founder, but this time it involved Charles Saatchi rather than his younger brother Maurice.
Charles Saatchi, the president at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, said yesterday that he had left the agency company he co-founded with Maurice and that he is suing for constructive dismissal, contending he was forced out.


June Havoc In Drama Of Hesitant Friendship
June Havoc has been appearing on one stage or another since she was 2.
Yet nothing she has learned in her 79 years in vaudeville, theater, films and television can resuscitate her new vehicle, which opened last night at the Lamb's Theater.
The play is "The Old Lady's Guide to Survival," Mayo Simon's unconvincingly life-affirming comedy, which even as you watch it, passes away as discreetly as a bishop's burp.
Ms.
Havoc is a strong, vigorous stage presence, but not an especially interesting actress when given this sort of material.
She looks great with her chiseled features, her eyes of delphinium blue and her becomingly short-cropped white hair.
She appears to be without age.
Her voice is big, fine and theatrical.
Except for her intelligence, she's not much like Netty, the 81-year-old San Diego widow she plays in "The Old Lady's Guide to Survival."


Aubrey Boyd 3d, 54; Sought Insulin Drug
Dr.
Aubrey E. Boyd 3d, a physician and professor who was a leading researcher into how drugs work on diabetes that develops in adulthood, died on Feb. 7 in his home in Hingham, Mass.
He was 54.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Nancy Stice Boyd.


Andretti And Kinser Qualify
John Andretti just scraped in to the Daytona 500 today, and Steve Kinser, like the great dirt-track racer he is, just slid in.
And although neither driver will have a great seat in the starting lineup on Sunday, they now know what stock car fans will tell you about this sold-out event: any seat will do.
Andretti, who is with a new team, and Kinser, who is starting a stock car career after dominating sprint car racing for the past 17 years, both survived mishaps today in their qualifying races.
The two 125-mile events helped determine the 42-car lineup for the Daytona 500: Andretti will start 38th and Kinser will start last.


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about L. C. Graves, the Dallas police officer who wrestled the gun from Jack Ruby after Ruby shot Lee Harvey Oswald, misstated the timing of Oswald's death.
He died while in surgery, not on the way to the hospital.


Religious Right Sends Confusing Message
To the Editor:
Re "Christian Right Issues a Threat to the G.O.P." (front page, Feb. 11): Ralph Reed, executive director of the Christian Coalition, has me very confused.
On Friday he feels comfortable threatening the Republican Party with a litmus test, saying that pro-life and pro-family voters "will not support a party that retreats from its noble and historic defense of traditional values or which has a national ticket or a platform that does not share Ronald Reagan's belief in the sanctity of innocent human life."


On Mets, 2 Friends Separated By a Strike
David Segui drove to a junior college near Kansas City, Kan., and put in a workout.
Benny Distefano, his former minor league teammate and an old friend, traveled here to report for the Mets.
To Segui, the Mets' first baseman/outfielder, it seemed as if the world was a bit out of kilter: his career is supposed to be on the upswing.
Distefano's is supposed to be done.
Instead, Segui is biding his time, waiting for the players' strike to end.
And Distefano, a retired outfielder, is one of 28 replacement players who will dress for the Mets' first spring workout Friday afternoon.


Law Faculties Need Better Gender Ratios; Real-World Pursuits
To the Editor:
The University of Pennsylvania study defines success as winning the honors that flow directly from high grades: law review, moot court, Order of the Coif (Law page, Feb. 10).
The legal community agrees.
These indicators determine who gets clerkships, offers of high-paying private sector jobs and further honors.


HOUSE VOTES BILL TO CUT U.N. FUNDS FOR PEACEKEEPING
Defying President Clinton's veiled threat of a veto, the House of Representatives today approved a bill that would cut United States payments for United Nations peacekeeping efforts and give Congress a greater say in committing troops abroad.
By a vote of 241 to 181, lawmakers approved the national security tenets of the Republicans' Contract With America, after a campaign by Democrats and the Clinton Administration succeeded in defeating or watering down a few important provisions.


Three Killed As Tornado Strikes Town In Alabama
A pre-dawn tornado that struck with virtually no warning killed three people today in this small northeast Alabama town and injured more than 100 as it hopscotched 25 miles through the area.
Houses were torn from their foundations, more than 40 commercial poultry houses were demolished and at least two small trailer parks were destroyed by the twister, which first touched down here at 5:05 A.M.
It ripped the roof off the Amberwoods Garden Apartments here and tore through the Joppa Elementary school five miles away.


Trump Sues Empire State Building Management Company
Donald J. Trump, who last summer gained a 50 percent interest in the Empire State Building without investing a penny, has filed a $100 million eviction lawsuit against the building's management company and others, contending that they are in violation of their lease obligations.
In the suit, filed on Wednesday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, Trump Empire State Partners contends that the Empire State Building Company, which has held the operating sublease on the building since 1961, has allowed the 102-story landmark to deteriorate into a "second-rate, rodent-infested" office tower.


Perils of Invisible Foe Are Often Tied to Heat Systems
Each year, about 250 people in the United States are killed by carbon monoxide and 5,000 more are injured, some permanently, according to the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
Most often, the source is a heating system or water heater that has a cracked flue or a blocked chimney.
While experts say equipment fueled by natural gas appears to be the most troublesome, carbon monoxide can also come from heating systems using oil, propane or coal, from cars running in attached garages, or from charcoal grills used indoors.


Court Upholds Restraint Order In Tobacco Suit
The Kentucky Supreme Court ruled today in effect that a paralegal who has been accused of stealing documents from the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation must face criminal contempt charges without speaking to a defense lawyer.
The unanimous ruling by the court's seven justices raises the possibility that the paralegal, Merrell Williams, may be sent to jail without being permitted to discuss his defense with a lawyer.


Sitting on Top Of Two Worlds
Say this for Marion Jones.
She has learned that she must satisfy only one person in this world -- herself.
So she is happy that she left her native Southern California a year and a half ago for the University of North Carolina.
She is happy that she is playing basketball in the winter and running track in the spring and summer.
And if you think she is ruining a world-class career as a sprinter by spending the winter as a starting point guard, that's your problem.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  BOOS FOR GIULIANI AT A POLICE CEREMONY
Mayor Giuliani was greeted by scattered boos and tepid applause at Police Headquarters when he joined Police Commissioner William J. Bratton at a promotion ceremony in which they tried to put their recent squabbles behind them.
B3.


Kotite Meets With Esiason: Everything Comes Up Roses
Two New York guys -- Boomer Esiason and Rich Kotite -- met for the first time as colleagues Wednesday night and talked as if they were made for each other.
"The only differences we have right now may be the Verrazano Bridge," Esiason, the Long Islander, said of Kotite, who is from Staten Island.


The Tolerant Dutch
The most surprising thing about "Sex, Drugs and Democracy," Jonathan Blank's bland documentary film exalting life in the Netherlands as the next best thing to Utopia, is how little joy the Dutch people express when describing a country that has achieved such an enviable equanimity.
This portrait of a society that has a legalized sex industry, total equality for homosexuals, an open but regulated sale of marijuana and apparently racial harmony has the sober plodding tone of an extended Chamber of Commerce advertisement.
Far from stimulating crime and unbridled hedonism, the film suggests, the Netherlands' liberal attitudes on sex, drugs, abortion, guns (they are forbidden) and capital punishment (there is none) reflect a national temperament that is sedate bordering on glum.
A word that keeps cropping up in the scores of interviews with Dutch Government officials and scholars about the country's approach to issues of individual freedom is "pragmatic." The Government doesn't think in terms of good and evil.
One commentator equates the Dutch pragmatism about social problems and its building of dikes to hold off the sea: if the water can't be conquered, it must be controlled.


Court Told Simpson Wasn't Curious About How Ex-Wife Died
A Los Angeles police detective today told of how he informed O. J. Simpson that his former wife had been killed.
While Mr.
Simpson was clearly upset at the news, the detective testified, he was strangely uncurious about the circumstances of her death, including whether she had been murdered or had died of natural causes.
The detective, Ronald Phillips, described how, having tracked down Mr.
Simpson at his room at the O'Hare Plaza Hotel in Chicago, he telephoned the defendant saying that he "had some bad news for him." Then he told Mr.
Simpson that Nicole Brown Simpson had been killed.


Merits of Lethal Injection Are Questioned By Its Foes
Shortly after 12 A.M. today, Texas prison officials strapped Billy Gardner, a 51-year-old convicted murderer, onto a hospital gurney.
Mr.
Gardner's arms were scarred from heavy drug use, but with a little effort, technicians found three clean veins for intravenous needles in the meat of his outer forearms, two on the left side and one on the right.
A saline solution began to drip.
Mr.
Gardner said his last words -- "I forgive all of you and I hope God forgives all of you all" -- and three deadly chemicals coursed into his body.
Within a few seconds, he seemed to fall asleep, then coughed and wheezed.
By 12:24, he was dead.


Financial Restructuring At Boston Arts Museum
Boston's Museum of Fine Arts, one of the nation's largest and most prestigious art institutions, has announced staff layoffs, a restructuring of operations and a reduced exhibition schedule.
The changes are meant to shrink a $4.5 million deficit, which grew by $700,000 last year in the face of declining attendance, reduced corporate contributions and a dropoff in revenues from the museum's retail operations.
The belt-tightening measures were announced Wednesday night by the museum's new director, Malcolm A. Rogers, in an address entitled, "The M.F.A. Is 125 Years Old: Are We to Hold a Birthday Party or a Wake?"


Art in Review
Grandma Moses  'Visions of America'
Galerie St. Etienne  24 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through March 18
There's been a bumper crop of outsider art shows this season, many of them featuring artists who deserve to be better known and accepted into the broader "inside" continuum of art history.
The exhibition at St.
Etienne continues the trend.
With the work of America's most famous 20th-century folk artist, Grandma Moses, providing an effective foil, it brings back into view the work of Earl Cunningham (1893-1977).
His paintings, which are fantastic in both senses of the word, were last seen in New York at the Museum of American Folk Art in 1980.


Banker Joins Dillon, Read
Jerome H. Powell, the investment banker who was spearheading Bankers Trust's drive to build closer relationships with its clients, said yesterday that he had quit the embattled bank to rejoin Dillon, Read.
Dillon, Read is one of the last old-fashioned "white shoe" investment banks that specialize more in advice than in trading.
Mr.
Powell worked there from 1984 to 1990, when he became under secretary for finance in the Treasury Department, which was run by Dillon, Read's former chairman, Nicholas F. Brady.


Diner's Journal
Sardinian Food
"What does Cala di Volpe mean?" That is the first question everyone who hears the name of SoHo's new Sardinian restaurant asks.
It is quickly followed by another: "What does the food taste like?"
Here are the answers:


Partial Closing for Turnpike
The western spur of the New Jersey Turnpike will be partially closed for construction work during the weekend.
The southbound lane between Exits 14 and 16W will be closed from 10 tonight until 8 A.M. tomorrow and again from 10 P.M. tomorrow until 8 A.M.
Sunday.
Ramps from the Meadowlands Sports Complex to the southbound western spur will also be shut.
Northbound traffic will not be affected.


Slash Welfare Benefits -- for Bureaucrats
Coming on top of Gov.
George Pataki's proposed cuts in welfare and Medicaid, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's new budget, which calls for even more, has drawn predictable cries of outrage from advocates for the poor.
With the state and city facing budget gaps in the billions of dollars, the Governor and Mayor have little choice.
But even if they did, these cuts would be overdue.
Spending on aid to the poor, which accounts for more than a quarter of all government outlays in the state, is vastly disproportionate to that in other states.
And the evidence shows that Albany and the city are spending neither wisely nor effectively.


Conjuring Up the Innocent and Golden Days of Jazz
Anyone with the misconception that the spirit of a particular music is not a direct reflection of the souls of the musicians who created it must see "A Great Day in Harlem," Jean Bach's small and very moving documentary about the jazz life.
The film, which opens today at the Quad Cinema, is ostensibly about the shooting of a famous photograph for the January 1959 issue of Esquire magazine.
But it is really a loving remembrance of a loosely knit community of musicians, the majority of whom are now dead, who cherished one another and created a body of music that will live forever.
Around 10 one morning in the summer of 1958 (no one is sure of the exact date), 57 musicians representing three generations of jazz history showed up to be shot for a group photograph taken by Art Kane, a young freelance art director.
Charles Mingus, Gene Krupa, Sonny Rollins, Maxine Sullivan, JimmyRushing, Coleman Hawkins, Mary Lou Williams, Thelonious Monk, Lester Young, Gerry Mulligan, Roy Eldridge, Dizzy Gillespie and Count Basie were among those who arrived at 126th Street, between Fifth and Madison Avenues in Harlem, to be photographed on a brownstone stoop.


Rangers Seeking a Center
The Rangers' shopping list for centers now includes Keith Primeau, a fifth-year player with the Red Wings whose ice time and potential are limited by other talented players at the same position in Detroit.
Executives of both the Rangers and the Wings, who spoke yesterday on the condition of anonymity, have confirmed that the teams recently discussed trading the 23-year-old Primeau, who stands 6 feet 4 inches and weighs 220 pounds, to New York.


Keep in Mind
"KID CITY," a new interactive multimedia exhibition that opened this week, in which children can learn how New York City was built, how skyscrapers are constructed and what could be in store for the city's future.
Organized by the Municipal Art Society and designed by the Lee H. Skolnick Architecture and Design Partnership.
At the Urban Center Gallery, 457 Madison Avenue, at 50th Street.
Through May 4.
Hours: daily, except Thursday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: free.
Information: (212) 935-3960.
"PRESIDENTS' WEEKEND: DISCOVER DYCKMAN," an Urban Park Rangers-led tour through the Dyckman House Museum, a Dutch Colonial farmhouse that was overrun by British and Hessian soldiers during the Revolutionary War.
Sunday at 11 A.M. and 2 P.M. at the museum, 4881 Broadway, at 204th Street, Inwood.
Free.
Information: (800) 201-PARK.


Where Every Day Is Valentine's Day
THEY can not say enough about Bayonne.
About the bridge at sunset.
The high school skating rink.
First Street Park.
The indoor pool, the outdoor pool, little league.
Bayonne, Bayonne, Bayonne.
"I think of it as a beautiful little peninsula city across from majestic New York," Kevin Sellaro said.


Of Passion And Paradox In the Ruins
"Through the Olive Trees" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Stephen Holden's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 24.
The film -- in Persian with English subtitles -- opens today at the Village East Cinema, Second Avenue at 12th Street, East Village.
In Abbas Kiarostami's film "Through the Olive Trees," Hossein Rezai, a nonprofessional actor with soulful eyes and a streak of stubbornness that is as big as his ego, plays a love-smitten bricklayer whose would-be fiancee (Tahereh Ladania) refuses to acknowledge his existence.
Complicating matters is the fact that the two have been cast as newlyweds in a movie about earthquake survivors in northern Iran.


A Crackdown on a Drug Gang


Judge Allows Big Lawsuit On Tobacco
A Federal judge yesterday cleared the way for the first nationwide class action against the tobacco industry on behalf of the nearly 100 million Americans who smoke or have quit smoking.
The judge ruled that the tobacco industry could be sued for punitive damages on accusations of addicting huge numbers of cigarette smokers and of concealing the fact that cigarettes were addicting.
In his decision, the judge, Okla B. Jones 2d of the United States Eastern District of Louisiana, has not only created the possibility for the largest class action in history, but has also exposed the tobacco companies to their most formidable legal challenge yet.
So far, they have never had to pay any money penalties in court.


Learning About the Senses: Even a Roach Can Enjoy
The main mystery about "Mystery of the Senses" is why it isn't a better set of programs.
The subjects of hearing, smell, taste, touch and sight are rich; much of the information in the five-parter that begins tomorrow on PBS is fresh, particularly the research into helping people who have lost one sense or more, and the auspices, "Nova," is always promising.
But the programs meander down dull paths; the scientific material tends to be delivered in clumps that are hard to absorb even through wide-open eyes and ears, and Diane Ackerman, the host and executive editor of this series inspired by her book "A Natural History of the Senses," comes on like a romance novelist manquee.


Kenton Kilmer, Writer and Editor, 85
Kenton Kilmer, a writer and editor and the son of the poet Joyce Kilmer, died on Feb. 10 at his home in Vienna, Va.
He was 85.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Islamic Extremists Are Active in U.S.
To the Editor:
Ironically, on the very day Ibrahim Hooper wrote denying the existence of Islamic extremists in the United States (letter, Feb. 11), a Federal Bureau of Investigation official testified in the Trade Center bombing trial about Islamic terrorist training in the United States since 1989.
Mr.
Hooper also says my PBS film "Jihad in America" referred only to the defense of Afghanistan.


Corrections
A music review on Thursday about a performance of Massenet's opera "Herodiade" by the Opera Orchestra of New York, at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday night, misstated the reason for recording it.
The performance is to be broadcast on National Public Radio, not released on compact disk.


Editorial Notebook; Doing the Triple Pier
A friend has eight gold-banded white plates and wants me to look for serving pieces to match.
A daughter says if I see a long necklace, maybe blue beads, she'll go $45 tops.
I am hoping to find another of my dome things, which are impossible to describe or define, which is why I call them my dome things.
My companions have been warned to be prepared for pickup at 8:45 A.M.
They have also been warned that I will be wearing a bright orange jacket so there is no excuse for losing me in the crush, and no forgiveness either.
Armed with cash (dealers like it), shod in sneakers (miles will be covered), packing Tic-Tacs (no time for lunch), we are going to the Triple Pier.
The Triple Pier, which takes place on two weekends in November and two weekends in February, is an antique show.
Or, rather, it is a show of old stuff, fairly new stuff, valuable stuff and stuff to which no one in his right mind would give house room.
Fortunately for the dealers, however, quite a few of the customers are not in their right minds.
Among them I count myself, who last year bought a decal'd pink tin cake carrier, circa 1937, in the event I have to carry a cake someplace.
My companions said I shouldn't pass it up.


Bribery Case Gets Under Way
Federal prosecutors began presenting their case yesterday against two former City Council presidents who are accused of taking bribes from towing companies that sought city contracts.
The first witness, Robert Marasco, the City Clerk, testified that one of the defendants, Councilman Gary S. Harris, took steps to have the Council increase the number of towing companies that could get the pacts.
Mr.
Harris was chairman of the towing committee in late 1991 when the Council created five towing districts instead of four, Mr.
Marasco said.


Lingering Emptiness
In the end, the jury that found Colin Ferguson guilty of the Long Island Rail Road shootings brought a measure of satisfaction to both the public and Mr.
Ferguson: neither had wanted him acquitted because he was mentally unbalanced.
But while the trial had its moments of catharsis for survivors, triumph for Mr.
Ferguson and macabre drama for television viewers, it was finally anything but satisfying.
It left a nasty, hollow feeling in its wake, the sense that the conviction of Mr.
Ferguson, who had been found competent to stand trial and chose to represent himself, was ill gotten.


U.S. Markets Shut Monday
All financial and commodity markets in the United States will be closed on Monday in observance of Washington's Birthday.
Banks, government offices and many businesses will also be closed.
But most markets in other countries will be open.


CHRONICLE
R.
B.
KITAJ, the American-born painter who makes his home in England, had something else to do this week besides promoting a retrospective of his work that opened at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Mr.
Kitaj (pronounced KIT-eye) flew to Washington yesterday to sketch his latest portrait subject: President Bill Clinton.


Thailand Supports Harmony in Cambodia
To the Editor:
"Rebels Still Torment Cambodia 20 Years After Their Rampage" (front page, Feb. 6) portrays the Khmer Rouge as more or less the only important obstacle to peace and prosperity to Cambodia, with the complicity of Thailand.
This conclusion is sadly derived from false assumptions, inaccurate information and unsubstantiated rumors that the very survival of the Khmer Rouge is dependent solely on Thailand, and that without the Khmer Rouge, Cambodia could now be peaceful and prosperous.


World News Briefs; Top Spanish Official Jailed in Terror Inquiry
The former head of Spain's antiterrorist program was jailed today on suspicion of involvement in a "dirty war" against Basque separatists.
No charges have been brought against the official, Rafael Vera, once the No. 2 official in the Interior Ministry.
But judicial officials said the judge overseeing the inquiry had jailed Mr.
Vera on suspicion of involvement in the 1983 kidnapping of a Spanish Basque businessman and the diversion of ministry funds to an antiterrorist death squad.


The G.O.P.'s Flawed Crime Bills
President Clinton has promised to use his first veto if the Senate, like the House, passes a crime bill that dismantles last year's law to help put 100,000 police officers on the streets.
But other crime bills the Republicans hurriedly approved last week are at least as dangerous to justice.
The misnamed Exclusionary Rule Reform Act would constitute a Congressional assault on the Fourth Amendment's safeguard against unlawful searches and seizures.
Like the rest of the crime legislation flowing from the Contract With America, the measure was dispatched to the floor without adequate committee hearings, lest anything slow the 100-day Republican legislative express.


Sonoma Sales Jump; So Do Costs
Williams-Sonoma Inc. was the envy of the retail industry during last year's difficult holiday sales season.
While other retail companies desperately slashed prices in hope of pushing up sales, the purveyor of kitchen wares and home furnishings enjoyed a sales boom that pushed its revenues last year ahead by about 50 percent.


Rangers Hoping Langdon Will Add Some Toughness
As they traveled to Montreal for the second game of a home-and-home set, the Rangers picked up an extra passenger yesterday.
Darren Langdon, a 24-year-old left wing, was promoted and will play in his first National Hockey League game tonight against the Canadiens in the Forum.
Although Langdon had 6 goals and 14 assists in 55 games in Binghamton of the American Hockey League, his most significant statistic was 296 penalty minutes.


Beliefs
Two weeks ago Andrew Sullivan, the young editor of The New Republic magazine, came to the University of Notre Dame to speak on "The Gay Catholic Paradox."
At first glance, the paradox was Mr.
Sullivan himself.
He told the overflowing auditorium of about 500 students that he is repeatedly asked, "How can you be openly gay and Catholic?"


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  The way was cleared for the first nationwide class action against the tobacco industry on behalf of the nearly 100 million Americans who smoke or have smoked.
Federal Judge Okla B. Jones 2d ruled in Louisiana that the tobacco industry could be sued for punitive damages on accusations of addicting smokers.  [ Page 1. ] Reformulated gasoline is drawing consumer protests.
The fuel is intended to cut smog and emissions of some carcinogens, but it costs more, and some drivers do not like its fumes.  [ 37. ] Kevin D. Mitnick, accused of a computer crime spree, waived his right to a bond hearing; he will continue to be held in jail.  [ 37. ] The United States trade deficit was the largest in seven years last year at more than $108 billion; deficits with Japan and China set records.
The Clinton Administration conceded that the numbers looked disturbing, but said they reflected economic strength.  [ 37. ] Companies  NBC, in a stunning reversal of its campaign against the Fox television network, agreed to cease its effort to deny Fox broadcast licenses in seven cities.
In exchange, NBC said it had reached a potentially lucrative agreement with Fox's chairman, Rupert Murdoch, to have two NBC-owned cable channels distributed on Mr.
Murdoch's Star Television system in Asia.  [ 1. ] Motorola shares plunged $6.375, or 9.9 percent, in heavy trading after the company stunned Wall Street with the news that inventories of cellular phones were bulging.  [ 37. ] A Pulitzer prize-winning editorial page editor is leaving The Philadelphia Daily News to take a similar post at The Star-Ledger in Newark.
The editor, Rich Aregood, cited business pressures to cut editorial resources as the reason for his departure.  [ 39. ] A $625 million transaction would create Italy's largest bank.
Banca di Roma, Italy's second-largest bank, said it it would acquire control of Banca Nazionale dell'Agricoltura.  [ 39. ] Williams-Sonoma's stock tumbled $3 after analysts cut their earnings estimates for the company, whose holiday sales boom had made it the envy of the retail industry.
The cost of handling the additional sales was $5 million more than expected.  [ 39. ] London Fog's owners have been meeting with creditors of the troubled coat manufacturer to hammer out a restructuring plan to keep the company from filing for bankruptcy protection.  [ 39. ] Markets  Stocks fell sharply on a "double-witching" day with traders' anxiety heightened by concern over Mexico's crisis.
The Dow Jones industrial average was down 33.98 points to 3,953.54.  [ 37. ] Treasury prices showed little change after tracking the dollar through a holiday-shortened session.  [ 47. ] The dollar plunged against most major currencies for a second straight day, hit by the strong German mark and worries over Mexico's financial stability.
The dollar fell a full pfennig to 1.4802 marks, the lowest point in almost two-and-a-half years.  [ 48. ] Gasoline prices rose, sending crude oil up on signs the Government will not allow states to stop selling clean-burning fuel.  [ 48. ] Your Money  Insurance policies for long-term health care are getting a second look by many consumers.
One reason is proposed cuts in government spending for health care.  [ 35. ] Studying businesses, not markets, has paid off for Warren E. Buffett, the investing phenomenon who has said, "Lethargy bordering on sloth remains the cornerstone of our investment style." Francis Flaherty: Investing.  [ 35. ] The I.R.S. has a personality, and knowing it can help taxpayers avoid an audit, Martin Kaplan, a Manhattan certified public accountant, argues in a new book.  [ 36. ]


No Headline
"We didn't have a college fund for Michelle. You see commercials on television saying to start when the baby is born. But because of the unforeseen things that happen in life, it's impossible to save money." -- BRENDA IRIZARRY, whose family of four lives on $38,000 a year in the Bronx.  [ 27:2. ]


Political Memo; Senate: Beehive of Presidential Ambition
Not since John F. Kennedy has a sitting senator run a successful Presidential campaign.
One can make the case, in fact, that the very qualities that make an effective senator -- like the ability to compromise -- are a hindrance in the modern campaign.
Primary voters tend to like their meat red and their ideological positions undiluted.
None of this, however, has prevented the quadrennial outbreak of Presidential ambition in the United States Senate, where it is sometimes said that every senator, sooner or later, looks into the mirror and sees a President.
It has happened, in recent months, to Senators Bob Dole and Phil Gramm, Richard G. Lugar and Arlen Specter.


Government Mortgage Group Trims Costs
One way for a bond fund to increase its returns is to cut expenses.
And that's exactly what most of the government mortgage funds listed here have done.
The winners for the last three years mostly have expenses below the group average of 1 percent, and some funds, like Vanguard and USAA, have substantially lower expenses.


Free to Sing of Love and Be Sincere
Brett Anderson knows how it feels to be an adolescent tormented by sexual longing and confusion.
He also knows every nuance of David Bowie's pioneering mid-1970's glam-rock albums.
The two obsessions coalesce in the songs of the London Suede, which performed on Tuesday night at the Manhattan Center Ballroom.
While young heterosexual rockers shy away from love songs, Mr.
Anderson lets androgyny free him to wax sincere.
"I want the style of a woman, the kiss of a man," he sings in "Introducing the Band" from the band's second album, "Dog Man Star" (Nude/Columbia), which was heard on tape to begin the band's set.
"Oh if you stay, we'll be the wild ones," Mr.
Anderson vowed from the stage, his voice rising to an aching falsetto, as teen-age girls with fluorescent-dyed hair crowded forward.


CHRONICLE
DANIEL YANKELOVICH, the social researcher and public-opinion analyst, was injured in a car accident near San Diego Wednesday night that killed his wife, Mary.
He was released yesterday from the University of California San Diego Medical Center.
Mr.
Yankelovich, the chairman of DYG Inc., a market research group in Elmsford, N.Y., and his wife, who often worked with him, were on business, heading toward a hotel in La Jolla when Mrs.
Yankelovich, who was operating the car, ran a red light and the car was hit by a small truck, the San Diego police said, according to The Associated Press.


BASEBALL: Uneasy Are the Men Who Sign Those Lineup Cards; Showalter Waffles And Keeps Waiting
You know that fence?
The labor-management fence Buck Showalter was teetering on before he seemingly ended the debate by arriving here for spring training?
Well, Showalter jumped back on it this morning.
Then he edged off it three hours later.
After attending the players' meeting in Orlando, Fla., on Thursday, Showalter held his daily session with reporters three hours earlier than usual today and expressed uncertainty about whether he would manage the replacement Yankees in exhibition games.
Showalter said the players association told the 12 managers who attended the meeting that they are legitimizing the replacement teams by instructing those players while the real players are striking.


Producer Hints at N.A.A.C.P. Deception
In a letter to members of the N.A.A.C.P.'s board, who are in the middle of a bitter leadership rivalry, the former producer of the group's annual Image Awards program suggests that accusations about large financial losses incurred by the Hollywood ceremony are being used to obscure mismanagement elsewhere.
Hamilton Cloud, the producer of the award program from 1986 to 1994, said the event, which was financed and broadcast by NBC until this year, was structured in a way that would prevent losses to the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, which presents the annual ceremony.


Soccer Fans Sentenced
A Dublin court sentenced two English soccer fans to two months in jail yesterday for their part in a riot at the Ireland-England game in Dublin.


6 Vie in Fountain of Youth
Half a dozen contenders for the Kentucky Derby from both the East and West Coasts will try to establish their credentials Saturday in the $200,000 Fountain of Youth Stakes, which Holy Bull lost a year ago for the first defeat in his career.
One of the candidates, Suave Prospect, breezed three furlongs in 37.3 seconds this morning in his final workout.
His trainer, Nick Zito, noting that the colt had drawn the No. 12 post position on the far outside, said: "I don't like to make any excuses before the race, but that post is something. If he runs well, we'll see you in the Florida Derby."


A Second West Bank Town? Arafat Says No
Yasir Arafat rejected today an Israeli proposal that he quickly widen his self-rule authority by assuming administrative control of the West Bank town of Jenin while Israeli soldiers remain there for the time being.
Jenin, a town of 50,000 people, has emerged as a likely early candidate for Palestinian rule if Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization come to terms on how to expand Mr.
Arafat's self-government beyond its present confines of the Gaza Strip and another, much smaller West Bank town, Jericho.


INSIDE
Huge Trade Deficit
The trade deficit in 1994 was the largest in seven years at more than $108 billion; deficits with Japan and China set records.
Page 37.
New Questions for Secretary
A $75,000 videotape shown at the Democratic National Convention figures in inquiries of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown.
Page 8.
Questions on Police Pistols
New York police officials believe officers with new semiautomatic guns have been firing too many shots, a former official said.
Page 23.


Jets Sign Lewis and Houston
The Jets, who are going to try to develop and keep their own stars, announced yesterday that they had reached contract agreements with their top linebackers, Mo Lewis and Bobby Houston.
They are part of the Drew Crew, all of the Jets' starting linebackers, including Marvin Jones, are clients of the Miami-based agent Drew Rosenhaus.


CASE CLOSED ON BLOCKBUSTER TRIAL TESTIMONY
Viacom Inc. said yesterday that the District Attorney's office in Dallas had determined that there was no basis for filing any charges against Steven R. Berrard, chairman of Viacom's Blockbuster Entertainment Group, in connection with his testimony in a civil trial.
The trial involved a 1991 lawsuit against Blockbuster filed by an investor, Charles Howell of Dallas.
A Texas court awarded Mr.
Howell $124 million in damages, which Blockbuster has appealed.
Mr.
Howell's lawyers recently made accusations to the judge about Mr.
Berrard's testimony, and the judge referred the matter to the District Attorney.
A statement from Viacom yesterday said, "As we fully expected, the Dallas District Attorney's announcement totally vindicates Mr. Berrard." Separately, in the latest effort by publishers to get in on the multimedia-in-education scene, Simon &amp; Schuster, the publishing arm of Viacom, acquired Educational Management Group Inc., an interactive education telecommunications company, company officials said yesterday.
Terms were not disclosed.


Suspect in Internet Break-In Waives Bond-Hearing Right
Kevin D. Mitnick, accused of a computer crime spree, waived his right to a bond hearing today, two days after he was arrested by the F.B.I. in connection with the theft of credit-card numbers and files from computers on the global Internet network.
Mr.
Mitnick, arraigned in United States District Court here, will continue to be held without bond as he faces Federal charges of illegal computer access and fraud.
If convicted, he could face up to 35 years in prison and a total of $500,000 in fines.


Clinton, in a Memorial Tribute, Hails Fulbright as an Inspiration
President Clinton eulogized former Senator J. William Fulbright today as a mentor and an inspiration, a man who "stood against the 20th century's most destructive forces and fought to advance its brightest hopes."
Mr.
Fulbright, an Arkansas Democrat, represented the President's home state in the House and Senate from 1942 to 1974, a Congressional career that began four years before Mr.
Clinton's birth and ended in the year he entered public life.


Effects of AZT
To the Editor:
"Children's AIDS Study Finds AZT Ineffective" (Science Times, Feb. 14) reported results of Pediatric AIDS Clinical Trial Group study 152.
Children in the study were all HIV-infected, but did not all have AIDS.
The study showed AZT less effective than DDI alone or AZT/ DDI in combination after two years of treatment.
AZT has been shown to be effective in multiple studies and in this study was equally effective for the first year of therapy.
Your headline misrepresents the study.
CATHERINE M. WILFERT, M.D.
Prof. of Pediatrics &amp; Microbiology Duke University Medical Center Durham, N.C., Feb. 16, 1995


Trial Begins in Abuse Cover-Up
In a courtroom packed with lawyers for priests and their accusers, a Superior Court judge convened a vast and complicated civil trial yesterday in which Roman Catholic dioceses in Camden and Providence, R.I., are charged with covering up for priests who are accused of sexually abusing children.
The lawsuit was filed by Stephen Rubino, a Westmont lawyer, on behalf of 38 people, and accuses the Diocese of Camden, the Diocese of Providence and 27 present or former priests of participating in or covering up for molestation by priests dating to the mid-1960's.


Nets Shifting Their Focus
The Nets insist the family feuds are behind them.
But only time will tell whether this peace treaty is of substance or a sham.
For now, things are as pleasant as they have ever been for the first-year Coach Butch Beard.
His Nets have won their first two games since the All-Star Game break, a 109-98 victory over Charlotte on Tuesday and a 100-94 triumph over Denver on Thursday night.
Both games were at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, part of a five-game homestand the Nets are hoping to take full advantage of.
Any playoff aspirations could largely depend on how well they do on their homecourt, thus making a good showing in this homestand critical.


Police Moves Announced
The Police Department said yesterday it would transfer 121 uniformed officers out of administrative positions and into street crime-fighting positions on Monday.
The wording of the announcement, as well as that it was distributed at City Hall and not the Police Department, was a sign that Mr.
Giuliani was taking a more direct role in the department and its public relations efforts.


2 Big Banks In Italy Plan A Merger
Italy's banking landscape was reshuffled this week as Banca di Roma, Italy's second- largest bank in terms of assets, announced that it would acquire control of Banca Nazionale dell'Agricoltura in a transaction valued at $625 million.
The merger would create Italy's largest bank.
Investors reacted unenthusiastically to the announcement, which came late Thursday.
Today, Banca di Roma shares closed at 1,760 lire ($1.10), down 57 lire, on the Milan Stock Exchange.


3 Companies Vie for a Jackpot
Picking a company to operate the state lottery has proved as difficult as picking the winning numbers in the Lotto jackpot.
First, the State Lottery Commission recommended the Autotote Lottery Corporation of Owings Mills, Md.
But the office of the state treasurer, which makes the final decision, ignored the endorsement.
Instead, last July, the Treasurer awarded the $100 million, five-year contract to Automated Wagering International Inc. of Hackensack.


Giuliani Fiscal Plan Puts Health Care Jobs at Risk
By calling for huge cuts in Medicaid and social service programs, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to reduce city spending by $1.3 billion is likely to lead to the loss of tens of thousands of jobs in the health care industry, the segment of the New York City economy that has been the strongest source of job growth for more than a decade.
In an interview, David R. Rubenstein, assistant director of the Mayor's Office of Management and Budget, estimated that Medicaid cuts alone would lead to job reductions of 10,000 to 30,000 at hospitals, nursing homes, mental health clinics and other medical centers, and remove $1 billion a year in wages.


A Spiritual Conversion in the South Bronx; A Priest of 50 Years Finds Meaning in the Struggle of His Poor Parishioners
Gerald Ryan envisioned a life doubly cloistered.
He entered the priesthood in 1945, following the path of his strict Irish Catholic boyhood; then he hoped his love of literature would land him on a teaching faculty.
The neat lines of his vision pleased him, as much for what they excluded as for what they included.
"I wasn't too interested in change or where society was going. That would have been a distraction to me," Father Ryan said.
"I was naive, inexperienced, jejune."


Visiting Cyberspace Isn't Just for the Young; TV Sets Still Lead
To the Editor:
In "Homeless @info.hwy.net" (Op-Ed, Feb. 11) Nicholas Negroponte writes that sales of personal computers were "ahead of televisions for the first time last year." Actually, it wasn't even close -- some 27.4 million color television sets were sold in 1994, nearly four times the number of home computers sold (about 7 million).


Corrections
A sports highlight headline on the front page of the Metro Section on Thursday misstatedthe nickname of the Carolina team in the National Football League expansion draft.
They are the Panthers, not the Cougars.


Robert Clancy, 80, Institute's Founder
Robert Clancy, an educator who was director of the Henry George School of Social Science from 1946 to 1970 and founder of the Henry George Institute, died on Feb. 9 in Jackson Heights Hospital in Queens.
He was 80 and lived in Jackson Heights.
The cause was colon cancer, said George L. Collins, the executive director of the Manhattan school.


A Singer Spurns The Role Of Victim
After the suicide of her husband, Kurt Cobain, 10 months ago, Courtney Love acquired a strange distinction reserved for Presidents, major felons and celebrity widows: every word she said and wrote became newsworthy.
Her postings on the computer bulletin board America Online were repeated word for word in magazines; her arrests, scandals and the drug overdose of the bassist in her band, Hole, made national headlines.
Her travels to Buddhist monasteries and lingerie shops were followed in gossip columns, and speculation about her dalliances and the upbringing of her 2-year-old daughter became a voracious hobby among fans and detractors.
On Tuesday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, as Hole taped an "Unplugged" performance for broadcast on MTV in April, Ms.
Love struck back.
"Look out the window and what do I see?" she sang in her hoarse growl.
"Dozens of people staring back at me. And it's strange." The song, "Season of the Witch," an altered version of the Donovan tune, took on new meaning in light of Ms.
Love's ascendancy to most-watched celebrity status.
Its chorus, "You guys pick up every stitch/Must be the season of the witch," sounded like the anguished cry of a woman who can't sneeze without being accused by some of not having used a tissue and promised a tissue factory by others.


Dow Off 33.98 On a Retreat From Record
The Dow Jones industrial average, which came tantalizingly close to 4,000 on Wednesday, went into sharp reverse yesterday, falling 33.98 points to close at 3,953.54.
The Dow fell past not only its Thursday record of 3,987.52, but even past its Jan. 31, 1994, peak of 3,978.36.
Even so, for the week, the Dow finished ahead by 14.47 points.


Formal and Forceful, With Feminine Allure
Peggy Baker, who is performing at the Kitchen through tomorrow night with Andrew Burashko, a pianist and fellow Canadian, is a dancer of startling power and fascination.
Audiences lost no time noticing her in Lar Lubovitch's modern dance company, where from 1981 to 1988 her big-boned dynamism was used with passionate sweep.
Appearing since then as a charter member of Mikhail Baryshnikov's White Oak Dance Project and as a soloist, she has evolved into a dancer of striking physical projection.


A Mexican Zigzag; Zedillo's Shifting Actions Toward Rebels Seem to Reinforce an Image of Weakness
When President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon was about to open his sudden strike against peasant rebels in the southern state of Chiapas last week, Government officials were told that army troops had the guerrilla leader known as Subcommander Marcos virtually surrounded.
Mr.
Zedillo then told the nation in a televised speech that Marcos and his comrades were violent criminals, and would be hunted as such.
The first problem, officials involved in the operation said this week, turned out to be a balky district judge: it took the Government eight hours to get arrest warrants for the rebel leaders, and by the time the federal police and army troops finally began to move, Marcos was long gone.


London Fog Aims to Avoid Chapter 11
The owners of the London Fog Corporation have been meeting with the company's creditors to hammer out a restructuring plan that would keep the coat manufacturing company out of bankruptcy protection.
But even as they met yesterday in Manhattan, speculation that the company would file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy increased.


First Lady, in Blue, Opens Refurbished Blue Room
Wearing a royal blue suit that was a shade or two brighter than the sapphire hue of the satin draperies and silk upholstery, First Lady Hillary Clinton opened the newly refurbished White House Blue Room to the press for the first time today, saying that the room with its straight-backed chairs and eagle motif was her new favorite.
But she allowed that choosing just the right hue for the furnishings had been a matter of some concern.


The Blood Outside Our Window
The white breast of snow was splotched with blood, and my daughter had to step around iced red pools on the concrete as she walked, alone, to the school bus.
The evening before, a friend arrived, breathless, at the door of our New York City apartment.
On the street outside she had seen a man who had just been attacked.
Police were taking descriptions of a white male in a black baseball cap who had run away.
The man who had been hurt lay there in a pool of blood.
"I should have comforted him," my friend said.
"The police were so cold. I should have knelt in the snow and just patted him or something."


Foreign Islamic Militants Strain Bosnian Alliance
What bothers Zeljko in the sweeping view from his bedroom window is not the gargantuan steel plant, built by Tito, but the yellow house beside the factory, where a group of Islamic militants have taken up residence.
The now dilapidated steel mill is a monument to the former Communist ruler's vision of placing strategic industries in the mountainous heartland of Bosnia, where he fought a successful guerrilla war against the Nazis in World War II.
The yellow house is a monument to the spiral of violence unleashed by the Bosnian war.


In America; Where the Schools Come Last
The thing to keep in mind is that Midwood High in Brooklyn is a very good school.
Academically it is one of the better schools in the country.
It turns out Westinghouse science scholars the way the Bronx used to turn out World Series winners.
In a big, tough, troubled city, it is something to be proud of.
But in an era in which government at all levels is dominated by little people with big egos and no vision, a school like Midwood must be made to suffer.
So if you visit Midwood you will find that it is jammed to 175 percent of capacity.
The halls between periods are like the running of the bulls at Pamplona.
Classrooms have been set up in areas that once were courtyards.
Shortages in support services are extreme.
There are 3,200 students and one -- just one -- art teacher.


COMPANY NEWS
DRESSER INDUSTRIES, Dallas, has signed a letter of intent to acquire Wellstream Co., Panama City, Fla., a maker of pipe systems for the offshore oil and gas industry.
Terms were not disclosed.
MERCANTILE BANCORP, St.
Louis, plans to acquire Amerifirst Bancorp, Sikeston, Mo., for about $23.8 million in stock.
NUCOR CORP., Charlotte, N.C., a steel products maker, plans to build a steel fastener plant in Conway, Ark.
The plant is expected to cost about $27 million and to begin operating in the first quarter of 1996.


Sports of The Times; Hip-Hop In Orange And Blue
WHO is Jesse Jaymes, anyway?
That's what I began asking a couple weeks ago when a photographer friend said that the creator of "Go New York Go," the Knicks' catchy signature song, was a young rapper named after one of the Wild West's most notorious outlaws.


METRO DIGEST
GUNMAN CONVICTED IN L.I.R.R.
MASSACRE  Colin Ferguson was convicted of murder in the 1993 Long Island Rail Road shootings that killed 6 people and wounded 19 others.
Page 1.
The jury brought a measure of satisfaction to both the public and Mr.
Ferguson: neither had wanted him acquitted because he was mentally unbalanced.
News Analysis, Page 26.
Survivors and relatives of those who died pleaded for stricter gun control.
Page 26.
PLAN PUTS HEALTH CARE JOBS AT RISK By calling for huge cuts in Medicaid and social service programs, Mayor Giuliani's plan to reduce city spending by $1.3 billion is likely to lead to the loss of tens of thousands of jobs in the health care industry.
Page 1.
FREE FROM WANT, BUT JUST GETTING BY Brenda and Amancio Irizarry live on $38,000 a year, an income that places them in the financial middle of a city where the gap between rich and poor is among the widest in the nation.
They have no savings.
They rent an apartment, because they cannot afford to buy a home.
The family has never taken a vacation trip together.
To be in the middle in New York City, as the Irizarrys' life attests, is not necessarily to have either the security or the comforts so often associated with being middle class.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  DISCOVERY OF BODIES REVIVES MURDER CASE A tangled murder mystery involving the shooting of a custodian six years ago, the disappearance of two others and the theft of hundreds of VCR's from the Board of Education's supply warehouse in Queens has been reopened with the discovery of the charred remains of two bodies near a creek upstate.
Page 25.
ADDICT CONVICTED IN EX-ROCKETTE'S DEATH Kevin McKiever, a homeless drug addict who had drifted in and out of New York's mental health system, was convicted of murder in the 1991 stabbing of a former Rockette who was attacked near Central Park.
Page 25.
SOURCE OF FUMES PUZZLES INVESTIGATORS Residents of a Brooklyn apartment building, evacuated Thursday after poisonous carbon monoxide fumes filled their homes, were allowed to return, but only briefly, to gather a few belongings and return to a hotel where they are being housed.
Page 25.
AND NOW, JUSTICE WITHOUT FANFARE There were no television cameras in the court, no teams of expensive lawyers, no prolonged discussion of legal tactics.
There was just an ordinary wife-beater impassively facing justice on the afternoon after St.
Valentine's Day.
About New York, Page 25.
GIULIANI GAMBLES ON THE HORSE RACES On some of the more obscure cable channels, New York City offers an eclectic but often dry mix of television programming -- from meetings of the City Planning Commission to training for firefighters to lessons in English.
Now, Mayor Giuliani plans to add something he hopes viewers will find more enticing: horse racing.
Page 25.
REGION  TRIAL OPENS IN BABY'S DEATH A gouged bowling ball perched in a baby's car seat on a courtroom bench provided a backdrop to the opening of a manslaughter trial.
A 19-year-old defendant is accused of dropping the ball off a Jersey City highway overpass and killing an 8-month-old girl riding in her parents' car.
Page 27.
Neediest Cases...24  Holiday schedule...24


Smuggling of Radioactive Material Said to Double in a Year
Efforts to smuggle radioactive materials, including potentially weapons-grade plutonium and uranium, from formerly Communist nations more than doubled last year, a Western European intelligence report says.
The report concluded that so far none of the material appeared to have been stolen from nuclear-warhead stocks.


Mr. Pataki's Environmental Duty
Gov.
George Pataki says he is looking for someone who will be sensitive to both environmental and business concerns to head New York State's Department of Environmental Conservation.
The trouble is that Mr.
Pataki may be on the verge of appointing a Cuomo administration holdover whose track record on environmental matters makes him an inappropriate choice to be chief steward of the state's threatened natural resources.
A "very strong candidate" for the top D.E.C. post, according to the Governor, is Michael Zagata.
Unlike some of Mr.
Pataki's appointees, Mr.
Zagata, at least, is not a political crony or relative of one.
He served at the D.E.C. under Gov.
Mario Cuomo, who named him to the amorphous new position of Business Ambassador just before the election, in an apparent nod to commerce.
Before that Mr.
Zagata spent 14 years working for various oil and gas companies.
He forged a career on the wrong side of some big environmental questions.
For example, he advocated the proposal, wisely rejected by Congress, to open up the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge for drilling.
He has also supported a misguided concept called "mitigation banking," which would allow companies to develop protected wetlands on the promise to create new, ecologically suspect sanctuaries.


Mexico Rejects Rebels' Demand for Troop Withdrawal
Flatly rejecting rebel demands that the army pull back from the towns and villages it occupied last week, the Mexican Government repeated its willingness to negotiate today and offered to let the guerrillas help shape a new amnesty law that would keep them from being prosecuted.
Members of a multiparty legislative panel flew in helicopters today to the area of conflict.
Senator Heberto Castillo of Veracruz, a panel member from an opposition party, said the Zapatista rebels would take part in drafting the amnesty law that President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon has proposed as a way to defuse the Chiapas crisis.


New York Employees Know How to Trim Fat; Leisure Helps Work
To the Editor:
The authors of "A Leaner New York in 20 Minutes a Day" (Op-Ed, Feb. 10) make the false assumption that longer workweeks would result in increased productivity.


Drug Addict Is Convicted Of Murdering Ex-Rockette
Kevin McKiever, a homeless drug addict who had drifted in and out of New York's mental health system, was convicted yesterday of murder in the 1991 stabbing of a former Rockette who was attacked while walking her dogs near Central Park.
Mr.
McKiever, 37, who rejected an insanity defense during his three-week trial, was found guilty in State Supreme Court in Manhattan by a jury that deliberated less than two days before returning a verdict of felony murder in the second degree and attempted robbery in the death of Alexis Ficks Welsh.


The Business Decision Could Hurt the Business
If the WTA Tour divined that it would save face, and local sponsors, by refusing a $10 million-plus offer from Tampax to become the new title sponsor of women's professional tennis, its hierarchy ought to think again.
What the tour's chief executive officer, Anne Person Worcester, had considered a safe business decision, albeit a distinctly nonfeminist message about just how unenlightened the marketplace remains, appears to have backfired.
"Now we're hearing that women are planning to boycott our tournaments because they're ticked off that we walked away from the Tampax deal," an unhappy tour executive said yesterday.


Trial Opens In Girl's Death by Bowling Ball
A battered bowling ball perched in a baby's car seat on a courtroom bench provided a stark backdrop to the opening of a manslaughter trial today.
A 19-year-old defendant is accused of dropping the ball off a Jersey City highway overpass and killing an 8-month-old girl riding in her parents' car.
The Hudson County Prosecutor, Debra Simon, told the jury that the defendant, Calvin Settle of Jersey City, showed "extreme indifference to the value of human life" when he stood against a railing and dropped the 16-pound ball on a road leading to the Holland Tunnel on Feb. 6, 1994.


Ex-Mayor Returns From Prison Undaunted
Fourteen years ago, a spirited young mayor named Gerald McCann began transforming the desolate waterfront in this working-class city into a blend of high-rise offices, condominiums and retail outlets.
Today Mr.
McCann's personal transformation took a significant turn, as he returned to his hometown after serving more than two years in Federal prison, where his aggressive win-at-all-costs approach to economic development ultimately landed him.
Expressing an unswerving devotion to Jersey City and unbridled optimism about his own future, Mr.
McCann, a 44-year-old Democrat, said he plans to become an integral part of the city's future -- perhaps even mayor again.
"I would like to be the Mayor again," he said in an interview just 12 hours before his release from a Manhattan halfway house where he spent the last four months.
"But that doesn't mean I currently have plans to run." .


Source of Lethal Gas Puzzles Investigators
Residents of a Brooklyn apartment building, evacuated on Thursday after carbon monoxide filled their homes with poisonous fumes, were allowed to return yesterday, but only briefly, to gather a few belongings and then return to a hotel where they are being housed.
Investigators remained puzzled over how a cable fire in a service box in the street outside had caused so much of the deadly gas to seep into the building at 1010 President Street in Crown Heights.
A 60-year-old woman who lived in the four-story building died of a heart attack after the evacuation.
Two of the 24 residents hospitalized on Thursday remained in serious condition yesterday, suffering from carbon monoxide poisoning.


Daschle on Home-State Tour to Rebut Accusations He Intervened for a Friend
Senator Thomas A. Daschle, the Senate's Democratic leader, today began a vigorous effort to rebut accusations that he improperly intervened with Federal aviation inspectors to help an air charter company owned by a longtime friend.
Mr.
Daschle began a four-day round of town meetings in his home state, South Dakota, where the accusations have received prominent press coverage.
David Kranz, a senior political writer for The Argus Leader of Sioux Falls, the state's largest newspaper, said that the issue of Mr.
Daschle's behavior had raised serious questions among many of his supporters.


The Night Streisand Called to Complain
To the Editor:
Re Frank Rich's "Barbra at Harvard" (column, Feb. 9), Mr.
Rich used Barbra Streisand's calling NBC during the network airing of "The Prince of Tides" to personally complain about the volume of commercials as an example of how obsessive she can be.
I was the "engineer" who spoke to Ms.
Streisand on Feb. 5.


LUMP-SUM GRANTS FOR NUTRITION AID PROPOSED BY G.O.P.
House Republicans today unveiled a bill that would scrap the national school lunch program and a separate Federal program that feeds pregnant women and preschool children, in favor of lump-sum grants to the states.
But senior Republicans are balking at Speaker Newt Gingrich's plan to do the same with food stamps.
The bill, drafted by Republican members of the House Committee on Economic and Educational Opportunities, would give states vast new discretion to design their own food programs in place of the school lunch program and the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children, or WIC.


New Gas Arouses Grass-Roots Ire
When customers buy gasoline at the C-Store station in Louisville, Ky., they are asked to sign a petition opposing a cleaner-burning fuel that was introduced this year to reduce pollution in many smog-infested urban areas.
"People are upset," Bob Fagin, who owns three gas stations in Louisville, said this week.
"We've had hundreds sign. Customers are complaining about the price and the possibility that it's a health hazard."


Met Camp Attractive To Players In Need
There was the principle, and then there was the money.
Both meant something to Stanley Jefferson, a former major league ballplayer who had fallen upon hard times.
He believed strongly in the players' union -- he had once been a member himself -- but creditors were calling every day, and he could not seem to find a 9-to-5 job.
In the end, the money won.


More on the Verdict
Many who saw Mr.
Ferguson defend himself felt little satisfaction in his conviction.
News analysis, page 26.
Victims of the shooting pleaded for stricter gun control, rather than condemning Mr.
Ferguson.
Page 26.


New York Employees Know How to Trim Fat
To the Editor:
Re "A Leaner New York in 30 Minutes a Day" by Laurence Buttenwieser and Raymond Horton (Op-Ed, Feb. 10):


NBC Agrees to End Its Attempt to Block Fox TV Expansion
In a sharp reversal of its bitter campaign to thwart the expansion of the Fox television network, NBC agreed yesterday to cease its effort to deny Fox licenses for broadcast stations in seven cities.
NBC said it had reached a potentially lucrative agreement with Fox's chairman, Rupert Murdoch, to have two NBC-owned cable channels distributed over Mr.
Murdoch's Star Television system, which delivers programs by satellite to homes in Asia.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Signed Jerome Harmon, guard, to a 10-day contract.
PORTLAND TRAIL BLAZERS -- Activated Terry Porter, guard, from the injured list.
Placed James Edwards, center, on the injured list.
WASHINGTON BULLETS -- Activated Kevin Duckworth, center, from the suspended list.
Football  National Football League BUFFALO BILLS -- Named Ted Cottrell linebackers coach.
CHICAGO BEARS -- Signed Dwayne Joseph, cornerback, and Ervin Collier, defensive tackle.
Waived Marv Cook, tight end.
DENVER BRONCOS -- Named Mike Heimerdinger wide receivers coach.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Named Marty Mornhinweg offensive assistant for quality control and special teams assistant, and Jim Lind linebackers coach.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Released Jon Hand, defensive end.
Failed to tender a contract offer to Ed Toner, running back, making him an unrestricted free agent.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Named Gunther Cunningham defensive coordinator.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Scott Miller, wide receiver, to a three-year contract.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Mo Lewis, linebacker, to a five-year contract; Bobby Houston, linebacker, to a four-year contract; and Marcus Turner, cornerback, to a two-year contract.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Failed to tender a contract offer to Gary Anderson, kicker, making him an unrestricted free agent.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Signed Scott Dill, tackle, to a three-year contract.
Hockey  National Hockey League ANAHEIM MIGHT DUCKS -- Assigned John Lilley, right wing, to San Diego of the Internationl Hockey League.
DALLAS STARS -- Acquired Mike Donnelly, left wing, from the Los Angeles Kings for a fourth-round draft choice in the 1996 NHL entry draft.
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Recalled Sergei Brylin, center, and Chris McAlpine, defenseman, from Albany of the American Hockey League.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Recalled Darren Langdon, left wing, from Binghamton of the American Hockey League.


Jury Finds Ferguson Guilty Of Slayings on the L.I.R.R.
Colin Ferguson was convicted of murder tonight in the 1993 Long Island Rail Road shootings that killed 6 people and wounded 19 others.
The verdict, which came shortly after 9:15 P.M., was greeted enthusiastically by relatives of shooting victims and by survivors of the massacre who filled most of the seats in the Nassau County courtroom.


Rison a Falcon No More
ANDRE RISON's career with the Atlanta Falcons is over.
Coach JUNE JONES told the four-time Pro Bowl wide receiver Thursday that the team will not try to re-sign him because of problems fitting him under the salary cap.
The team also won't try to re-sign running back ERRIC PEGRAM. (AP)


Bridge
In a duplicate game, an 80 percent result is almost unheard of.
Two who have scaled that Everest are Mel and Janet Colchamiro of Merrick, L.I., who recorded 80.1 percent last July 13 in a silver-point game at the Grand Club in Merrick.
Mel Colchamiro drew a delicate inference in making three no-trump on the diagramed deal last month in a regional tournament in Port Chester, N.Y.
His no-trump opening as South was the weak variety, and his wife's response of two diamonds as North was forcing Stayman.


Finding Insurance in a Tough Market
Although California homeowners often struggle to find insurance these days, perseverence sometimes pays off.
It did for Pan and Evan Kaizer.
She's an executive with a charitable foundation, he's and executive in a garment company, and they live in a house that was built in 1937 in the Studio City section of Los Angeles.
Last June, shortly after the Northridge earthquake, the Twentieth Century Insurance Company notified the Kaizers that the earthquake coverage on their home would not be renewed on Feb. 17.
Their homeowners coverage would be dropped two years later.
Determined to have earthquake coverage, the Kaizers started shopping for new insurance.


Driver Out of Big Race
A year after he was disqualified from the Winter Olympics for a rules violation, the United States bobsled driver BRIAN SHIMER dropped a 675-pound bobsled on his right foot in Lake Placid, N.Y., Wednesday, breaking his big toe and forcing him out of the biggest race of the season, the four-man world championships at Winterberg, Germany. (AP)


Bodies' Discovery Revives 6-Year-Old Murder Case
A tangled mystery involving the shooting death of a schools custodian six years ago, the disappearance of two others and the theft of hundreds of videocassette recorders from a Board of Education warehouse in Queens has been reopened with the discovery of the charred remains of two bodies near a creek upstate.
As allegations of corruption at the New York City school system's Bureau of Supplies multiplied, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines announced yesterday that he was shutting down the warehouse.


Washington Mayor Teams With Gingrich on City Crisis
Emerging from their first meeting since the extent of this city's budget crisis became known, Speaker Newt Gingrich and Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. said today that they would pursue a wide range of ideas to rescue the city from insolvency, including eliminating Federal income tax for District residents and recruiting specialists from states that have overcome similar problems.
"We are committed," Mr.
Gingrich said, as he and Mr.
Barry left together after a two-hour meeting arranged by Jack F. Kemp, the Housing Secretary in the Bush Administration.


David Garvey, 72, Accompanist Who Was Almost a Partner, Dies
David Garvey, a pianist best known for his collaborations with Leontyne Price and other performers, died on Tuesday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 72 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was heart failure, said David Targ, his lawyer and friend.


In the Middle: New York on $38,000 a Year -- A special report.; Free From Want, but Just Getting By
Brenda, Amancio, Michelle and Amelia Irizarry are a family of four living in the Bronx, and at first glance, their lives seem to mirror the middle-class ideal.
Brenda heads the parents' association at the local middle school.
Her husband, Amancio, bustles off to work early each morning.
Their younger daughter, Amelia, 13, accents her jeans with Nikes and Timberland boots.
Their older daughter, Michelle, 20, attends college and hopes to become a social worker.


Surplus of Phones Hurts Motorola
Motorola Inc. stunned Wall Street today by disclosing that sales of its cellular phones would be well below analysts' projections in the first quarter.
The company's shares plunged $6.375, or 9.9 percent, to close at $57.875 in extremely heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


Visiting Cyberspace Isn't Just for the Young; Electronic Copyright
To the Editor:
"Growing Threat of Cyberthieves in the Intellectual Marketplace" (Arts pages, Feb. 11) highlights how digital technologies facilitate blatant piracy.
The permanent danger to copyright, however, lies in the more insidious practices of corporations in today's conglomerated communications industries -- piracy of the second and third degrees, if you will.
Piracy in the second degree refers to the attempt by these corporations to grab rights in the new media that were not granted or often not even contemplated in their contracts with creators.


Corrections
An article yesterday about efforts to replace William F. Gibson as chairman of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People misstated the name of a television program formerly produced by Don Cornelius, whom Mr.
Gibson signed up to produce an awards ceremony.
The program was "Soul Train," not "Show Train."


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Hardaway, O'Neal Perform Their Magic  Anfernee Hardaway scored 31 points and Shaquille O'Neal outscored Shawn Bradley, 30-3, to pace the Orlando Magic's 129-83 victory over the visiting Philadelphia 76ers last night.
Hardaway, bouncing back from missing the last shot in a 1-point overtime loss Wednesday night at Cleveland, was 7 for 8 in the second quarter when he scored 15 of his 21 first-half points. (AP) ROCKETS 109, BULLETS 92: Hakeem Olajuwon scored 16 of his 30 points in the first quarter and Pete Chilcutt posted season highs with 18 points and 14 rebounds as Houston extended its winning streak to three games with a road victory over Washington.
Clyde Drexler, making his first start for the Rockets since being traded from Portland on Tuesday, had 9 points and 9 assists. (AP) HAWKS 110, MAVERICKS 90: Mookie Blaylock had 24 points, 9 assists and 5 steals against host Dallas to lead Atlanta to its fourth straight victory and give Coach Lenny Wilkens his 950th career triumph. (AP) WARRIORS 139, SUNS 128: Latrell Sprewell scored 33 points and Tim Hardaway added 30 as Golden State broke a 19-game losing streak in Phoenix with the overtime victory.
Chris Gatling added 26 points for the Warriors, whose previous win in Phoenix was in March 1987.
It was the first victory for Golden State's new coach, Bob Lanier, after two losses. (AP) N.H.L.
Second-Period Flurry Carries Bruins  Boston's Mariusz Czerkawski and Bryan Smolinski scored goals in the first two minutes of the second period to lead the Bruins to a 5-4 victory over Florida last night.
The Bruins are 2-1-0 in the middle of an 8-game trip, while the Panthers dropped to 2-2 during their 7-game homestand. (AP) SENATORS 2, LIGHTNING 1: Radek Bonk notched his first two National Hockey League assists and Michel Picard had a goal and an assist as visiting Ottawa defeated Tampa Bay.
It was the Senators' first victory in franchise history against the Lightning after six losses.
After Coach Rick Bowness scratched Ottawa's leading scorers, Aleksei Yashin and Alexandre Daigle, the rookie Bonk recorded his first multi-point game for the Senators (2-9-2). (AP) RED WINGS 4, OILERS 2: Doug Brown scored two second-period goals to lead Detroit to a victory over visiting Edmonton to end the Oilers' six-game unbeaten streak. (AP)
SKIING  Street Wins Third World Cup Downhill  Picabo Street of Sun Valley, Idaho, won her third World Cup downhill of the season yesterday, beating Katja Seizinger of Germany at Are, Sweden, by 41 one-hundredths of a second to take the lead in the overall downhill standing.
Street, who has also won at Lake Louise, Alberta, and Cortina d'Ampezzo, Italy, flashed down the Olympia course, shortened to 1,981 yards because of a heavy snowfall in the last week, in 1 minute 9.11 seconds.
The 23-year-old Street took the downhill lead from her teammate Hilary Lindh, who finished sixth.
Street, who has 409 points, and Lindh are battling to become the United States' first female downhill champion.
Seizinger, the 1994 Olympic champion and three-time defending World Cup downhill champion, kept her lead in the overall World Cup standing. (AP) TENNIS  Pierce Reaches Semifinals at Paris Open  Third-seeded Mary Pierce scored a 6-2, 6-4 victory over sixth-seeded Judith Wiesner yesterday in the quarterfinals of the Paris Open, assuring that the top four seeded players will play in the semifinals.
Jana Novotna, No. 3, outlasted Karina Habsudova, 6-3, 3-6, 6-4, and will play top-seeded Steffi Graf.
Fourth-seeded Iva Majoli beat Sabine Appelmans, 6-2, 6-4, and will meet Pierce. (AP) AUTO RACING  Earnhardt Taps His Way to Victory  Dale Earnhardt won Round 1 of the International Race of Champions series yesterday after he and the race leader, Al Unser Jr., tapped fenders on the last lap of the 40-lap race at Daytona International Speedway.
Unser spun and hit the wall in Turn 3, allowing Earnhardt to pass.
Earnhardt held off a charge by Scott Pruett, who finished second.
Unser had taken the lead from Earnhardt moments before, diving low in Turn 1 on the final lap.
All 12 drivers in the four-race series drive equally prepared Dodge Avengers.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Ivy League Breakthrough for Columbia  Columbia ended an 18-game Ivy League losing streak by beating visiting Yale, 79-69, last night behind a career-high 29 points from Boris Piskun.
The junior scored 11 of the Lions' first 14 points as Columbia (4-17, 1-8) built a 33-27 halftime lead against Yale (8-12, 4-5).
Columbia's last Ivy victory was on Jan. 29, 1994, when the Lions beat the Bulldogs, 77-58. (AP) YACHT RACING  Young America Comes From Behind  The men's team on Young America defeated America , the women's crew, by 1 minute 20 seconds yesterday during the Citizen Cup defenders' trials off San Diego, a prelude to the America's Cup.
At the first mark, America
was ahead by 31 seconds.
But by the downwind mark, Young America had closed within 14 seconds.
On the challengers' course, Black Magic 2 defeated France 3 by 1:39 and Nippon 94 beat Sydney 95 by 2:45.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.96
3.21
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.68
5.66
3.27
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.98
5.96
3.47
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.41
7.40
6.07
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.58
7.57
6.62
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.46
8.45
7.43
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.49
6.48
5.59
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Fair Comes In Out of the Rain
After 10 years in Cherry Hill, the headless woman, scores of farm animals and the Tilt-a-Whirl -- among other attractions -- will move to nearby Pennsauken when the New Jersey State Fair opens this summer.


Cautious Devils and Isles Avoid Loss
With both teams playing as if to avoid a defeat, a tie seemed unavoidable tonight.
And that's what the Islanders and Devils played to in a 2-2 affair that had no scoring in its first 37 minutes.
Stephane Richer and Tommy Albelin scored the goals for the Devils, who had the territorial advantage with 37 shots, including 3 in the overtime, before a crowd of 18,501 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


And Now, Justice Without Fanfare
THERE were no television cameras in the court, no teams of expensive lawyers, no prolonged discussion of legal tactics.
There was just an ordinary wife-beater impassively facing justice on the afternoon after St.
Valentine's Day.
No relatives or friends were there to hear sentence pronounced on Anthony Davis, a sheet-metal worker who weeks ago had pleaded guilty to assaulting the mother of his child in the first degree.
The woman he hurt was also missing and only a dozen strangers, waiting for other cases to be called, sprawled inattentively on the pews of the Manhattan courtroom.


Strolling With Satan Into a Moral Forest
Like it or not, Satan is back in style.
Whether invoked by heavy-metal bands, television evangelists or even "Damn Yankees," the devil has assumed a mainstream visibility that rivals that of the now omnipresent angels in American culture.
And in a time of moral discourse that restores the capital letters to Good and Evil, it makes perfect sense that Nathaniel Hawthorne and his fables of original sin should take center stage again.
In the wake of Phyllis Nagy's deconstruction of "The Scarlet Letter" at the Classic Stage Company (with Demi Moore's film version of the same novel in the offing) comes "Young Goodman Brown," a chamber opera based on Hawthorne's greatest short story.
The tale of a New England Puritan whose faith in human virtue is shaken by a walk in the woods with the devil, it has been brought to diverting life at La Mama E.T.C. by an impressive team of talents: Phillip Johnston (the former leader of the fractured jazz band the Microscopic Septet) composed the score; the avant-garde icon Richard Foreman wrote the libretto, and David Herskovits, a director of promising flair, has staged the production.


Inquiry on Commerce Chief Focuses on Campaign Video
A 17-foot image of Ronald H. Brown, striding down a Washington street with two businessmen, filled the screen behind the podium at the Democratic National Convention in 1992.
An announcer praised Mr.
Brown's achievements as the Democratic national chairman, unifying the party and erasing its anti-business image.
Now that video has become part of a growing set of investigations into the business activities and personal finances of Mr.
Brown, who became Commerce Secretary after helping elect Bill Clinton to the Presidency.
At the center of these inquiries is a company, Corridor Broadcasting, run by a former business partner of Mr.
Brown, Nolanda Hill.


A 'Madam' With the Mostes'
From the moment Tyne Daly swivels onto the stage of City Center jovially boasting that she's "the hostess with the mostes' on the ball," the new concert revival of the 1950 show "Call Me Madam" soars like a musically powered balloon.
And what a ride it turns out to be!
Sailing on one of Irving Berlin's most rhythmically propulsive scores, the production doesn't touch ground until the final reprise of that irresistibly buoyant Berlin ode to romantic giddiness, "You're Just in Love."
The musical, with songs by Berlin and a book by Howard Lindsay and Russel Crouse, had the first of four concert performances on Thursday as part of City Center's Encore series of revivals. (The final performances take place this afternoon and evening.) It is a big, happy bubble of postwar American optimism.
While lacking the high-mindedness of "South Pacific," the narrative drive of "Annie Get Your Gun" or the personality of "Guys and Dolls," this deft mixture of light topical satire and romantic fluff still stands high on the list of the era's more charming musical-comedy confections.


4 Whitman Notebooks Turn Up After 53 Years
Four notebooks of Walt Whitman, missing from the Library of Congress for more than half a century, have been identified by Sotheby's and will be returned to Government archives, the auction house announced yesterday.
A man going through his late father's estate found the notebooks, along with a paper butterfly depicted in a famous portrait photograph of Whitman, and asked Sotheby's to evaluate them in January, said the auction house.
It said it was precluded from identifying the client or his father and said there was no explanation of how the papers had come to be in private hands.


Holiday on Monday
Washington's Birthday will be observed on Monday.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Alternate-side street-cleaning regulations suspended.
SANITATION No pickups, street cleanings or recycling.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and subways on Saturday schedule.
Long Island and Metro-North railroads on holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and trains on Saturday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on holiday schedule.


A.A. and Federation Lead a Man's Way to Recovery
In James W.'s mind he had to hit bottom before he could see the light of hope.
For the last 15 months Mr.
W. has remained clean and sober, but before he could deal with his alcohol and drug problem, he says, he had to go through an ordeal.
"I went through a lot of changes," said Mr.
W.
"I was depressed. I used alcohol and drugs as a way to cope. Everything was crumbling down. I had nowhere to turn."


BASEBALL: Uneasy Are the Men Who Sign Those Lineup Cards; Tigers Give Anderson A Leave of Absence
Saying "there's no place in our game for replacement players," Sparky Anderson, the dean of major league managers, took an unpaid leave of absence from the Detroit Tigers today with no guarantee that he will be asked back when the striking players return.
Anderson's decision to turn his back on what he views as fraudulent major league players did not seem likely to prompt other managers to follow his lead, based on the mixed reaction of his colleagues.
But it did tarnish the owners' strategy to play a replacement season.


Warning Is Issued On Hospitals Bonds
Underscoring the uncertainty surrounding New York City's municipal hospital system, Standard &amp; Poor's, the rating agency, issued a warning yesterday on bonds sold by the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation.
The warning is the first step toward a possible downgrading of the corporation's credit rating.
Standard &amp; Poor's said it issued the warning in light of Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposal to cut the state spending on Medicaid by $1.2 billion and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's request that the Governor cut even deeper to balance the city's budget.


China Warns Against 'Star Wars' Shield for U.S. Forces in Asia
China said today that the United States "will increase the danger of nuclear war" and "trigger an arms race in outer space" if it proceeds with a plan to develop an advanced missile defense system that could be deployed around United States forces in Asia.
A proposal to build a missile shield covering the United States -- reminiscent of the "Star Wars" program of the Reagan years -- was defeated on Thursday in the House of Representatives.
But the Clinton Administration and some members of Congress support the development of a smaller "theater missile defense" system to protect American forces and allies when they are exposed to shorter-range missiles like those Iraq fired against Israel and Saudi Arabia during the Persian Gulf war in 1991.


Gambling on the Horse Races On Cable Television? You Bet!
On some of the more obscure cable channels, New York City offers an eclectic but often dry mix of television programming -- from meetings of the City Planning Commission to training for firefighters to lessons in English.
Now, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani plans to add something he hopes viewers will find more enticing: horse racing.
What's more, viewers will be able to bet on the races over the telephone from the comfort of their homes: a sort of home-gambling network.


An Endless Border War
Peru and Ecuador have signed a peace accord, ending their three-week war over a 48-mile stretch of border.
The squabble cost at least 49 lives and gained little or nothing for either side, but some good may result if the two countries finally resolve the dispute that has caused tension and occasional battles for more than 50 years.
In 1942, following a war in which Peru grabbed a substantial chunk of Ecuador's territory, the two countries signed a treaty that delineated their border.
But the treaty was not precise about those 48 miles, which run along a mountain range called the Cordillera del Condor.
Ecuador rejected the treaty in 1960.
The two countries have clashed over the disputed stretch ever since, including a two-day military battle in 1981.


Defense Says Simpson Was Too Stunned to React to Former Wife's Killing
O.
J.
Simpson's chief defense lawyer labored today to show that Mr.
Simpson failed to press a police officer for details of his former wife's death not because he knew about it already or was indifferent to the news but because he was too stunned and exhausted to react as someone normally would.
Completing his cross-examination of Ronald Phillips, the Los Angeles detective who told Mr.
Simpson by telephone that Nicole Brown Simpson had been killed, the lawyer, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., suggested that Mr.
Simpson was too shocked and distraught, indignant and worried about his children to ask any questions.
He was also too tired after an all-night flight to Chicago and only an hour's sleep.


CHRONICLE
In 1906, a 7-year-old Russian immigrant named Abraham Tracuvotsky arrived on Ellis Island with his parents and seven siblings.
The family settled in Philadelphia and later changed their surname to Tracy.
The boy later became the singer ARTHUR TRACY, one of America's most popular radio stars in the early 1930's.
His renditions of "Marta" and "Ramblin' Rose" on his show "The Street Singer" made him an overnight success.


Visiting Cyberspace Isn't Just for the Young
To the Editor:
Despair not, senior citizens of America!
Ignore Nicholas Negroponte's forebodings about societies with large numbers of senior citizens (Op-Ed, Feb. 11).


Army Opens Inquiries Into Ranger Deaths
The funerals will be held soon for the four soldiers from the elite Army Ranger school who died of exposure this week after training for hours in the cold water of a Florida swamp.
But it may take weeks or even months before the military knows just what went wrong and why the young men -- "the best of the best," in the words of the Under Secretary of the Army -- perished.
Yesterday, Army officials said there were four investigations under way into what happened in a swamp along the Yellow River near Eglin Air Force Base in the Florida Panhandle, investigations that could end in courts-martial.


Looking at Concussions, and the Repercussions
Troy Aikman's chin is still discolored, and neurologists crowd around his CAT scan.
Concussions are here today, but not necessarily gone tomorrow, which is why Aikman and six other pro quarterbacks convened here today for the most squeamish of seminars.
A panel of doctors was granted an audience this afternoon with Dallas's Aikman, San Francisco's Steve Young and Minnesota's Warren Moon -- to name three -- and, at day's end, there was a recommendation to make concussions a leaguewide headache.
Leigh Steinberg, who brainstormed the convention and is the agent for all of the quarterbacks, will submit a proposal to the National Football League's competition committee, and, at the least, he hopes quarterbacks of the future will be treated like punters: gingerly.
Steinberg and his panel of neurologists -- doing much wishful thinking -- will also call for the elimination of artificial turf, a re-evaluation of helmet wear and the inclusion of a sideline medical referee, whose sole job would be to rule on a player's ability to play.
Aikman could easily be the concussion poster boy.
He has suffered six in his six-season career, and he can barely recount his most recent Super Bowl.
He still wears linebacker Wilber Marshall's fingerprints under his chin -- or helmet prints, to be exact -- and league officials confirmed today there could be rule changes coming that keep quarterbacks upright.
"How can they possibly help?" asked Young, the league's reigning most valuable player.
"They're going to make a lineman yell before he hits you?"
According to the league executive Joe Browne, it is conceivable that the league -- at the behest of its subcommittee on concussions -- will expand a quarterback's safety net next season.
Under current rules, pass rushers cannot overtly maim a signal caller in the pass pocket, but can club him outside of that realm.
That's exactly why Marshall, the Arizona linebacker, was not penalized or fined after he blasted Aikman last season -- because Aikman had roamed from the so-called pocket -- but that rule might be amended at the league meetings in March.
"It was pretty intense," Aikman said today, recalling Marshall's gruesome, helmet-first assault.
"I don't know if I've recovered yet from that thing."
Post-concussion syndrome was a large topic of discussion today, and doctors on the panel tried to clear up several myths.
First, team trainers -- when determining the severity of the blow -- should not ask the player if he can remember the score or what he ate for breakfast.
It is more helpful, they said, to examine his ability to concentrate by asking him to recite the months of the year backward.
If a player conquers that question and then shows no amnesia in the next 20 minutes, he should be allowed to re-enter the game.
The doctors also warned that many quarterbacks can play deftly despite their concussions -- but may not remember one single touchdown pass.
This, in fact, is what happened to Aikman in the playoffs of January 1994.
He suffered a concussion in the conference championship against San Francisco and still did not have his complete equilibrium for the ensuing Super Bowl against Buffalo.
"I said at the time had it been a regular season game, I probably wouldn't have played," Aikman said today.
"I was having headaches that week. But, for me, it's the Super Bowl. I know you're saying, 'You're an idiot, a moron for playing.' But, to me, it doesn't matter.
"I remember playing the game, but not much more. My first Super Bowl, I remember everything that took place at the Rose Bowl, and, to this day, everything's clear. The second one in Atlanta, though, I don't have a clear recollection."
Doctors today then gave Aikman something else to chew on: concussions make a person more susceptible to Alzheimer's Disease later in life.
"People this year were asking me, 'When is enough, enough,' " Aikman said.
"The next one could maybe be my last one. I've said before if it comes to the point that I'm worrying about concussions, I will get out."
In the interim, most of the quarterbacks today were not scared away from the sport.
"We can't make it flag football, can we," said Washington's John Friesz, who also joined the Rams' Tommy Maddox, Jacksonville's Andre Ware and Cincinnati's David Klingler at the seminar.
And the only linebacker present this afternoon concurred.
"Will I let up on quarterbacks now?" San Francisco's Gary Plummer said, repeating a question.
"No way."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  MEXICAN LEADER'S IMAGE SUFFERS
New analysis: After seizing rebel territory and then, almost as suddenly, offering an amnesty, Mexico's new President has done little to dispel an image of political weakness and ineptitude. 1


After Vigil for Verdict, A Plea for Gun Control
In an extraordinary courthouse press conference minutes after Colin Ferguson was convicted in the Long Island Rail Road shooting spree, survivors and relatives of those who died used their moments before the cameras to plead for stricter gun control, rather than to condemn Mr.
Ferguson.
"The manufacturers, the gun people look for the almighty dollar," Robert Giugliano said, his voice rising.
"Enough is enough."


Philadelphia Editor Heads For a Top Post in Newark
A Pulitzer prize-winning editorial page editor for The Philadelphia Daily News is leaving that paper to become editor of the editorial page at The Star-Ledger in Newark.
The editor, Rich Aregood, who is widely admired in the newspaper industry as a staccato and irreverent writer, said yesterday that he had resigned from the Philadelphia tabloid newspaper largely because of the business pressures to cut editorial resources that are affecting newspapers across the country.


Mathematician Excelled on Her Own
To the Editor:
The Feb. 9 obituary of the fine Berkeley mathematician Raphael Robinson calls his deceased wife Julia Robinson his "longtime collaborator on mathematical papers." Very little of her work was collaborative with her husband.
She was elected to the National Academy of Science and was president of the American Mathematical Society.
Had genders been reversed, would such a description have been applied?
MARTIN DAVIS  Prof. of Mathematics &amp; Computer Science, New York University New York, Feb. 10, 1995


Officers' Fast-Firing 9-mm. Pistol Concerns Police Leaders
Senior New York City police officials have concluded that officers equipped with new rapid-firing 9-millimeter semiautomatic handguns have been firing too many shots, a former senior police official said yesterday.
The officials are considering whether to stop issuing the semiautomatics to recruits and whether officers who carry the weapon should be retrained, the former official said.
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton summoned his top chiefs to a meeting last week and urged them to act immediately to deal with the problem, said the former official, who attended the meeting and who spoke on condition of anonymity.
The meeting came after a shooting in which police officers fired more than 100 bullets while foiling an early morning robbery at a bodega in the Bronx last Friday.


Warmth and Passion From Guarneri
The Guarneri String Quartet is celebrating its 30th anniversary this season, and in honor of the occasion the ensemble seems to have turned over a new leaf.
For a decade or more, this quartet's performances have been abrasive and perfunctory, more like slugfests than like the reasoned discourse that is the chamber music ideal.
So it was a pleasant surprise to hear warmth and passion in the group's playing on Monday evening at Alice Tully Hall.
The quartet began with a piece from slightly off the beaten path, Juan Crisostomo Arriaga's Quartet in E flat, one of three he published in 1824, less than two years before his death at the age of 20.
In its time this was a conservative piece; its opening resembles Beethoven's First Quartet, composed a quarter-century earlier.
Yet Arriaga's music also has an individualistic and slightly peculiar harmonic touch that makes it worth reviving.


Mel Williamson, 72, Artist and Writer
Mel Williamson, a painter and art director who turned to writing after his eyesight failed, died on Monday at his home in New York City.
He was 72.
The cause was bone cancer, said his wife, Lorraine.


Endowment Aide Going to Jacob's Pillow
Sali Ann Kriegsman, the director of the dance program at the National Endowment for the Arts, has been appointed executive director of the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival, effective May 1.
Ms.
Kriegsman succeeds Samuel A. Miller.


A Criminal Runs Out of Luck
Harvey Hahn, a 40-year-old career criminal, may have beaten a murder conviction this week, but his luck didn't hold.
He was sent to prison for four years for violating probation in another case.
At the start of the week, things were looking up.
Mr.
Hahn was acquitted in a landmark murder trial after a key witness refused to testify.
The witness, Robert F. Brown, who was convicted of murdering 22-year-old Karen Sewekow of Medford Lakes in 1981, had implicated Mr.
Hahn, then backed down.
The case made history in New Jersey when a bite mark on the victim's arm was used to implicate the killer.


Knicks Beat the Heat, but Then Get It From Riley
Ending a Knicks victory in a bizarre way, Pat Riley delivered a brief, terse and critical post-game statement that left his players wondering why he was so livid.
Following New York's 100-91 victory over the Miami Heat last night, without John Starks (partly dislocated left shoulder), Riley declined to answer questions during his post-game news conference, and instead delivered only a few words.


The I.R.S Personality: Knowing It Can Help
TAX season is here, and with it a new crop of books offering tips on which arcane details of the tax laws can save a few dollars.
Martin Kaplan, a certified public accountant in Manhattan, has joined the ranks of tax advice authors but with a different take on the issues.
To Mr.
Kaplan, what matters more than such details as the new rule that a written receipt, not just a canceled check, be provided for charitable contributions of more than $250, is understanding the personality of the Internal Revenue Service.


Man Killed by Trash Compactor
An 18-year-old Linden man was killed when he was dragged between a roller and a belt in a giant trash compactor he was trying to fix.
The victim, Paul Imperiale, an employee of DiMarco Disposal, was working to repair the machine when his sweatshirt became entangled in the gears and suffocated him.
His body was found Thursday on the conveyor of the machine, which is two stories high.
CHARLES STRUM


Corrections
An obituary on Feb. 6 about Joan R. Cook, a former reporter and Newspaper Guild leader at The New York Times, referred incorrectly to women's history in the union leadership at The Times.
Ms.
Cook, who was elected in 1980 to head the guild's Times unit, was not the first woman to do so.
The first was Jerre Smoot, in the 1940's.


Comeback for Long-Term Care Policies
Murray Klavens, 72, a retired manager at a semiconductor company who lives in Hicksville, L.I., says he knows a rip-off when he sees one.
And that's what long-term care insurance policies were when they came out in the late 1980's, he says.
"They were much more expensive, they offered a lot less in home-care benefits, and your assets were still at risk" in case of an extended illness, he says.
But in June 1993, Mr.
Klavens found a much-improved policy and began paying $2,709 a year for it.
The about-face is being repeated across the country as long-term care policies get a second look.
For a number of reasons -- including proposed cuts in government health care -- the policies are more appealing than a few years ago, when they were widely dismissed as too expensive and too limited.
Long-term policies "are something I now tell everyone of my clients to look at," said Peter J. Strauss, a fellow of the National Academy of Elder Law Attorneys and a partner with the New York law firm of Epstein Becker &amp; Green.
For starters, the new policies have fewer restrictions and include more types of care than before.
Policies may extend well beyond nursing home care to home care, adult day care and assisted living in senior housing.
Rather than requiring a doctor's certification, the policies will now pay if a social worker, physical therapist or other professional health care provider confirms that the policyholder needs help with one or two daily functions or has some mental impairment.
Another reason for increased interest is that the Federal Government and the states are threatening to cut back on health care programs because of budget concerns.
One program that is a target for cuts in New York, for example, provides assistance to the homebound and the disabled, who may rely on such services to live independently and who say their only alternative may be a nursing home.
When health care revision looked likely a year ago, financial advisers urged their clients to put long-term care policies on the back burner.
But such legislation ran out of steam in Congress, and virtually no one expects an overhaul of the health care system anytime soon.
Congress did take action, though, to make it harder for the elderly to claim poverty and qualify for nursing home coverage through Medicaid, a combination Federal and state program for the poor.
Medicare, a Federal-state program for the elderly, covers short-term nursing home needs after a hospital stay, but, depending on the state, stops payment at about 30 days.
With nursing home costs running more than $100 a day, spending all one's assets for nursing home care is a very real possibility.
Depleting one's assets is perhaps the greatest financial fear of the elderly, who often hope to leave a home or other hard-earned investment to their children.
To address this concern, California, Connecticut, Indiana and New York have teamed up with public agencies to create long-term care policies that protect assets.
These states offer policies that guarantee not to deplete assets for long-term care even after the policy's benefits are exhausted.
No matter how improved, long-term care policies are not for everyone.
Norma M. Severns, a certified financial planner with Armstrong, Welch &amp; MacIntyre in Washington, and an elder-care specialist, finds long-term care policies most suitable for the middle class.
Someone with $1 million in investments is likely to have income that could cover nursing home and similar bills, she said.
And someone who has less than $100,000 in assets and $20,000 in income may find annual premiums of $1,500 or more too costly and could wind up depleting assets for nursing home insurance.
As a rule of thumb, "long-term care premiums should never exceed 10 percent of income," Ms.
Severns said.
The prime candidate for a long-term care policy is someone 50 to 60 years old.
For those older, premiums rise sharply.
A policy that costs $1,000 annually if taken out at age 55 might cost $3,000 at age 70.
Buyers should look for a policy that is renewable for life and that cannot be canceled for any reason other than failure to pay premiums, which should remain level over the policy's life.
Waiting until after retirement to buy a policy can lead to another problem as well.
With age, the chances increase of being rejected because of a medical condition, like a stroke, Parkinson's disease or fading vision.
"Sign up while you're still young and healthy," Mr.
Strauss advised.
Mr.
Klavens said kidney problems that had developed since he bought a policy would probably disqualify him if he were trying to find coverage today.
Mr.
Klavens bought his policy through the New York State Partnership for Long-Term Care (800 633-3088).
Should the benefits be exhausted, after three years of nursing home bills for example, policyholders have to contribute only current income to pay their care bills.
Medicaid will pay the remainder, no matter what the policyholder's assets.
That promise was the deciding factor for Mr.
Klavens, who has an individual retirement account of more than $100,000 and a portfolio of mortgage-backed securities.
"I didn't like the idea that my assets might still be dissipated," he said, if he needed care for longer than three years or exhausted the $164,000 maximum benefit on his policy.
Ruth Loeb, 74, of Manhattan, said she bought a policy to help protect her two daughters and five grandchildren.
"I want to have something left for them," Ms.
Loeb said.
Under the New York partnership program, the minimum amount of coverage is three years of long-term care in a nursing home at $105 a day or six years of support services in the home at $52 a day, or some combination.
Because the average nursing home stay is less than three years, Ms.
Severns said, the state aims to reduce its costs by encouraging more people to start out with private insurance instead of Medicare and Medicaid.
As an inducement, it picks up any additional costs when the insurance benefits are exhausted.
Connecticut, California and Indiana offer what they call "dollar for dollar" protection of assets in their long-term care insurance programs.
If someone buys a policy that will pay $100 a day for three years, or a total of $109,500, that person could keep an equivalent amount of assets and still qualify for Medicaid to cover bills at the end of the three years.
Joan Quinn, who is president of Connecticut Community Care, a care management concern, said she had seen "how little is covered by regular insurance if you stay at home." So a year ago she bought a policy through Connecticut's partnership program (203 424-4943).
Because she bought in her 50's, Ms.
Quinn pays $1,200 a year for $100,000 of comprehensive coverage, meaning she can pass $100,000 on to her heirs without Medicaid making a claim on those assets.
Within states, premiums may vary considerably by insurer.
In New York, annual premiums for a 60-year-old who takes out a policy that offers $105 in daily nursing home benefits and begins to pay after a 100-day waiting period ranged from $945 at the John Alden Life Insurance Company to $1,655 at the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association.
Rates from several insurers are published in a booklet titled "Insurance Policies Covering Long-Term Care Services in New York State." A free copy is available from the New York State Insurance Department, Publications Unit, Empire State Plaza, Agency Building #1, Albany, N.Y. 12257.
Trying to maximize coverage may be a mistake, health care advisers say.
Three to five years of long-term care is usually sufficient, and buying more may make premiums unaffordable.
Extending the waiting period before coverage begins is one way to reduce premiums.
A waiting period of 20 days is considered a good compromise, Ms.
Severns said, though up to 100 days is possible.
Only if the premiums are truly unaffordable, she said, should people consider a longer waiting period.
For anyone who bought a policy several years ago, elder-care experts recommend asking the insurer to modify the policy to include a wider range of care.
Even a few years in age can make a big difference in premiums and makes starting from scratch untenable.


For Mr. Buffett's Stocks, The Business Is the Key
DO you study the stock market?
Do you puzzle over interest rates?
Do you plumb the depths of modern portfolio theory?
No doubt you hope to profit from your hard work.
Well, here's some disturbing news.
Warren E. Buffett, the investing phenomenon whose Omaha holding company, Berkshire Hathaway, was trading at yesterday's close at an eye-popping $23,450 a share, does none of these things.


Executive Changes
FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORP., Washington, named William Longbrake chief financial officer and deputy for financial policy.


Trade Gap Widened Last Year
The United States last year posted its largest overall trade deficit in seven years, more than $108 billion in goods and services, and set record deficits with Japan and China, the two countries that confront Washington with its most persistent trade problems.
The Clinton Administration said that while the numbers looked disturbing -- the deficit widened 42 percent, or $32.4 billion -- they also reflected the underlying strength of the American economy.
The fast-paced expansion in the United States sucked in a tremendous volume of imported computers, electrical machinery and clothing.
That probably helped contain inflation at a time when American factories were running at nearly full speed.


At Work; The Bottom Line on 'People' Issues
THOSE who stand upon the promontory that allows them to train their field glasses on the distant economic future will tell you they see a world vastly different from the alienated-from-the-fruits-of-their-labor one that exists now.
It is a world in which employees are regarded as assets rather than costs and wherein "people skills," like being able to tease the best out of workers, is valued as much as, say, a facility with numbers.
For all that, management experts have long thought there was more talking the talk than walking the walk, a suspicion confirmed by a recent survey from Towers Perrin, the big consulting firm.
Nine out of 10 senior executives told the researchers that people are a company's most important resource and 98 percent said improved employee performance would enhance the bottom line.


Post Office: Still Gone but Not Forgotten
Ever since the Ansonia Station post office vacated its spot at Broadway at 68th Street to make way for a gargantuan Sony movie theater, neighbors have wondered if it would return as promised to the same block.
And they have been looking -- in vain -- for signs of life in the vacant storefront on 68th Street, next to the theater's side exit, which is owned by the Postal Service.
Now it seems the only certainty is that the post office's new permanent headquarters will not reopen on schedule in June.


February 12-18: AIDS Is Up; Contraceptive Use Among Women Drops
In a reversal of a long trend, the number of Americans using contraceptives has begun to drop.
Using a survey of thousands of women, the National Center for Health Statistics calculated that in 1982, 56 percent of women between the ages of 15 and 44 used contraceptives.
In 1988, that figure rose to 60 percent.
Then, in 1990, the figure slipped to 59 percent.
The news came last week only a few days after reports that the incidence of AIDS among women had increased by 17 percent over the last year.
AIDS is now the fourth leading cause of death among women 25 to 44 years old.


Merchants Fear Plans To Attract Big Stores
Ten months ago James Novak moved his 18-year-old auto parts business from Roosevelt Avenue in Jackson Heights across Flushing Bay to a thriving district in College Point because of what he called a decline in economic conditions.
Now he is being met with a new challenge: a city plan that would allow the opening of a megastore at the College Point Corporate Park just blocks away from his newly renovated business at 14th Avenue and 132d Street.


Corrections
A map on Jan. 29 with an article headed "Remembering Poland's Jews," about Nazi death camps, located Plaszow incorrectly.
It is a suburb of Cracow; it is not 120 miles to the east, near the Ukrainian border.


When Bad Things Happen to 'Boys Town'
IT'S TIME, LADIES AND gentlemen and Speaker of the House, to haul out our well-thumbed George Orwell, whose wisdom doesn't age, and revisit the British public school, circa 1915, where Orwell learned his first hard lessons about institutional life: "Your home might be far from perfect, but at least it was a place ruled by love rather than by fear, where you did not have to be perpetually on your guard against the people surrounding you."
The Canadian Film Board and the Canadian Broadcasting Company must have hired the ghost of Orwell as adviser to the harrowing television film "Boys of St. Vincent" (A &amp; E, tonight and Monday night at 9).
So closely is it based on a notorious story of priestly sexual and physical abuse of orphan boys in Newfoundland that it was temporarily banned in parts of Canada on the grounds that it could prejudice a criminal trial going on at the time.
Never commercially released, although it had a limited engagement at Film Forum in New York and at some other noncommercial theaters, it went on to win awards at the Cannes, Banff and Umbrian film festivals.


A Natural-Gas Bus Shuttles in Philadelphia
A new environmentally friendly shuttle bus service has begun operating between popular sites in downtown Philadelphia.
The service, called Phlash (pronounced Flash) Downtown Loop, travels along a continuous route in the Center City section.
The buses are powered by compressed natural gas, which contains up to 95 percent less carbon monoxide than gasoline or diesel fuel.
There are more than 30 stops, including the Pennsylvania Convention Center, City Hall, Logan Circle, Rittenhouse Square, the Academy of Music, the South Street area, Independence Hall, Penn's Landing on the Delaware River and the Old City.
A complete round trip takes about 50 minutes.


Kelly Cusack and Corey Millen
KELLY CUSACK, 29, is a serious hunter, fisher and wilderness guide who spends the summers managing her father's fishing operation, Mike Cusack's King Salmon Lodge, on Bristol Bay, about 300 miles southwest of Anchorage.
Friends describe Ms.
Cusack, who grew up in Anchorage, as a diamond in the rough, the sort of outdoorswoman who can hunt waterfowl or track caribou through the tundra without smudging her lipstick.
"She'll go out fishing with full makeup on, catch the fish, gut them and still look glamorous," said Kimberly Shields, an old friend of the bride.


Challenging a Literary Pick-10
To the Editor:
Why was there no mention of the Bronx in your Feb. 5 article, "The 10 Best Books About New York"?
Did you never read "The Beautiful Bronx," by Lloyd Ultan, or "We're Still Here," by Jill Jonnes, or a wonderful book about the neighborhood I grew up in, "Ashes Under Uricon," by Audrey R. Langer?
SALLY PRAVER Queens


Traveling Light: Carry It On, Leave It There
ONE of the pleasures of travel is reducing your belongings, at least for a short while, to the more or less essential.
What's essential to some people is a subject in itself -- pillows, Worcestershire sauce, firearms, portable bathtubs and lapdogs show up on the packing lists of great travelers of the past.
What's nonessential, but taken along and tossed on the way, also fascinates me.
I've never yet packed too little on a trip, although I have often packed the wrong stuff: when my mother used to say, "Always take a sweater," she meant a wool, not a cotton, one.
The throwing away of things while on the road can be divided into two categories, the deliberate and the desperate.
War -- that extreme extension of tourism by military means -- is a great inspiration to desperate tossing.
Theodore Stephanides, who fought in the Battle of Crete in 1941, writes of all the articles he saw abandoned by British soldiers in the retreat across the White Mountains -- cans of food, weapons, boots, even diaries and photographs -- and of how he had to fight the deadly impulse to scrounge.


February 12-18: Capital Punishment; New York Prepares for A New Death Penalty
With the announcement of an agreement between Gov.
George E. Pataki and state legislative leaders, New York State is poised to reinstate the death penalty.
The bill is expected to pass overwhelmingly in both houses of the State Legislature in the next two weeks, and Mr.
Pataki has pledged to sign it.
When he does, New York will become the 38th state to reenact capital punishment since 1976, when the United States Supreme Court ruled that states could impose death sentences under certain circumstances.
New York's last execution was in 1963 and its last capital punishment law was struck down in 1977.
But every year since then, the Legislature has passed death penalty bills, only to have them vetoed: six times by Hugh L. Carey and 12 by Mario M. Cuomo.


Pamela F. Duevel, John G. Nesbett
Pamela Faye Duevel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul R. Duevel of Norwich, Conn., was married yesterday to John Garret Nesbett, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Nesbett of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Howard Seip performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church of Norwich in Norwichtown, Conn.


Critical Condition -- A special report.; Russia's Degenerating Health: Rampant Illness, Shorter Lives
Valery Yermokov's heart stopped beating as soon as he finished the quart of homemade vodka.
A drug addict who could not possibly afford heroin, he had also injected a coarser opiate into his veins.
By the time they wheeled him into the Semashko Emergency Hospital in this central Russian city, Mr.
Yermokov was all but dead: He was breathing once a minute and his skin was cold.
The doctors took a look at him and simply shook their heads.
But after a few minutes -- and a last-hope shot of adrenaline -- Mr.
Yermokov opened his wide green eyes and clawed his way back to life.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
EXPLORING THE DANCE
The Hartford Ballet's self-explanatory "Dynamic Directions II: New Dance Explorations" will present its second annual foray into the outer spaces of dance on Friday and Saturday evenings at The Bushnell in Hartford.
Four one-act ballets by some of the current generation's innovative choreographers have been assembled under the guidance of Kirk Peterson, the Hartford's artistic director.
Performances are at 8 P.M. and tickets, ranging from $9.50 to $37.50 with discounts available, may be reserved by calling 246-6807.


Party Priorities
To the Sports Editor:
I am a registered Republican in the state of Kansas.
It upsets me when my political leaders in Congress have time to meet with Rupert Murdoch and have time to organize and attend a $50,000-a-plate dinner but say they do not have time to get involved and help settle the baseball dispute.


World Markets; Preventing the Next Peso-Style Crisis
WAS the world's currency cop napping on the beat when Mexico's peso got mugged, costing investors millions and pushing the country toward recession?
That is not quite how C. Fred Bergsten put it last week at a meeting of the Institute for International Economics, which he directs.
But it is what he implied when he asked Michael Mussa, the International Monetary Fund's chief economist, why the body set up to maintain good monetary order had issued no warning on Mexico.


Dusty Baker Reflects On Good, Bad and Sad
As Dusty Baker looked out upon a mostly nondescript group of minor leaguers, the manager of the San Francisco Giants couldn't help drifting back to the players who were really on his mind.
His major leaguers.
As he talked about Barry Bonds, Robby Thompson and Matt Williams, Baker exuded an air of hope that he would again manage those strike-bound players, if not soon, then surely one day.


Sure as Shooting
To the Editor:
The article "The Divine Dog Syndrome and Other Rules of Film Making"  [ Feb. 5 ] , which offered excerpts from the book on movie cliches "Ebert's Little Movie Glossary," prompted me to recall this experience.
While watching a lot of old war movies on "The Late Show" in the mid-60's, I noticed that if, during a battlefield scene, one soldier pulled out snapshots of his sweetheart or family to show another soldier, the soldier with the pictures would inevitably be killed by enemy fire within the next few minutes.
DIANA W. MORGAN  Ashley, Pa.


Elizabeth H. Gery, Richard Brennan
Dr.
Elizabeth Helen Gery, a psychiatrist, was married yesterday to Richard Lee Brennan, an architect.
Both work in New York.
Justice Benjamin Lander, a retired justice of the State Supreme Court in New York, officiated at the Seamen's Church Institute in New York.
The Rev.
Daniel Morrissey, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Dr.
Gery, who is 41 and is keeping her name, is an attending psychiatrist at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center's AIDS-care program in Manhattan.
She graduated from the University of Maryland and received her medical degree from Case Western Reserve University.
She is a daughter of Rita and Lester Gery of Silver Spring, Md.
Her father retired as the manager of the Baltimore office of the Commercial Union Assurance Company.
Her mother, also retired, was the secretary to the director of the Basilica of the Immaculate Conception in Washington.


World News Briefs; Iran Urges Revisions In Nuclear Treaty
Iran said today that it would oppose an unlimited extension of the treaty against the spread of nuclear weapons, which expires in April, and called for a revision in the accord binding signatories to a deadline for the destruction of nuclear weapons.
Iran's delegate to the United Nations, Kamal Kharrazi, told the official Iranian press agency that although Teheran agreed with the treaty, it would oppose any agreement extending it indefinitely.


A Garden Grows on McKibbin St., With Help From an Upper West Side Fence
Despite the determined efforts of its neighborhood supporters, the DOME garden on the Upper West Side could not be saved.
But one small piece of it is bringing new life to a community garden in Williamsburg.
The Council on the Environment of New York City, a privately financed citizen's group, "adopted" the Sunshine garden last year, and has spent nearly $7,000 to enhance it.


Tree Tips Over, and a Block Rises Up
There are 19 trees on 100th Street between West End Avenue and Riverside Drive.
This is the story of one of them.
The tree, a 25-foot zelkova, was minding its own business on Jan. 31 when a large Mayflower moving van struck its upper branches, partly uprooting it.
The sidewalk buckled slightly, and the tree came to rest at a 60-degree angle to the ground.


The Three Of Hearts
On Valentine's Eve, a triptych of parties.


An Evolving Chairmanship
The first chairmen of the N.A.A.C.P. were well-off white liberals.
William English Walling, a Southerner who feared a race war, was the very first, serving from 1909 when the National Negro Committee was founded and becoming chairman of the executive committee of its successor organization, the N.A.A.C.P., in May 1910.
He was succeeded in 1911 by the journalist Oswald Garrison Villard, from a family with long abolitionist credentials.


INSIDE
A Whitman Trove Recovered
Four notebooks kept by the young Walt Whitman, rediscovered after half a century, "strongly reinforce the image we have of Whitman as a profoundly humane person," a Sotheby's official says.
Page 41.
Mental Health and Smoking
Advocates for the mentally ill say that the anti-smoking restrictions that are sweeping the country are creating a cruel burden for mental patients.
Page 41.
Testing Primary Waters
As Republican Presidential hopefuls gathered in New Hampshire this weekend, Senator Dole fielded some tough questions.
Page 32.


POSTINGS: 20-Year Lease on Fifth Avenue Town House; From Vanderbilt To Gianni Versace
In 1905, the Vanderbilt family hoped that the town house they were building at 647 Fifth Avenue, between 51st and 52d Streets, would stave off the retail and commercial tide even then sweeping uptown and preserve the neighborhood's residential character.
That battle was lost long ago.
The building was home to Olympic Airways for two decades, when banks and other airline offices flourished on the avenue.
Now, after being vacant for 18 months, the building has been leased for 20 years by Gianni Versace, the Italian fashion designer.
Versace plans to turn the five-story marble town house into its flagship store in the United States and will restore the 25,000-square-foot building's French Classical exterior, a New York City landmark.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 5, about Deborah S. Kent, the first woman to head a vehicle assembly plant at the Ford Motor Company, misstated the given name of one of her daughters.
She is Jordan, not Joy.


So Dazzled by New York, So Haunted by Berlin
FEW ARTISTS EMBRACED BOTH Europe and America as passionately as George Grosz.
Born in Germany in 1893 and famed as one of the greatest creative talents of the Weimar period, he fled to New York a few weeks before Hitler came to power and spent 26 highly productive years in the United States.
In the largest exhibition of his work ever mounted -- more than 600 works -- the Neue Nationalgalerie in Berlin is now seeking to portray him as a multitalented figure who skipped effortlessly from expressionism to Dada to realism, not simply a master of painting and drawing but also a photographer, poet, collagist, designer, illustrator, pornographer, dandy and outraged opponent of Nazism.
Grosz was an artist who thrived on contradictions, and many of them are visible in "George Grosz: Berlin-New York," which opened last month and runs through April 17. (After two more stops in Germany, the show will come to New York, where it will open at the Guggenheim Museum Soho in December.)


In Unity, There Is Strength, So Two 'Hills' Agree to Merge
Since the neighboring communities of Bayside Hills and Oakland Hills were founded more than 60 years ago, they have made a point of distinguishing their roughly 40 square blocks from the rest of Bayside.
They had plenty of help.
Real estate agents driving through the area's hilly, leafy streets, lined with Tudor and colonial houses, often stretched the boundaries of both communities so that prospective buyers could claim that they, too, were going to live in Bayside Hills or Oakland Hills.


On Sunday; Budget Scythe Poised to Slash Autism Center
JOSIAH CUNNINGHAM seemed on the verge of breaking into dance as he savored the word "normal" and lavished it upon his son, Jeremiah.
"Normal," he exulted, three years after he first plunged into nightmare suspicions that his eerily withdrawn, uncontrollable toddler might grow up autistic.
"I work with mentally retarded people, driving and cooking for them, and there was Jeremiah when he was 2, rocking all the time, not speaking properly, very unruly, rocking like the mentally retarded," Mr.
Cunningham recalled uneasily.


Style and Spirit
CAFE LUXEMBOURG ** (212) 873-7411; 200 West 70th Street; $$$; all major credit cards


The 13th Sign
Saturday.
Yesterday I was an Aquarius.
Today, I'm lost.
A friend called to tell me that Jacqueline Mitton of the Royal Astronomical Society has announced the existence of a 13th astrological sign and the year has to be divided up differently and we've all been dislodged.
Who am I?
And what is my birthstone?
Sunday.
Maybe I'll have to go to a singles bar and pick myself up, put my hand on my arm and say to myself smoothly: "Hi! What's your sign?" Do they still have singles bars?
I'm too busy to go to a singles bar: I have to watch Court TV.
I have an obligation.
Should I become a "Citizen for Court TV"?
There's a special number to call to become a Citizen for Court TV.
"An idea as old as America," says the ad.
I'd better call.
After all, astrology is even older than America, and look what happened to it.


The 'Legless Angel'
To the Editor:
As a psychotherapist who is also deeply connected to literature, I was delighted to read Peter Gay's insightful essay.
His understanding of Agnes Wickfield gives due credit to a wrongly maligned young woman.
I have always found Agnes pretty wonderful myself, and understood her "monitory gesture" to have very specific meanings.


Western Resorts See Prime Skiing Business
The rains that drenched California last month took the form of record snowfalls on Sierra slopes, and as those weather fronts moved east they have brought prime skiing to much of the region.
But it isn't only snow that is drawing skiers West.
Resort operators from Lake Tahoe, Calif., to Park City, Utah, to Vail, Colo., are also attributing the surge in business to poor early-season conditions in Europe, and to a warm January on the East Coast.


Once the Best of Friends
WHAT WENT WRONG?
The Creation and Collapse of the Black-Jewish Alliance.
By Murray Friedman with the assistance of Peter Binzen.
Illustrated. 423 pp.
New York:  The Free Press. $24.95.


British History, Victorian Style
OF all obscure Victorians to revive, why George Hayter?
This is the first question posed by "Sir George Hayter and Victorian History Painting," on view here at the Art Museum at Princeton University.
The second question is, How could a former pupil of Henry Fuseli, at the Royal Academy Schools, be as pedestrian as his master was eccentric?


Hong Kong Hotel Opens 30-Story Tower
Hong Kong's opulent Peninsula Hotel recently opened a new 30-story tower addition, completing a three-year, $180 million renovation that included the refurbishment of the lobby, existing rooms and restaurants.
The tower, now the tallest building in Kowloon, houses 132 rooms and suites starting on the 17th floor, each with a view of either Victoria Harbor or the Kowloon mountain ranges.
The lower 10 floors contain the 17,000-square-foot Peninsula Spa, with a swimming pool, sun terrace and gymnasium; a soundproof music room with a grand piano, and a business center with computers, meeting rooms, a library, individual offices and secretarial services.
Felix, a restaurant designed by the French architect Philippe Starck, is on the 28th and 29th floors.
Dinner at Felix, which offers a range of European and Asian dishes, costs about $55 with wine.


Eroticizing Violence
To the Editor:
As a member of the National Coalition Against Censorship, I would like to reply to Abbe Smith's review.


February 12-18; Spring, Minus Bats and Mits
BASEBALL'S silent spring has barely begun and the scribes are pitching the end of the Jeffersonian Ideal, the hole in the national psyche and the wrenching vision of peanut vendors on welfare.
Don't catch that junk.
Actually, we need a rest from baseball.
And what baseball seems to need now is a long rain delay, a chance for some serious emotional and economic deflation.
As Ken Burns inadvertently showed us last year, the game's relation to contemporary American life is more romance than reality.
We are only losing a male soap opera in a time when there are plenty.
O.J., anyone?


'Smirnoff White Whiskey -- No Smell, No Taste'
OF all the captains of industry in the United States, past or present, John Gilbert Martin was one of the most unlikely, and most unforgettable.
He bore no resemblance to the politically correct archetype of the American businessman, the research-oriented profit-driven three-piece suit.


'Disrespect for Game' A Managerial Lament With Modern Players
Managers, in the early days of this spring training, don't have players to talk about, at least none they want to talk about, so some of them express their concerns about the players who aren't in Florida and Arizona and aren't expected any time soon.
Tony La Russa of Oakland and Joe Torre of St.
Louis spoke not of specific players but of players as a group, lamenting the changes they have seen develop over the years.


America  's Female Crew Emphasizes Self-Reliance
Female stereotypes are being buried at the America
compound here with the efficiency of a bulldozer in a landfill.
But the first all-women's team to compete for the America's Cup is still trying to turn over 144 years of men's sailing achievements.
And that pile of earth has plenty of rocks in it.
"Much of it is a head game," Bill Koch, the America
team benefactor, said this week.
"They've shown that they have the strength, and they have the technique. What's left is strictly in their heads. Can they really compete against men? Can they really cut it?"


Deals and Discounts
BALKAN'S BULGARIA Balkan Holidays has guided tours of Bulgaria as well as other destinations in Eastern Europe.
An eight-day Classic Bulgaria tour takes in Sofia, the museum town of Koprivshtitsa, the city of Veliko Turnovo, the Valley of the Roses, and Plovdiv, the country's second largest city.
The price ranges from $965 (in February) to $1,119 (in July and August), and includes round-trip flights from New York on Balkan Air, hotels, daily breakfast and some dinners.
Information: (212) 573-5530.
COMPANION FARE The tour company Austravel has a Take a Mate fare from Los Angeles to Auckland, New Zealand, priced at $948, that allows passengers to bring a companion for $499.
The price includes flights on Qantas and the first night's hotel in New Zealand.
The fares are valid for travel Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday from April 1 to July 31.
A similar program to Sydney or Melbourne costs $1,048 for the first passenger, $499 for the second. (The add-on fare from New York is $350 round trip.) The two passengers must travel together throughout the trip, and the fare, which is nonrefundable, must be paid for by March 31.
Reservations: (800) 633-3404 or (212) 972-6880.


The Furs of Brighton Beach
BEFORE the Communist revolution stifled luxury in Russia, aristocrats would glide through the snow in ankle-length sable, with matching muffs and hats.
Wealth is rare in Russia these days, and sable still rarer, but fur is still as fundamental to the Russian landscape as birch trees and onion domes.
So in the Russian-immigrant enclave of Brighton Beach, on a day as cold as iced vodka, the streets are awash with shapki (fur hats) and shuby (fur coats).
Compared with the sea of puffy down and navy wool in Manhattan, the scene is almost exotic.


Rooms of Their Own
Imagine paying a visit to a house where every room and furnishing is dedicated to an artist from the 15th century to our day and rendered in his particular style.
You may at first be taken aback by the "Mailbox and Garden for Christo," all wrapped in cloth and bound with rope, but you'll be happy to await your host in the "Hallway for Georgia O'Keeffe" among huge, pulpy white, yellow and pink flowers.
Perhaps you'll be asked to sit and watch the Cubist "Couch and TV for Pablo Picasso," but if you have to go directly to "A Guest Room for El Lissitsky," don't panic.
The decor may be too geometric for your taste -- rectangles, circles and planes of all kinds in white, red, orange, black and brown -- but the room is very functional.
ARTHOUSE (Chronicle, $16.95) is the invention of Graham Percy, an illustrator who was born in New Zealand and now lives in London.
It is an imaginary residence built on centuries of Western art, a place where eyes and mind come to play, a source of cheerful wonder.
Is it a personal pantheon in which "A Children's Room for Giorgio de Chirico" (somber and architectural) and "A Window Box for Henri Rousseau" (where a lion sits under leafy plants) are homages to the masters Mr.
Percy venerates?
Did he instead, after years of respect, decide to take revenge, poke fun and devise a bathroom with a tiny toilet, a little dog and three white balls in a wooden box for Joseph Cornell, or a dollhouse built with Brillo boxes for Andy Warhol?
After several visits to "Arthouse," Mr.
Percy's intentions cease to matter much.
From his sunny arrangement of oranges in "A Refrigerator for Paul Cezanne" to the lonely potted plants facing a desolate lawn in "A Back Porch With Cacti for Edward Hopper," the glow of Mr.
Percy's love of art and life makes you want to come back.
CHRISTINE SCHWARTZ HARTLEY


In a Charged Climate, German Union Takes Strike Vote Tomorrow
After weeks of ineffectual talks with German employers, the country's powerful electrical and metal workers' union, IG Metall, has called a strike vote for Monday that could lead to work stoppages in southern Germany as early as Friday.
The struggle between IG Metall, which has 2.6 million members, and Gesamtmetall, an employers' federation representing almost 8,000 businesses, is an annual event.
But this year, the war of words over pay increases and shorter working hours has taken on larger proportions.


Healthsource Fills A Gap in the Care Of Sick Children
WHEN Elizabeth Martinez found out about the Child Health Plus program, she couldn't quite believe it.
Several months earlier, Mrs.
Martinez and her children had lost their medical insurance when she was laid off from her job at a hospital.
At the time, Mrs.
Martinez assumed that she had joined the ranks of people trapped in insurance limbo -- those who had too many assets to qualify for Medicaid but not enough money to afford private health insurance.
When her 2-year-old daughter became ill with a sore throat and nausea, she began paying for medical care out of pocket.
"She had exams and lab work, and I was just paying $100 here and $100 there," Mrs.
Martinez said.
"Sometimes you don't know where you will get the money, but you still want the best for your child."


Wealth Doesn't Make Moral Superiority; Flat Tax, Property Loss
To the Editor:
Not only does the flat tax create benefits for those who earn more than $200,000, but it also creates extra benefits for those in low-cost states.


PAINTING LIFE INTO SAMMY
Your Jan. 29 issue was wonderful from cover to cover, but it was Ellen Pall's article "Painting Life Into Sammy" (Jan. 29) that moved me to tears.


No Heroes, No Villains
FOR THE PRESIDENT'S EYES ONLY Secret Intelligence and the American Presidency From Washington to Bush.
By Christopher Andrew. Illustrated. 660 pp. New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $30.


THE CONCILIATOR
Jimmy Carter for Secretary General of the United Nations!
No one is as devoted to world peace as he is.
Thanks for an excellent article.
PAUL FEINER Elmsford, N.Y.


From the Realm of Imaginary Creatures
THE BIZARRE IMAGES OF beasts with leering faces and distorted bodies like those in "Medieval Monsters: Dragons and Fantastic Creatures," an exhibition at the Katonah Museum of Art, were once regarded as magical and intensely real.
So pervasive was the belief in the power of mythic fauna to ward off evil spirits throughout Europe in the Middle Ages that they were emblazoned on all types of sacred and secular objects.
The animal forms and motifs seen in the 95 items on view, produced between the 10th and 16th centuries, reflect the vigor of the decoration on cathedrals and palaces from Sweden to Sicily.
The objects range from carved furniture, cast bronze vessels and woven tapestries to stained glass panels and stone capitals.


What Makes Math Fun? Ask Those in Single-Sex Classes
THE class of a dozen sixth graders at the Rippowam Cisqua School here eagerly raised hands in response to their teacher's questions on mathematical ratios.
When the class was divided into small groups to solve other problems, the students tackled their tasks eagerly, cajoling and pushing each other to find answers.
Elsewhere in the building, a different class of sixth graders was also engrossed in a math lesson.
The 13 students tackled problems on probability.
Although the noise level was more subdued than in the first class, the students remained enthusiastic.


Correction
A review on Jan. 22, about "The Frontier in American Culture," by Richard White and Patricia Nelson Limerick, edited by James R. Grossman, misidentified the artist responsible for the 1868 Currier &amp; Ives lithograph "Across the Continent." She was Fanny Palmer (Frances Flora Bond Palmer, 1812-76), not Francis Palmer.


Berlin Museum
To the Editor: Thank you for the Correspondent's Report "At Checkpoint Charlie, a Museum Remembers" (Dec. 18).
I visited Berlin and Checkpoint Charlie in May and was quite disappointed.
I walked past Rainer Hildebrandt's Checkpoint Charlie Museum, and although I was interested, did not enter.
In part, it was the admission price, probably higher because of the loss of grants.
But I was also dismayed that barely five years since one of the most historic events of the second half of this century, there is only minimal recognition that the checkpoint, the symbol of freedom for some and oppression for others, ever stood on Unter den Linden.
Only a small sign, not even an official one, reading "Checkpoint Charlie," and a few capitalists offering Cold War relics and chunks of the wall attest that this Berlin intersection has any significance.
I found it ironic that I nearly got lost on my way there, almost missing a landmark that was once so unmistakable.


THE CONCILIATOR
Though it didn't serve him well in office, President Carter's mild-mannered disposition may be just the right vehicle for settling international disputes on a one-on-one level.
The fact that he is able to negotiate with such intransigent people as Bosnia's Karadzic and Haiti's General Cedras is a testament to his integrity and perseverance.
TULYNN M. SMYLIE Brooklyn


SUNDAY, February 19, 1995; A QUESTION FOR: Jerry Lewis
Q: How much work goes into a joke?
A: I did a joke in a film called "The Ladies' Man" -- I call any sequence where you create laughter a joke.
There were five butterflies in a frame, pressed butterflies.
The kid is cleaning and he opens the door and the five butterflies fly away.
I tried it with my technical department, and I could see the wires -- no good.
I tried it blowing them out.
It was too fast.
I couldn't photograph it.
I was meeting Deke Slayton at NASA, and I said I'd love to talk to the guys about a joke.
Deke brought me in a room with three of the weirdest people I've ever seen in my life.
And I tell this one man with wild hair what I'm trying to do.
We spent three or four hours.
They told me that if I used an iodized salt on dental floss, it would make the dental floss invisible to the camera.
And that's how I did the joke.
It did not last nine seconds on the screen.


New Zealand
To the Editor: A few years ago my wife and I spent a number of months in New Zealand.
As a result we were very interested in "By Rail Around the North Island of New Zealand" (Dec. 4).
The writer clearly had a wonderful time and presented her experiences very well, but we think the reader will get the wrong impression: Railroads are not the method of choice to see New Zealand.
We would urge that anyone wishing to really see the wonders of this country to choose either tour bus or autosince the railroads do not go to many of them.
We traveled by both road and rail and there is no question which is preferable.
D.
LEONARD WERNER  New York, N.Y.
Susan Spano, the author, responds: You probably do see more by road travel, but it can also be more costly.
While in New Zealand, I spotted a brochure for a low-cost bus tour operated by the Ice Bus Northland, Post Office Box 1553, Auckland, New Zealand.
It makes numerous stops across the North Island, allowing passengers to get off and on at will, with reservations at hostels.
You pay point to point; for example, $49 from Auckland to the Bay of Islands.
Next time I visit, I'd be inclined to try that.


IT'S DRUGS, STUPID
Granted that legalization would be aimed at the drug traffic and not the abuse, it still would have positive consequences.
It would deprive the pushers of their lure of easy money to poor youths and the pressure to steal to support drug habits.
Not the least of the benefits would be the gradual elimination of the foreign drug cartels and the corruption that supports them.


Phil Gramm
YOU'RE GONNA BE AMAZED," boasts Senator Phil Gramm as the lights dim and he proceeds to demonstrate to a roomful of potential supporters on a recent Saturday in Columbia, S.C., how -- step by step -- he will win the Republican nomination for President of the United States.
The show, featuring colorful graphics flashing across a screen, might well be called Gramm the Invincible.
It is meant to scare rivals into thinking they have no chance to catch up in fund raising and organization, and to convince Republicans that they had better join the juggernaut.


Trial Focuses on Family at Center of Marine Pollution Charges
To the Federal Government, the Frank family of New York and its former network of marine-transport and ship-cleaning companies are major environmental criminals who long and persistently polluted the area's waterways with sewage sludge and toxic industrial waste.
The family says it has been unjustly hounded and unfairly accused by Federal and state agencies despite its efforts to comply with environmental regulations.


SUNDAY, February 19, 1995: VENTURES; The Gold Bug
How to find miners that don't get ill, don't go on strike and don't care if the whole mine caves in?
Not robots.
Much too expensive.
Better to turn to bacteria as the Newmont Mining Corporation is doing.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE GLASS LAKE  By Maeve Binchy. Delacorte, $23.95.


Ready, Set, Ski


Mirror, Mirror
This spring, the fairest of them all is wearing her little black dress crisscrossed with straps.


BARNEY AND BOSNIA
Sonenshine may believe that she is striking a blow for motherhood when she describes how she quit her high-stress job to stay at home with her son, Jordan.
But her "solution" is hardly helpful to the majority of mothers who can't afford to quit work or who would rather not throw away their careers.
What would help?
Sharing parenting and changing the way America does business.


Divorce, Mediators, Lawyers and Fairness
To the Editor:
While I am extremely happy to see The New York Times devote attention to divorce mediation, I have substantial differences with the information presented in "Divorce Without Some of the Pain" (Your Own Account, Jan. 15).


Rhyme's Reason: Linking Thinking To Train the Brain?
HENRY JAMES described a baby's world as a "blooming, buzzing confusion." But parents know better.
Almost instinctively, they speak to their infants in "motherese" -- a universal language of parents, spoken in a lilting, singsong, rhyming pattern.
And parents around the world are rewarded with burbles and smiles as the babies cut through the confusion and focus on the intonation and rhymes.
"What did you dooo? Did you get a boobooo?" sang a nurse to a baby in a doctor's office last week.
The child looked up at her and beamed.


Habitats/113 West 87th Street and 112 West 88th Street; For 2 Brownstones, a Long Night's Journey Into Day
TO Mig Boyle, the two back-to-back bombed-out shells hovering shakily over two particularly elegant side streets of the Upper West Side were persistent reminders of decay, and an inevitable invitation to vagrancy and vandalism.
For more than 15 years Ms.
Boyle and her neighbors struggled to save the houses -- at 113 West 87th Street and 112 West 88th Street.
But until two brave individuals showed up and took on the city bureaucracy, it seemed a frustrating and futile exercise.


Beach Party: Volleyball At the Garden
STRONG men.
Tan.
Playing volleyball in the sand.
No, it's not Malibu (and, no, it's not heaven).
It's Madison Square Garden on Saturday.
After the ice from the Ranger game settles, 240 tons of sand (straight from Long Island) will be dumped onto the Garden floor to set the stage for the third annual Evian Indoor Beach Volleyball Fest, where some of the best male players in the country will compete for more than $250,000 in prize money.


Leigh McNinch, David Kilborn
Jessica Leigh McNinch, a daughter of John H. McNinch of Atlanta and the late Susan Head McNinch, was married yesterday to David Thompson Kilborn, the son of Peter T. and Susan W. Kilborn of Chevy Chase, Md.
The Rev.
Douglas E. Remer performed the ceremony at St.
Martin's in the Field Episcopal Church in Atlanta.
Mrs.
Kilborn, who is 24 and is known as Leigh, is a stepdaughter of Jan N. McNinch.
The bride and her husband, 26, work at the Nationsbank Corporation in Charlotte, N.C., where she is a fund adminstrator and he is a vice president in the company's capital markets subsidiary.
She graduated from Randolph-Macon Woman's College.
He is a graduate of Trinity College in Hartford.


From an Autobiography, Tales That Echo
FROM each poet, a world.
Last night a mockingbird  forgot to stop performing.
It drew in moonlight  its loud loops of song. . .
Would I too be heard better  if I sang in the dark?
"Once I have written it, I have left it behind. I no longer want to talk about it," Claire Nicolas White said to me when I left her.
And I thought about it deeply, that mandate she had placed with me, to leave her behind and take only her writing.


The Poet Kings and the Versifying Rabble
THE POET JAMES MERRILL was the very embodiment of the poetry establishment.
He was a patrician figure, with a nearly English accent and a gaunt, wizened face.
His poetry, like the man, was elegant and elusive, and his death from a heart attack two weeks ago had an inescapable symbolism.
It marked a transition in American poetry itself, the withering away of an establishment that has dominated American poetry for a generation.
"We're poets who've lived long enough to find ourselves alone in the boat," he said a few weeks before he died.
Merrill was immensely wealthy; his father, Charles Merrill, founded the brokerage house of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith.
He was also an overbearing, hedonistic philanderer.
In "The Broken Home," Merrill's lines about the breakup of his parents' marriage -- perfectly crafted, every word meticulous, necessary, carefully placed on the page -- typify the writing of the American poetry establishment at its best:


Q. &amp; A.
Interest on Security Deposit
Q My question concerns interest earned on the deposit I placed with the landlord for my residence several years ago.
What is the percentage I should receive annually?
Is the landlord obligated to deposit this money in an interest-bearing account under my name?
I have a deposit of $3,000 with the landlord for two and a half years now, and never saw any interest. . . .
Ingrid Cusson, Manhattan.


Editorial Notebook; The Kremlin Syndrome
Three years after the disintegration of the Soviet Union, Russians can find almost anything at the store, but can find out almost nothing about presidential decision making in the Kremlin.
The vacuum is a source of political volatility in Moscow, and a troubling sign of undeveloped democracy in Russia.
Consider some of the conspiratorial reports circulating in Russia about President Boris Yeltsin's mishandling of the war in Chechnya:


Tenafly Journal; Residents Sue to Stop Plans for a Giant A. &amp; P.
ISSUES that turn into messy public fights are a rarity in Tenafly, a small, affluent town in northeast Bergen County whose residents take pride in their town as a comfortable place in which to live and bring up children.
That is why the current battle over a proposal by the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company to build a mega-supermarket here has been so jarring.
It has pitted many Tenafly residents against their neighbors.


February 12-18: Poor New York; The City Faces Its Sharpest Cut in Spending Since The Great Depression
In New York City's political history, at least one thing has remained constant: budgets have grown from year to year as the city extended its generous hand to the poor, the sick, the young and the old.
No more.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani unveiled a budget plan last week that included the largest cut in spending since the Great Depression, slashing $1.3 billion, or 4 percent, from the city's current $31.8 billion budget.
Only once since the end of World War II has the city's spending actually declined.
And even then, after the fiscal crisis of the 1970's, it dropped only one-half of 1 percent.


Elegant Table in a Cramped Storefront
THE Manhattan chefs keep coming.
A few months ago Tony Lucin, formerly of Vivolo and La Rondine, opened Cafe Al Dente in Cedarhurst.
The firepower at the new restaurant is concentrated in the kitchen.
The food, with only a few exceptions, is impressive.
The dining room is not.
Despite elegant touches like fresh flowers and white napery, diners can never forget that they are in a cramped storefront.
That is especially obvious on crowded weekend nights, when passing waiters jostle diners.


Remembering Iwo Jima and the Price of Victory
THE battle for Iwo Jima, which began 50 years ago today, was more than the bloodiest campaign in Marine Corps history.
It was, in a sense, a horrible thrust in the passage from the Stone Age to the atomic age.
The casualty rate -- nearly a third of the Americans were killed or wounded in 36 days of fighting -- made a deep impression on Americans who were guessing the cost of invading Japan.
Only about 5 percent of the Japanese defenders survived.
The rest killed themselves or fought to the death.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about redecorating the White House misidentified the room where Hillary Rodham Clinton was standing in some editions.
She was in the East Room, not the Blue Room.


How Washington Inc. Makes a Sale
For 18 months, the Indian power-plant deal has floated near the top of the list of 100 or so big infrastructure projects around the world that the United States Government desperately wants American firms to win.
It is the first of eight big power generation projects in India, and if the American consortium could close this one, it would create a precedent likely to give other American companies an advantage in billions of dollars of follow-on deals.


This Time, Isles Turn a Goal Deficit Into Victory
For the second consecutive evening, the Islanders spotted the Devils a pair of one-goal leads.
For the second consecutive evening, the New Yorkers were able to pull even.
And, thanks to a questionable double-minor assessed to the Devils' Mike Peluso for high-sticking Rich Pilon and then flipping his stick in the air (which cost Peluso the extra two minutes for unsportsmanlike conduct), the New Yorkers took a rare lead.


THE FRENCH CONNECTION
Impetuous, energetic and warm, Alain Ducasse is like the cuisine that has earned him three Michelin stars.
Both the man and his cooking (at Le Louis XV in Monte Carlo) appear exuberant, Italian.
But underneath the sunny exterior beats the heart of a French classicist.
As much as Ducasse has Italianized the French kitchen -- replacing butter on his restaurant table with cruets of spicy olive oil, pushing vegetables to the center of the plate and elevating the glop his countrymen call pasta -- he is, at his core, very French.


Nets Tie 2 Records For Futility In Loss
P.
J.
Brown stood there resolutely, shrugging his shoulders.
It was moments after his coach, Butch Beard, had stormed the locker room, searching for heart and resolve where there was none.
"You can't beat a junior high team by scoring 25 points in the second half," Brown said.


A Personal Holiday
FIFTY-FIVE YEARS AGO THIS MONTH,by a fluke and a hair, my mother and I got out of wartime Berlin, obtained passage on the S. S. Volendam in Rotterdam and sailed past the Statue of Liberty to a Hoboken pier at the dawn of an American holiday -- Feb. 22, 1940, the 208th anniversary of George Washington's birth.
That timing surely heightened my subsequent patriotism, but it has also deepened my resentment of the Monday Holiday Law, which satisfied commerce (and some people's nostalgia for the Confederacy) by moving tributes to Washington (and trumping Feb. 12 tributes to Lincoln), resulting in the celebration of "Presidents' Day" on the third Monday of February -- tomorrow.
As a media person, I have no doubt benefited from the added advertising that promotes Presidents' Day discounts and three-day ski specials.
As a democrat, I can certainly sympathize with every American's right to compose a personal list of Presidents worth honoring.
But some of life's most cherished words and images are date-specific and no mere Act of Congress should be allowed to confuse the memory.
It is next Wednesday, not tomorrow, that I will again hug my mother, think back to the sign in the Holland Tunnel and pay tribute to a few educators who reprogrammed a child's mind to function and finally flourish in a new and weirdly spelled language.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
AFRICA, HANDS ON
A children's workshop is to be held tomorrow from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. at the Garrison Arts Center, focused on the music and art of African cultures.
The fee is $30 and includes an afternoon snack.
Children need bag lunches.
The day will begin with a tour of the current African art exhibition, giving everyone an opportunity to inspect the masks, sculptures, patterned fabrics, jewelry and musical instruments.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Do You Get the Message?
Executives may now be opting for fancy alpha-numeric beepers that can flash complex written messages, but resourceful teen-agers still using the basic digital models are developing codes to convey feelings that go beyond mere telephone numbers.
The fundamental technique is simple: send a numerical message that, when flipped upside down, resembles a word.
A simple "hello" is 07734, while 50538 conveys the Spanish word "besos," meaning kiss.


Corrections
Because of a computer malfunction, a letter to the editor in the Connecticut Weekly today carries an erroneous signature.
The writer is Horace T. E. Hone.


A Japanese Gambler Hits the Jackpot With Softbank
WHEN he was trying to start his software distribution business in the early 1980's, Masayoshi Son rented a huge booth at a Japanese consumer electronics trade show and offered software companies free space to display their products.
The booth was mobbed, but the retailers that attended the show dealt directly with the software manufacturers, bypassing Mr.
Son, the middleman.
"I probably made back one-twentieth of the cost of the booth," Mr.
Son told the Harvard Business Review a few years ago.
"After that, many people were laughing at me. They said, That guy's really dumb. He's a nice guy, but dumb."


Enjoying an Occasional Buttery Indulgence of Brioche
LOW fat is simply not an option when it comes to certain baked goods.
Brioche, for example, must be buttery and eggy.
And for those who believe that when it comes to diet, moderation is the best advice, an occasional indulgence is not out of place.
This rich, golden brioche loaf has a bit of crunch in its texture, thanks to the addition of cornmeal.
It is excellent to serve with good jam for brunch or sliced thin alongside a salad, an elegant terrine or with smoked fish or meats.
Additional butter is not needed.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Three Cheers for America's Reborn Luxury Sedans; Newest Lincoln Has Every Trick In the Book
IT used to be I read novels: westerns, mysteries, an occasional book of the sort that is pompously called serious.
Now all I read are manuals, and my wife thinks I'm funny.
What has happened, I guess, is the nerding of America.
Or at least of Marshall.
But I will say I did not have far to go; I have always pored over the specs of my latest toy, whatever that happened to be.
And with the arrival of that fancy aqua thing in the driveway, I have been turning pages like crazy.


Challenging a Literary Pick-10
To the Editor:
I was surprised that the very ur-memoir produced by this city was not mentioned: "A Walker in the City," by Alfred Kazin.
This book is both a coming-of-age-and-sensibility tale of a young writer and critic shuttling between Brownsville and "the city" and an exquisite exposition of the ambivalences suffered by young and ambitious people whose lives seem suspended on the tightrope that stretches between the outer boroughs and Manhattan.
JUSTINE CULLINAN Brooklyn


A SVELTER LOOK


Divorce, Mediators, Lawyers and Fairness
To the Editor:
Your report on divorce mediation recalls an old saying: "The rain falls equally on the just and the unjust, but more on the just because the unjust have stolen their umbrellas." In divorce, the ideal is to keep everyone under the umbrella.
But the spouse without a financial grip, usually a dependent wife, is not well-served either by a lawyer who concentrates on wrestling or a mediator bent on reaching an agreement at all costs.
What can be crucial is, not the process, but clear knowledge of the intricacies of property division and support, the firmness to deal with bullying as well as psychological sensitivity to a woman who is under extreme emotional pressure.
Without this kind of help from a lawyer or mediator -- and perhaps a therapist -- a powerless wife and her children are sure to get very wet.
LOIS BRENNER  Manhattan, Jan. 15  The writer, a matrimonial lawyer, is a partner at Kurzman Karelsen &amp; Frank.


Ms. Rauffenbart And Mr. Santry
Suzanne Rauffenbart, the associate dean of public affairs at the Harvard Medical School in Boston, was married on Thursday to David George Santry, a senior vice president of Oppenheimer Capital in New York.
Justice Sidney H. Asch of the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court officiated in his chambers in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Santry, who graduated from the American University, was formerly the vice president of public affairs at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Hospital in New York.
She is the daughter of Laurette and Walter Rauffenbart of Moorestown, N.J.
Her father retired as the president of The Legal Intelligencer, a law journal in Philadelphia.


Challenging a Literary Pick-10
To the Editor:
Please add my name to the list of readers surprised not to find "The Alienist" by Caleb Carr anywhere on anyone's list!
ELLEN HANLEY Manhattan


Why Business Is Paying Less for Health Care
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 14 front-page article on the cost of health care to employers told only a small part of the story.
While health care costs are rising exponentially, the real reason business is paying less for health care is that employers are providing benefits for fewer people because:


The Executive Computer; Borland Sees Its Future in Delphi
SOMETIMES the financial and managerial travails of a company can obscure its products.
That has certainly been the case with Borland International Inc., which has been beset with losses, layoffs and lawsuits as it labored to deliver upgrades of its mainstay products like the Paradox and dBase data-base management programs.
Its newest product, Delphi, which ships this week, could be the company's last and best hope for renewed prosperity, if not continued survival.
Delphi is a visual programming tool.
That means software developers can create applications to run on Microsoft's Windows operating system by point-and-click and drag-and-drop commands rather than writing thousands of lines of computer code from scratch.
Some coding is still necessary, and this is definitely not a product for end-users, but tools like Delphi can speed the programmer's task considerably.
A corporate in-house programmer, for example, might use Delphi to create software for tracking purchasing orders.


Lift F.D.A. Roadblock on Experimental Drugs
To the Editor:
As you note in "F.D.A. Becomes Target of Empowered Groups" (news article, Feb. 12), the future makeup of the Food and Drug Administration is very much in doubt.


Are White Schools Bad for Black Children?
KWANZAA AND ME A Teacher's Story.
By Vivian Gussin Paley. 140 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.


Al Gore, One Vice President Who Is Eluding the Shadows
Two years ago, when Al Gore said he wanted to reinvent Government, people listened politely.
Or snickered.
Or fell asleep.
When he took his first foreign trip -- to Poland in April 1993 -- it was assumed that he was trying, like Vice Presidents before him, to fill up his time.
There's not so much snickering now.


LIVES WELL LIVED
I am still marveling at your "Lives Well Lived" issue (Jan. 1) -- a perfect start to the New Year.
From the ironic-informative Watson-Crick sketch of Linus Pauling to the lunatic genius of Wayne Koestenbaum's exegesis of Jackie Onassis's allure, the portraits brim with all the wit, charm, tragedy, heroism, humor, maddening contradictions and giddy vitality of lives truly worth celebrating.
EZRHA JEAN BLACK Los Angeles


Just Say Yes or Maybe
A CROOKED MAN  By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt. 351 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


THE CONCILIATOR
In "The Conciliator" (Jan. 29), Jim Wooten gives an intriguing picture of life after the Presidency, Jimmy Carter-style.
The inimitable Plainsman has earned respect for saving lives and facilitating peace.
Of far greater significance, though, is his contribution to civilized discourse between those entrapped by political enmity.


California Second-Stringer Captures Fountain of Youth
D.
Wayne Lukas scored one more transcontinental coup today when one of his second-string California horses, Thunder Gulch, won the Fountain of Youth Stakes against some of the better Kentucky Derby contenders in the East.
Thunder Gulch made a bold move when Mike Smith took him seven wide on the far turn and won the race to the wire with a desperate drive that nipped Nick Zito's Suave Prospect by a neck.
Four lengths back in third place came Jambalaya Jazz, the favorite and one of the East's highly visible candidates for the Derby.


Fantasy Garden in Mexico's Jungle
THE traditional way to reach Tamazunchale from the outside world was by canoe, up the Moctezuma and Panuco Rivers from Tampico, the nearest Gulf of Mexico port.
For ages, Nahuatl Indians wanting to trade Tamazunchale's abundant coffee and tropical fruits for candles, kerosene and salt made the trip down and back in a few weeks.
Roads, only somewhat faster, now wind into the town, in the central Mexican state of San Luis Potosi, over mountain passes more than a mile and a half high.
The few visitors still arrive disoriented and dazed, although they are only 220 miles north of Mexico City.
Tamazunchale, pronounced like Thomas 'n' Charlie without the R, has grown to 80,000 people, but the thickets that hang from the mountains seem ready to swallow it back up at any minute.
The clouds and mists lingering over the town obscure what lies above.
The drenching year-round humidity dulls the senses and plays tricks with the mind.


SUNDAY, February 19, 1995: STUFF; Memories of Outer Space
Waste not, want not seems to have been the motto of astronauts from the beginning.
They seem to have saved every item they brought back from space and now they're selling their treasures.
Superior Stamp and Coin is having its winter Space Memorabilia Auction next weekend in Beverly Hills, Calif.,with almost 1,400 items provided by cosmonauts and astronauts from all phases of the Soviet and American space programs.
The supply of space memorabilia grows even as space shots dwindle.
Superior's first all-space auction (the first anywhere) was in January 1993 and brought about $400,000.
This one is expected to pull in $1 million.


Dispute Over Plans to Pool Police and Fire Investigations
FOLLOWING the release last month of a highly critical State Department of Investigation report -- which cites sloppy police work and a lack of coordination among Westchester law enforcement agencies in the 1991 burning-death case of a 3-month-old girl -- some officials are calling for centralized arson and police squads to tackle major cases in the county in the future.
But one plan -- to form a major-case squad through the District Attorney's office -- has met opposition from police chiefs in what some are calling a turf war.
Proponents of a change say that in a county where 43 municipalities have autonomy over such matters proposals to centralize power are likely to result in controversy.


Holocaust Survivors' Emphasis Is on Life
Fifty years after their liberation from death camps, more than 3,000 Holocaust survivors gathered here this weekend for a commemoration.
But Saul I. Nitzberg, a survivor of Auschwitz, was not among them today.
He skipped the event's first day to attend a relative's wedding.
"Our family is very closely knit," said Dr.
Nitzberg, 72, of Hollywood, Fla.


Only Thing Hall Loses Is League's Top Scorer
Remember, Seton Hall was supposed to finish last in the Big East according to the coaches' preseason poll, and Syracuse was picked to finish first.
As the game today at the Meadowlands Arena proved, the conference's coaches are no better seers than anyone else.
Seton Hall (16-8, 7-7) trounced Syracuse, 82-74, and it was not nearly as close as the final score.


IN SHORT: FICTION
HANGING BY HER TEETH  By Bonnie Greer. Serpent's Tail, paper, $11.99.


Registration of All Guns Proposed in Canada
Reacting to increasing urban violence, the Canadian Government has moved to strengthen gun laws by proposing mandatory registration of all firearms and a ban on small, easily concealed handguns known as Saturday night specials.
Under the legislation, introduced in Parliament on Tuesday by the governing Liberal Party, possession of an unregistered weapon could mean a prison sentence of up to five years.


G.O.P.  PREPARING BILL TO OVERHAUL NEGLIGENCE LAW
Opening what promises to be a bitter battle over the future of the nation's civil law system, House Republicans are preparing to move legislation through Congress that would dramatically change the way courts handle negligence and product liability lawsuits.
The House Judiciary Committee is expected next week to approve a measure that would, for the first time, put significant portions of torts -- the area of law that governs cases involving defective products and personal injuries -- under Federal law.
Virtually all of tort law is governed by a combination of state laws and common law, which has been developed through centuries of decisions by English judges and state courts.


William Maxwell's Voice
To the Editor:
Harvey Ginsberg's lively portrait of William Maxwell ("A Modest, Scrupulous, Happy Man," Jan. 22) is a welcome corrective to Mary Flanagan's sapless review of "All the Days and Nights," Mr.
Maxwell's collected stories, in the same issue.
Her obtuse inventory of subjects he does not cover reveals, though evidently without her awareness or approval, how thoroughly this consummate artist has spent his writing life instinctively avoiding cliches and fashionable trends.
He has given, in both his stories and his novels, only the purest testimony of the eye, the heart and the mind.


Corrections
The Market Watch column last Sunday, about investing in technology stocks, misstated the given name of the author of "The Market that Beats the Market." He is Michael Gianturco, not Robert.


Streetscapes/The Park Avenue Railroad Viaduct; A $120 Million Renovation for an 1897 Behemoth
IT is really the last of Manhattan's elevated lines, the giant four-track railroad viaduct going up Park Avenue from 111th Street to the Harlem River.
Workmen with torches are now carving out large chunks of this rusting behemoth, built in 1897, and debris litters the street below.
But this el is being rebuilt, not demolished, in a $120 million Metro-North Commuter Railroad project.


Sports of The Times; Opting to Pull Strings and Not Be a Puppet
AT least Sparky Anderson, if this is how he's leaving baseball, goes out a manager, not a marionette.
He goes out fearless and bold.
Those are qualities owners are supposed to want in their managers and coaches.
Those, of course, are qualities much easier to demonstrate between the white lines, where you're a tough guy if you send the runner with two strikes, or kick dirt on the umpire's pants.
"I know the deal," Anderson said Friday, when he took unpaid leave from the Detroit Tigers, with no guarantees of being brought back.


Pornography Meets Paranoia
WHEN the suburban Southfield, Mich., police department demanded an appointment with William and Roslyn Grosky last spring, the two college professors furiously debated whether they owed an overdue parking ticket or a library fine.
But what they were suspected of was child pornography.
The Groskys, seeking a photo enlargement, had given a local photo lab an 18-year-old print of their nude, five-year-old son slipping into his underpants after a bath, and lab technicians had alerted the police.


British Voice Concerns On Chunnel Safety
LONG before the Channel Tunnel opened for business late last year, its operators were busy trying to ease the fears of prospective travelers about safety in the 31-mile undersea link between Britain and France.
They still have their work cut out for them.
On Jan. 24, an engine on a train bound from Brussels through the tunnel to London caught fire just a few moments after getting underway.
Sensors immediately detected the fire and automatic equipment extinguished it.
The train was still nowhere near the tunnel.
No one was hurt, but the train ground to a halt and passenger coaches were briefly plunged into darkness while crew members scurried about in apparent confusion.


The Executive Life; Secrets of Job-Hopping From High-Tech Stars
FAME in Silicon Valley typically belongs to men and women like William R. Hewlett and David Packard, who start their own companies and then stay with them for many years.
But such consistency is the exception in the valley.
Typically, careers here are migratory.
And job-hopping is more often rewarded for its ambition than discouraged.


Battling Demons, and Nicotine; Hospitals' Smoking Bans Are New Anxiety for Mentally Ill
Robert Ciancioso, a lanky man in his 40's, speaks in a tremulous voice as he describes the panic attacks, phobias and anxiety that have haunted him for half his life.
He pushes up a sleeve, revealing red streaks across his forearm where he recently mutilated himself.
His only hope, he says, is treatment in a psychiatric hospital.
But there's a problem.
Mr.
Ciancioso is a two-pack-a-day smoker.
And the psychiatric unit he wants to enter, at Mount Sinai Medical Center, severely limits smoking among patients because of the health risk to them and to the staff.
Patients can smoke 12 cigarettes a day, but only at four prescribed times between 9 A.M. and 9 P.M.


Watershed Fiscal Plan
It was both pragmatic fiscal pressure and broad political ideology that combined last week to produce a watershed in New York City politics: a Mayor proposing to make drastic cuts in the city's aid to the poor.
In releasing his preliminary budget for the next fiscal year, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said essentially that after five years of budget trouble, the city had run out of easy spending cuts.
And so he called for reductions of $1.2 billion in welfare and Medicaid, the government health program for the poor and disabled.


Water Pipe Break Halts Deegan Traffic
The break of a small water pipe beneath the Major Deegan Expressway in the Bronx brought traffic to a near standstill in the southbound lanes north of West Fordham Road for as much as four miles yesterday.
Only the left lane was passable.
The other two were shut off by orange mesh put up by repair crews.


A New Danger in Strep Season
SOMETIMES it seems personal, as though the tiny microbes are out to get you.
Just as viruses make their annual assault in the guise of the flu, bacteria wage warfare in the form of strep throat, an assault that will peak between now and April.
The mighty microbial warriors, often carried from one host to another via the spray of coughs and sneezes, have a recently revamped weapon in their arsenal this year: severe invasive Group A streptoccus.


Giuliani Proposes Changes in Zoning To Aid Superstores
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani proposed sweeping zoning changes yesterday that would open New York City's underused manufacturing areas to the cavernous discount retailers and warehouse stores that have shaped the consumer landscape of America's suburbs and small towns for years.
With a dearth of office tower construction and little hope that manufacturing in New York will rebound, the proposed changes would make attracting large retailers a major focus of the city's economic development strategy over the next decade, particularly outside of Manhattan.


For Suburban Homes, Modest Recovery
A RECOVERY that was reserved in most areas and robust in some reigned over the residential real estate market in the New York suburbs last year.
Home sales surged in much of Connecticut and Long Island and in Westchester and Rockland Counties and parts of Northern New Jersey -- but fell short of their mid-1980's peaks.
Sale prices, in most places, were flat or rose only slightly, barely bouncing off the bottoms hit during the recession in the early 90's.
The increase in sales was sparked, largely, according to real estate brokers and housing analysts, by a slowly receding wave of young, first-time home-buyers, many of whom had been priced out of the market in the 80's.


Police Plan For School Is Disputed
A LEASE that could have the Suffolk County Police Academy sharing a building with schoolchildren is being opposed by police officials.
The officials say the situation is potentially dangerous.
For six years the academy has rented the first floor of the former Peter J. Brennan Junior High School in North Babylon.
The police, who rent the building month to month, arenegotiating a three-year extension of the lease.


Hacker and Grifter Duel on the Net
MY first inkling that Kevin Mitnick might be reading my electronic mail came more than a year ago.
I found a document posted on a public electronic bulletin board containing a personal message that could only have been obtained by someone reading my mail.
At the time, I suspected it might be Mr.
Mitnick, a convicted computer felon who was being sought by the F.B.I. for violation of probation, but I simply shrugged and stopped using that e-mail account for anything important.
I'd been around the Internet long enough to believe that true computer security is a fleeting illusion.
In cyberspace, many people have become inured to the dangers of living in world of swashbuckling electronic pirates.


Why Business Is Paying Less for Health Care; Medical Accounts
To the Editor:
Re your Feb. 13 news article on the financial bind of New York City's elite hospitals:


School Offers a Taste of West Point
THE Pentagon's efforts to reduce the size and cost of the United States military have cast a shadow over the future of an unusual prep school here with a long and proud tradition.
The United States Military Academy Preparatory School, which traces its own history back to 1916, has been housed at this base for 20 years.
Its assignment is to give promising candidates -- many of them from the Army's enlisted ranks -- 10 months of training that will help them succeed at the United States Military Academy at West Point, N.Y.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
FAITH AND FREEDOM  Religious Liberty in America.
By Marvin E. Frankel.
Hill &amp; Wang, $17.95.


A Poet of Their Own
I'D GOT LOST LOOKING FOR W. S. Merwin's house on the Hawaiian island of Maui, driving along roads lined with palms and sugar cane, then turning into a dense area of ironwood and heliconia trees.
It was almost like rain forest here -- pink and red hibiscus, ginger flowers filled with rain from the night.
Then, suddenly, there he was, as if he'd somehow materialized out of the rain.
He was standing by the gate to his land, looking like a Zen sensei, in a kimonolike shirt.
He had slanting blue eyes and wide cheekbones.
His skin was a silvery color.
He was staring at me intently.
"You said you'd be here at 10:15," he said in a precise voice.


Wealth Doesn't Make Moral Superiority
To the Editor:
If Bruce Ellis Fein believes what he writes about the virtues of a flat tax (letter, Feb. 12), we're in even more trouble than I thought.


Hip to the 90's
To the Sports Editor:
I've been retired from baseball for 30 years, but next month I'm going to have both hips replaced.
Does that make me qualified to be a replacement player?
KEN MACKENZIE  Guilford, Conn.
The writer played for the 1962 Mets.


Park Panel At Center of War Over Waterfront
Years of political struggle over the proposed Hudson River Park are reaching a crucial juncture -- and the fledgling agency trying to develop the park has itself turned into a central battleground.
The threatened demise of the Hudson River Park Conservancy could jeopardize plans to create a 4.5-mile waterfront park stretching from 59th Street to the Battery.
Without the conservancy, the project would be relegated to a variety of city and state park, economic development and transportation departments.


Meetings Of Boards In Queens
DISTRICT 1 Astoria, Long Island City.
Third Tuesday of the month; next meeting Feb. 21, 7 P.M.; Variety Boys and Girls Club, 21-17 Thirtieth Road; (718) 786-3335.
Agenda: Presentations from D.E.P. and Sheriff's office.
DISTRICT 2 Sunnyside, Woodside.
First Thursday of the month; next meeting March 2, 7 P.M.; Senior Center, 43-31 39th Street; (718) 533-8773.
Agenda: T.B.A.
DISTRICT 3 East Elmhurst, North Corona, Jackson Heights.
Meetings are usually held the third Thursday of the month; next meeting March 19, 7:45 P.M.; I.S. 227, 3202 Junction Boulevard, at 94th Street; (718) 458-2707.
Agenda: T.B.A.
DISTRICT 4 Corona, Corona Heights, Elmhurst.
First Tuesday of the month; next meeting March 7, 7:30 P.M.; Joseph Lisa Center, 51-13 108th Street; (718) 760-3141.
Agenda: T.B.A.
DISTRICT 5 Glendale, Ridgewood, Middle Village, Maspeth, South Elmhurst.
Second Wednesday of the month; next meeting March 8, 7:30 P.M.; location to be announced; (718) 366-1834.
Agenda: T.B.A.
DISTRICT 6 Rego Park, Forest Hills.
Fourth Wednesday of the month; next Feb. 22; 7:30 P.M.; Rego Park Jewish Center, 97-30 Queens Boulevard; (718) 263-9250.
Agenda: City Planning Commissioner will be speaking.
DISTRICT 7 Flushing, Bay Terrace, College Point, Whitestone.
Second Monday of the month; next meeting March 13, 7:30 P.M.; Bowne Street Community Church, 143-11 Roosevelt Ave. at Bowne Street; (718) 359-2800.
Agenda: Zoning and budget matters.
DISTRICT 8 Flushing, Jamaica, Jamaica Estates, Jamaica Hill, Kew Gardens Hills.
Second Wednesday of the month; next meeting March 8, 7:30 P.M.; Borough Hall, Room 213, 120-55 Queens Boulevard; (718) 591-6000.
Agenda: Discussion of 1996 budget.
DISTRICT 9 Richmond Hill, Woodhaven, Kew Gardens, Ozone Park.
Meetings usually held the second Tuesday of the month; next meeting March 14; 7:45 P.M.; Borough Hall, Room 213, 120-55 Queens Boulevard; (718) 286-2686.
Agenda: T.B.A.
DISTRICT 10 Howard Beach, Ozone Park, Richmond Hill.
First Thursday of the month; next meeting March 2, 7:45 P.M.; Knights of Columbus, 135-45 Lefferts Boulevard; (718) 843-4488.
Agenda: Zoning and sanitation matters and a presentation from Richard Brown, the Queens District Attorney.
DISTRICT 11 Bayside, Douglaston, Auburndale, Hollis Hills, Little Neck, Oakland Gardens.
First Monday of the month; next March 6, 8 P.M.; Middle School 158, 46-35 Oceana Street; (718) 225-1054.
Agenda: T.B.A.
DISTRICT 12 Jamaica, South Jamaica.
Third Wednesday of the month; next meeting March 15, 7 P.M.; Family Life Center, 172-17 Linden Boulevard; (718) 658-3308.
Agenda: T.B.A.
DISTRICT 13 Queens Village, New Hyde Park, Springfield Gardens, Cambria Heights, Floral Park, Bellerose, Glen Oaks.
Usually fourth Monday of the month; Feb. 27, 7:30 P.M.; Queens Reformed Church Parish Hall, 94-79 Springfield Boulevard; (718) 464-9700.
Agenda: T.B.A.
DISTRICT 14 Far Rockaway, Rockaway Beach, Neponsit, Broad Channel, Breezy Point, Arverne, Bayswater, Edgemere.
Second Tuesday of the month; next meeting March 14, 7:45 P.M.; American Legion Hall, 301 Beach 92d Street; (718) 471-7300.
Agenda: T.B.A.
Schedules for meetings of community boards in other boroughs will appear in subsequent issues.


February 12-18: Sanctions Skirted; Iraq Exports Its Oil, Flouting the U.N.'s Rule
It has been building up slowly over the past year: Barrel upon barrel of Iraqi oil has been smuggled out of the country to be sold in Turkey, Iran or out on the high seas in contravention of the United Nations sanctions slapped on Baghdad in August 1990, after Iraq invaded Kuwait.
The smuggling system is as ingenious as it is hard to detect.
A fleet of trucks loaded with oil heads down the many roads leading to the overland borders with Iran and Turkey and melds into the daily traffic traversing Iraq.
Meanwhile, small tankers of various nationalities load up with oil at a port on the Persian Gulf and sail close to the Iranian coast until they can unload their oil onto big ships on the high seas.


Mexican Rail
To the Editor: In "Luxury Train Ride Back in Time" (Nov. 27), Aaron Latham describes his rail trip from Chihuahua to Los Mochis in Mexico.
His story had particular resonance for me.


Corrections
An entry for Orient Lines in a listing of cruises published on Feb. 5 omitted a sailing of the line's Marco Polo.
It is the voyage from Hong Kong to Tianjin, China, departing Sept. 2.


You're More Conservative? No, I Am.
A year before the first Presidential primary, the early maneuvering for the Republican nomination is not over which potential candidate is a conservative but who is most conservative.
In Congress, Republicans (and even some Democrats) are tackling issues, such as banning racial preference in employment, that were taboo only three months ago.
And Democrats, notably President Clinton, are avoiding issues, like the environment, that were once reliable vote-getters.


New Chief Tells Freehanded Uruguay It's Time to Take Its Medicine
Uruguay has long enjoyed one of the highest standards of living in Latin America, buttressed by a social security system that allows people to retire years earlier than in other countries.
But if the President-elect, Julio Maria Sanguinetti, has his way, those days will soon be over.


February 12-18; The Bitch Eats At Sardi's
On Tuesday night, as Valentine's Day wound down to a close, she won the ultimate beauty contest, and on Wednesday she celebrated by standing atop a table at Sardi's and eating grilled steak.
Then, in the hope that somebody had ordered her favorite meal of liver and garlic sauteed in burgundy wine, she began raiding the plates of the hordes of guests gathered at the restaurant in her honor.
The breach of manners was excusable for the 21-pound bitch known as Peggy Sue, an onyx-hued Scottish Terrier who survived the pomp, circumstance and politics of the 119th Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show at Madison Square Garden, where she competed against nearly 2700 champions and was named Best-in-Show by Judge Jacklyn Hungerland.


Fiscal Improprieties Found In Troubled School District
A preliminary audit of a Brooklyn school district taken over in December by Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines has found that tens of thousands of dollars was spent improperly, work was done without soliciting bids, and cameras and computers were missing.
Saying that the report on District 17 by the Office of the Auditor General "paints an extremely troubling picture," Mr.
Cortines turned the findings over to the city's special investigator "to identify any possibility of criminal wrongdoing."


M. A. Greenberg, Jeffrey B. Kobrin
Michelle Ariella Greenberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Greenberg of Kew Garden Hills, Queens, is to be married this evening to Rabbi Jeffrey Bernard Kobrin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence A. Kobrin of New York.
Rabbi Jacob J. Schacter is to perform the ceremony at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs.
Greenberg Kobrin, 21, is studying history and urban affairs at Columbia University.
Her father and her mother, Valerie Greenberg, own G's Services, a data-processing management consulting firm in Kew Gardens, Queens.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
97.25
98.93
107.00
per Dollar
German Mark
1.4890
1.5197
1.7545
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.4040
1.4013
1.3435
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5815
1.5627
1.4620
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$378.20
$375.75
$380.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


3 Deaths Shake Brandeis High
At Brandeis High School, three students have died since the school year began in September.
And while teachers and administrators at the school said they had assumed that violent deaths would be the most frightening ones to youths, they discovered that these deaths were particularly hard for the student body of 2,600 to accept because they were not.
One student died of a burst gall bladder; another, of asthma.
The third student collapsed in his classroom chair in October and died of a congenital heart abnormality.
Teachers say that his death was particularly frightening to the students because it occurred at school.


February 12-18; 18 Holes, 3 Wounded
"You know," Bill Clinton said last week, "Sometimes you're out there and you realize it's all about coordination, you know, and you just feel like you're never going to get it together, but you're having a good time anyway."
Mr.
Clinton wasn't talking about the perils of his Presidency, just one, brief sunburned moment of it: a day of golf with George Bush, Gerald R. Ford and the 91-year-old comic foil to three generations of presidents, Bob Hope.


A Word of Praise
To the Editor: So many letters to the Travel section deal with disappointing behavior that we would like to express our appreciation to American Airlines for the way it handled our reservations on an American Eagle flight canceled in December..


Retiring at Top Speed; With Blair, Winning Comes First, Then the Party
She has won five Olympic gold medals, met four Presidents and even appeared as a clue on "Jeopardy," but not until this weekend has Bonnie Blair received the ultimate sporting tribute -- her own hotel rate.
Most years, the world sprint championships of speed skating couldn't sell out a phone booth.
This year is different.
In a month, on her 31st birthday, Blair will retire.
This weekend, she is making her final appearance in the United States.
More than 150 friends and relatives have claimed the Blair Rate at a suburban Milwaukee hotel.
The Blairs know how to throw a party the way Roger Clemens knows how to throw a fastball.
If there is any melancholy, it's that the festivities will not begin until the racing is finished on Sunday.


On Christopher Street, A More Silent Night
Residents of 165 Christopher Street in the West Village are looking forward to a good night's sleep soon.
In June, more than 25 of the co-op's inhabitants filed for a temporary restraining order against a neighbor, BT Summit Office Products, at 303 West 10th Street, charging that the company's 24-hour shipping and receiving operation was clogging the street and causing an insufferable din.


Miss Pasciutti-Bertschinger, Mr. Lieber
Karen Ann Pasciutti-Bertschinger, the daughter of Joan and John Pasciutti of Keller, Tex., was married yesterday to David Leslie Lieber, a son of Denise and Stanley Lieber of New York.
Judge Sharen Wilson of the Criminal District Court No. 1, Tarrant County, Tex., officiated at the bridegroom's house in Fort Worth.
Mrs.
Lieber, 38, is a customer service representative at United Advertising in Hurst, Tex.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father is a pilot based in Fort Worth.


Challenging a Literary Pick-10
To the Editor:
In an oft-taught course at Friends Seminary, "New York Writers," we read Henry James's "Washington Square," Saul Bellow's "Seize the Day" and James Baldwin's "Go Tell It on the Mountain."


Two Fathers in China
China's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, is 90 years old and ailing, and the nation seems about to fall once again into political uncertainty.
As Mr.
Deng's daughter Deng Rong travels around the United States publicizing her new biography of him, she may try to set the tone of his obituaries, glorifying him as a heroic figure responsible for China's economic reforms.
Whatever she thinks of her father, I will remember what he did to mine.
My father, Bao Tong, has been imprisoned in China for nearly six years because back in 1989, he and Zhao Ziyang, then the Communist Party chief, represented in the Government a sympathetic view and a more humane approach to the students demonstrating in Beijing.


Business Diary: February 12-17
THE ECONOMY A 4,000 Dow: Close, but No Banana Split  In the scheme of things, it makes not the slightest difference whether an arbitrary market gauge known as the Dow Jones industrial average stands at 3,999 or 4,000.
The homeless, and the rich man's champagne, will be just as cold.
But the folks with the pin-striped calculators care deeply about round numbers, and they were all atwitter last week when the Dow, after hemming and hawing for a year, neared the big Four-O-O-O.
It came close just over a year ago, setting a record 3,978.
But then came all those Federal Reserve rate cuts, and the debates over whether they were not enough or too much.
But last week the tea leaves looked just right -- steadying rates, solid profits, safely slow economic growth -- and the Dow charged to a new record.
Two in a row, actually -- but still short of 4,000 -- before thinking better of it on Friday and slipping 33 points.


What Critters Lurk in the House Plants?
IT was hanging plant inspection day recently.
A fern had many dead or yellowing fronds and there was a strong suspicion that scales were the causing problem.
Right.
A close look revealed that these critters were indeed about.
There they were, adhered to the backs of the stems, motionless.
Scales thrive by sucking the plant's sap, eventually killing the fronds.


Real-Life Heroes Also Race Far From Daytona
The Daytona 500 and its speed weeks are the spring training of stock car racing.
But instead of pitchers and catchers reporting, it's pit crews and Winston Cup cars setting up shop at the Daytona (Fla.) International Speedway.
Instead of smoking fastballs and hot prospects, it's smoking tires and hot laps.
But as Dale Earnhardt, Rusty Wallace and their Nascar brethren prepared this past week for today's legendary 500-mile grind, I wasn't gripped by their 190-mile-an-hour billboards and their multimillion-dollar racing teams.


HOW POT HAS GROWN
In a rented hall on the outskirts of Central Amsterdam, a couple of hundred American gardeners gathered over a holiday weekend not long ago to compare horticultural notes, swap seeds, debate the merits of various new hybrids and gadgets and, true to their kind, indulge in a bit of boasting about their gardens back home.
Gardeners talking the back-fence talk of gardeners everywhere, except that these gardeners happened to be criminals.
Sunday afternoon's panel discussion had just adjourned, and gardeners were milling in small knots among the potted marijuana plants that dotted the room like ficus trees in a hotel lobby.
Brian R., a grower in his 20's who is originally from Washington and now lives in the Netherlands, was showing off a bud from his garden, pointing out its exceptional "calyx to leaf ratio." With his oversize glasses, basement complexion and a taste for the kind of button-down short-sleeve shirt that usually keeps company with a plastic pocket protector, Brian looked more like a computer programmer than a gardener.
But then, the most sophisticated marijuana gardening today takes place indoors, where technological prowess counts for as much as horticultural skill.


Challenging a Literary Pick-10
To the Editor:
A list of New Yorkiana really should include "The AIA Guide to New York City," by Elliott Willensky and Norval White, an amazingly accurate compendium of the city's physical aspects with a good measure of cultural history mixed in.
Even after Yale University Press's "Encyclopedia of New York City" appears, the AIA Guide will remain an essential vade mecum.


BENEFITS
For the Botanical Garden  THURSDAY -- A party at the Metropolitan Club, 1 East 60th Street, will benefit the New York Botanical Garden and celebrate its 5,500-specimen orchid collection.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 6:30, followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $300, from (718) 817-8552.
Earth Day at 25  THURSDAY -- A Party for the Planet, celebrating the 25th anniversary of Earth Day, will be held at the Five Spot, 4 West 31st Street.
The event, from 8 P.M. to midnight, will include drinks, hors d'oeuvres and dancing.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 686-4905.
Honor for Robin Williams  THURSDAY -- The American Museum of the Moving Image will honor the actor Robin Williams at a dinner-dance at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The black-tie evening, which will begin with cocktails at 7, will include appearances by Billy Crystal and Steven Spielberg.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 245-6570.
Benefit for the Homeless  THURSDAY -- The Neighborhood Coalition for Shelter, an advocacy group for homeless people, will benefit from a tour of the art collection at the United Nations and a reception and dinner in the Delegates' Dining Room.
The tour will begin at 6:30 P.M., followed by the reception at 7 and dinner at 7:30.
George Plimpton will be the master of ceremonies at the event, which will honor Wolcott B. Dunham, a partner in Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, the law firm.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 288-6965.
Who Is That Masked Person?
SATURDAY -- The Carnevale di Venezia will benefit the cultural programs of Fieri Manhattan, an organization of Americans of Italian descent.
The event, a masked party, will begin at 9 P.M. at Sfuzzi in the Winter Garden of the World Financial Center.
The evening will include drinks, a buffet dinner and dancing as well as a prize for the best mask.
Tickets, $45, from (914) 779-6113.
For College Scholarships  SATURDAY -- Hank Love, a singer, and Urban Blight, a musical group, will perform a benefit show for the Central Park East Secondary School College Scholarship Program.
The evening will begin at 8 with an open bar at Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, followed by the performances at 9.
Tickets, $15, from (212) 529-2070.
A Trans-Atlantic Exchange  SATURDAY -- Project Children, a program that provides children from Northern Ireland with summer vacations with American families, will benefit from a fund-raising dinner at the Trump Taj Mahal Xanadu Theater, at Virginia Avenue and the Boardwalk, in Atlantic City.
The event will begin with cocktails at 5:30 P.M., followed by dinner at 7.
The Emerald Society Pipe Band will perform, and Maria McVicker will sing a program of popular standards.
Tickets, $50, from (609) 272-1980.
For Italian Musical Theater NEXT SUNDAY -- I Giullari di Piazza, an Italian theater group, will benefit from a pre-Lenten celebration at the Synod House of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
The evening will include wine, food, music, dance and a performance of the 17th-century comedy "La Canzone di Zeza." Tickets, $25, from (212) 924-0077.
Dalton School at 75  FEB. 27 -- The Dalton School will celebrate its 75th anniversary with a benefit at Avery Fisher Hall that will raise money for the construction of a new fine arts center at the school.
Tom Brokaw, the NBC news anchor, will be the master of ceremonies.
The event will begin at 8 P.M. and is to include talks and performances by students, parents and alumni, including Helen Frankenthaler, the painter; Marian Seldes, the actress; Eugenia Zukerman, the flutist, and Saeka Matsuyama, a violinist and current student.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 722-5160.
A Benefit Auction  FEB. 27 -- An evening with Luciano Pavarotti, Mediterranean cruises and tours of France and Italy will be among the items featured in an auction at Christie's.
A reception at 6 P.M. will precede the auction.
The evening will raise money for hunger relief and other programs of the Unitarian Church of All Souls.
Tickets, $50 for the reception and auction, from (212) 535-5530.
To Support Madre  FEB. 27 -- Madre, an organization that supports health projects for women and children in Central America, the Middle East and the former Yugoslavia, will benefit from a reading of a screenplay, "Custody" by Jeff Baron, at the Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street.
A reception with the cast, which is to include Estelle Parsons, will follow the event.
Tickets, $125, or $35 for the reading alone, from (212) 627-0444.
For the Police Foundation  FEB. 27 -- The New York City Police Foundation will honor Richard A. Jalkut, the president of Nynex, at a dinner-dance to mark the 150th anniversary of the founding of the New York Police Department and the 100th anniversary of Theodore Roosevelt's appointment as Police Commissioner.
The evening at Police Headquarters will begin with a reception at 6:30, followed by dinner at 7:30.
Black tie or dress uniform.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 751-8170.
Against Family Violence  FEB. 27 -- Steps to End Family Violence will hold a cocktail buffet to support the organization's legal, financial and social programs.
The event, from 6 to 9 P.M., will be held at the Manhattan Penthouse, Fifth Avenue at 14th Street.
Tickets, $85, from (212) 410-4200.
Honor for Actors  FEB. 27 -- The National Board of Review of Motion Pictures will raise money for its screening and community-service programs and will honor Sidney Poitier, Tom Hanks and others at a dinner at Tavern on the Green.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 6.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 410-2798.
Italian Chefs Celebrate  FEB. 27 -- The International Italian Guild of Professional Restauranteurs will hold a dinner to benefit the scholarship programs of the New York City Technical College's department of hospitality management.
The evening, from 6 to 9, will include dishes prepared by 12 Italian chefs, who will cook in the college's teaching kitchens, 300 Jay Street, in Brooklyn.
Tickets, $75, from (516) 427-9309.
Musica Sacra
FEB. 28 -- A benefit concert by the choral group Musica Sacra will be held at 8 P.M. at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street.
Other guest musicians will include Dave Brubeck; Peter Schickele; Judith Malafronte, mezzo-soprano, and Jan Opalach, bass-baritone.
Charles Bressler, tenor, will be the master of ceremonies.
A reception at the Century Cafe, 132 West 43d Street, will follow the performance.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 529-3188.


A Small Club's Role as Arbiter of Hipness
FOR DECADES, THE VILLAGE Vanguard, which is celebrating its 60th anniversary this week by giving itself a party, has been an important outpost in a continuing American cultural experiment.
Unrepentantly partisan, it has glorified the homegrown and avoided pretension in its mission to frame the humor, poetry and music of what is sometimes called the street, defined as anything American, anything separate from the academy.
And the party, which runs Tuesday through Sunday, explains where the club has been: Allen Ginsberg, Shirley Horn, Bobby Short, Dick Gregory, Pete Seeger and Professor Irwin Corey are all showing up to pay tribute and to perform.
That list -- and the staggering lineup of performers over the years, from Barbra Streisand and Woody Allen to John Coltrane and Thelonious Monk -- also suggests that the Vanguard, small, underground and unprepossesing, has been a witness to and participant in a startling transformation: the elevation of its esthetic from the marginal and hip to the mainstream.
The Vanguard has been a shrine for what is good about this century, and the century has caught up with it.


Rangers' Night Ruined by Roy and Recchi
The Rangers lost to the Canadiens by 5-2 tonight in the historic old Forum because they gave away the puck too many times, because they took too many bad penalties, because Mark Recchi scored twice for Montreal and because Patrick Roy proved yet again that he is a goalie who brings honor to the Montreal tradition of Georges Vezina, Jacques Plante and Ken Dryden.
Roy, with icy poise, stopped 34 of 36 shots to put the Rangers once again below the .500 mark at 6-7-2.


Ask Dr. Darwin
Why do babies cry so often and suffer from colic?
Infants cry to get picked up, since thousands of years of experience have taught them that the safest place to be at all times is in their mothers' arms.
Doctors typically reassure the worried parents with a diagnosis of colic.


BEST SELLERS: February 19, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
51
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
2
35
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
3
3
5
KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The police detective Alex Cross pursues a serial killer and the kidnapper of his niece.
4
7
2
ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D.
James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a prestigious London publishing house.
5
1
DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) In words and pictures, the story of a girl whose head unexpectedly sprouts a daisy.
6
6
4
ACCEPTABLE RISK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $23.95.) A medical researcher's quest has devastating results.
7
12
2
HOME SONG, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $23.95.) The appearance of his unknown biological son threatens the serenity of a man's family life.
8
4
5
EYES OF A CHILD, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $24.) The apparent suicide of a San Francisco man leads to courtroom encounters.
9
2
ALWAYS A RECKONING, by Jimmy Carter. (Times Books/Random House, $18.) A collection of poems.
10
9
4
THE MURDERERS, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Putnam, $23.95.) A series of murders and "willful deaths" beleaguers the Philadelphia police force.
11
8
132
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
12
5
6
SELF-DEFENSE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tries to help a woman who says she is being stalked.
13
11
20
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
14
1
THE PAPERBOY, by Pete Dexter. (Random House, $23.) A reporter, investigating the murder of a Florida sheriff, is outmaneuvered by violent half-wits.
15
13
4
TRUST ME, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $22.) A canceled wedding leads to a curious romance.
16*
10
25
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
2
I WANT TO TELL YOU, by O.J.
Simpson. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) The former football star, now on trial for murder, responds to letters he has received.
2
5
2
RAGING HEART, by Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $18.) An account of the marriage of O.J. and Nicole Brown Simpson.
3
2
19
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
4
6
4
INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE, by Ronald Kessler. (Pocket, $23.) Anecdotes about events at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue during the past 30 years.
5
4
8
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
6
3
16
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of belief, suffering and hope.
7
7
4
ALL MY CHILDREN, by Gary Warner. (General Publishing, $25.) A scrapbook of photographs and mementos about the long-running television show.
8
9
24
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
9
12
8
NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker. (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J.
Simpson as remembered by a friend.
10
13
12
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
11
10
50
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
12
1
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) A lawyer argues that a plethora of governmental rules, regulations and bureaucracy is fettering the lives of all Americans.
13
11
61
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
14
8
20
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
15
14
21
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
91
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
1
THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE. (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips for successful investing from 16 Illinois women.
3
2
43
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
4
3
5
FOOD, by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Information about recipes, nutritional menus and diets.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 4, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) ADMITTING THE HOLOCAUST: Collected Essays, by Lawrence L. Langer. (Oxford University, $23.) Mr.
Langer, a retired professor of English, illuminates the literature of the Holocaust -- the chronicles of ghetto and camp, the fiction and poetry wrought out of the horror, the representations in film and on television.
Mr.
Langer is also the editor of ART FROM THE ASHES: A Holocaust Anthology (Oxford University, $30), a remarkable collection of personal accounts, both by well-known survivors and by victims otherwise obscure, and of fiction, poetry and art related to the cataclysm.
ALL THE DAYS AND NIGHTS: The Collected Stories of William Maxwell. (Knopf, $25.) Stories, balanced, gentle and humane, concerned above all with reconciliation, from six decades of work by a master writer and editor who is now 86.
THE CUNNING MAN, by Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) The hero of this wise and entertaining novel, a chronicle of personal and social change in Toronto, is a doctor whose superb diagnostic skills rest on shamanism and Platonism as well as scientific medicine.
DEMOCRACY ON TRIAL, by Jean Bethke Elshtain. (Basic Books, $20.) A professor of ethics argues that the weakness of democratic institutions in America reflects the replacement of rights conceived as immunities from government interference by rights conceived as individual entitlements.
GIVING AWAY SIMONE: A Memoir, by Jan L. Waldron. (Times Books/Random House, $22.) An absorbing personal history of the author and her family, women who for five generations failed or declined to keep their children.
HOW LATE IT WAS, HOW LATE, by James Kelman. (Norton, $21.) A novel about a Glasgow ne'er-do-well that charms, persuades and enlightens, though it is written not only in salty talk but in the Glaswegian language.
NOVEL WITHOUT A NAME, by Duong Thu Huong. (Morrow, $23.) Ten years in the army of North Vietnam transform the protagonist of this gritty novel as he and his nation are stripped of the ideals they have sacrificed so much for.
TERRIBLE HONESTY: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s, by Ann Douglas. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) The great big city in the great good time, analyzed with broad scope and minute complexity as the locus of the national psyche when Americans attacked the conditioned responses of the pre-1914 world.
THE UNUSUAL LIFE OF TRISTAN SMITH, by Peter Carey. (Knopf, $24.) Its tough, spare, considered language sustains this big and thoughtful novel, whose hero learns that imperialism is universal, bad for weak and strong alike.
THE WEDDING, by Dorothy West. (Doubleday, $20.) A fascinating, deceptively substantial novel by an 87-year-old survivor of the Harlem Renaissance; its main subject is the subtle assumptions of color, class, race and status in a summer colony of upper-class black families.


Supporting the Center For Children at Court
Thank you for your article about the Yonkers Family Court Children's Center operated by the Westchester Children's Association ("In Family Court, Caring for Children," Jan. 29) noted that only 60 percent of the funding for those centers -- Yonkers is one of nine sites around the state -- is provided by a grant from the Office of Court Administration.
The burden of finding matching funds to pay the remaining 40 percent of costs falls on the nonprofit organizations providing the service.
In the case of the Yonkers Center, the Westchester Children's Association raised the necessary funds from individual, corporate and foundation donors who care, as we do, for the well-being of children.
As a result, we have been able to serve nearly 800 children in the first seven months of center operation.


A Couple of Vanyas Sitting Around Talking
SOON THERE MAY BE A CLUB for Uncle Vanyas.
First there was the highly praised Louis Malle movie "Vanya on 42d Street," a filming of Andre Gregory's stage rehearsal of the Chekhov play, in a translation by David Mamet, with Wallace Shawn in the title role.
Two more movies are still to come: Michael Blakemore's "Country Life," set in the Australian outback, with John Hargreaves as Vanya, and "August," in which Anthony Hopkins will assume the part and which he will also direct.
On Thursday, Tom Courtenay, who became an overnight star in his debut in the 1962 film "The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner," opens in "Uncle Vanya" at Circle in the Square in a production with ties to the Royal Exchange Theater in Manchester, England.
Among the cast is Werner Klemperer as the aging professor, whose arrival at the country estate with his beautiful young wife, Yelena (Amanda Donohoe), causes confusion and discord.
James Fox portrays the doctor, who along with Vanya falls in love with the indolent, unhappy Yelena.
The play, in a version by Jean-Claude van Itallie, is directed by Braham Murray, an artistic director at the Royal Exchange.
Mr.
Murray and Mr.
Courtenay were invited to Broadway by Theodore Mann, a founder of Circle in the Square.


Notes Reveal 'Profoundly Humane' Whitman
The nurse recorded in his notebook each wounded soldier's simple request, for an orange, a piece of horehound candy or to have a book read to him, and the nurse obliged as he could.
He noted his patients' names and addresses, and for those who could not write, he wrote letters to their families.
By the name of each who died, he drew a cross.
The chronicler was Walt Whitman.
The notes, taken while he worked as a nurse in a Union Army hospital in Washington during the Civil War, are part of the contents of four notebooks of Whitman's that turned up recently at Sotheby's in Manhattan, after more than half a century missing and presumed stolen.


What Critters Lurk in the House Plants?
IT was hanging plant inspection day recently.
A fern had many dead or yellowing fronds and there was a strong suspicion that scales were the causing problem.
Right.
A close look revealed that these critters were indeed about.
There they were, adhered to the backs of the stems, motionless.
Scales thrive by sucking the plant's sap, eventually killing the fronds.


Sculptor Sees Larger Issue In Debate Over Her Statue
To the Editor:
I sat in the library of the American Academy in Rome recently reading Richard Brilliant's "Gesture and Rank in Roman Art," fascinated to learn how gesture and expression were taught to young men preparing for public life in antiquity.
These lessons were employed in Greek and Roman sculpture to render stature or emotion in the figure represented, and were passed down throughout the history of Western figurative sculpture.


Injury Pattern
To The Sports Editor:
When Holy Bull suffered his career-ending tendon injury on Feb. 11, his jockey, Mike Smith, said, "It happened right after he changed leads."


By the Book
To the Editor:
In French films, there is always at least one scene in which a character is reading a book.
In most American movies, there are no books. (The exception, "Pulp Fiction," an American homage to French cinema, proves the rule.)


Woman and Friend Charged In Death of Her Daughter, 3
A 21-year-old Bronx woman and her boyfriend have been charged in the beating death of her young child after she ran next door crying for help, the police said yesterday.
The woman, Nora Pantoja, was arrested late Friday after it was revealed that she was present when the child, 3-year-old Lillian Mezon, was struck repeatedly by her boyfriend, Carlos Javier Rivera, the police said.


Refined Risk: A Bond Deal Offers 18.5%
WOULD you lend money to a company that had gone broke twice before?
What if the man running the company was being sued -- by his son -- for fraud?
Last week, Wall Street answered with a resounding "Yes." The Transamerican Refining Corporation raised $300 million by selling junk bonds with promised yields of 16.5 percent to 18.5 percent -- plus a bonus of stock in the company.
"These interest rates have not been seen since the leveraged buyout frenzy of the late 1980's," said Max Holmes, Salomon Brothers' director of corporate bond research.


A Northern Italian Addition in Wilton
WITH the recent change in its liquor laws, Wilton is beginning to hum as a restaurant town.
Another addition is Per Bacco!
Ristorante, featuring northern Italian food in a small, quietly handsome setting of beige-tiled floor, beige-sponged walls, well-spaced tables and soft romantic lighting.
In the last couple of years, it seems every new Italian restaurant has called itself northern.
But at Per Bacco!, the label is accurate.
The stage for a promising meal was set with the arrival of crusty bread and a tiny dish of luscious sun-dried tomatoes in extra-virgin olive oil.
Other spreads -- red and yellow roasted pepper strips, an onion "jam" -- were equally delicious.


Zipping Through School, but, Boy, Is He Dumb
The Jerky Boys  John G. Brennan, Kamal Ahmed Directed by James Melkonian R 82 minutes


Sound Bytes; A Curator of Multimedia
BY now, there are hundreds of companies churning out thousands of titles of multimedia software.
So it is rare that a start-up gets much attention before it has produced a single offering.
But the Corbis Corporation of Bellevue, Wash., was certain to be an exception because its owner is Bill Gates, chairman of Microsoft.
Corbis's publishing arm is bringing out its first title, "A Passion for Art: Renoir, Cezanne, Matisse and Dr. Barnes." The CD-ROM program is a kind of virtual museum tour through the collection of Albert C. Barnes, who in the early 1900's amassed a huge private art collection.
The software, priced at about $45, will be in stores in a few weeks.


Nancy Chambers, Kevin E. Urbonas
Nancy Jessica Chambers, the daughter of Kathleen and John Chambers of Westwood, N.J., was married yesterday to Kevin Edward Urbonas, the son of Catherine and Edward Urbonas of Clinton, Conn.
The Rev.
Joseph McCloskey, S.J., a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's Roman Catholic Church in Westwood.
Mrs.
Urbonas and her husband, both 24, are graduates of Syracuse University.
The bride is an editorial assistant at Working Woman magazine in New York and a co-editor of its regional Metroguide section.
Her father is a sales representative for Decision Servcom, a computer servicing company in New York.
Her mother teaches seventh-grade mathematics and science at the David E. Owens Middle School in New Milford, N.J.


In the Region/Connecticut; Waterborne Radon Joins Airborne Type as Problem
RADON, the ghostly household carcinogen that can't been felt, smelled or tasted, has been recognized by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency for at least six years as the second highest cause of death from lung cancer after cigarette smoking.
The E.P.A. rates it as the greatest health risk of any environmental pollutant.
Now, waterborne radon is emerging as a more complex form of the problem, and Connecticut's coastal counties have one of the highest levels of contamination in New England.
The state's Department of Health and the E.P.A. have identified Fairfield, New Haven, Middlesex and New London Counties have the most polluted; Hartford County as the least, and Litchfield, Tolland, and Windham Counties as intermediate.


In a First Foray, Dole Faces the Age Question
The audience that gathered in a library auditorium here for the first town meeting of Senator Bob Dole's Presidential bid had barely taken their coats off when they made it obvious that they would not go easy on him.
The location had been carefully chosen, one of the few parts of the state where Mr.
Dole had run well in the 1988 Republican primary, and his reception, over all, was warm.
Still the pesky questions came thick and fast, on abortion, school prayer and legalizing marijuana.
The touchiest question came from a nervous though determined Norman May, 67, a retired school principal from the nearby town of Rindge: "Are you worried about the age issue? I hate to bring it up because I voted for you the last time. That is going to be a factor and how are you going to address that?"


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
BATTERY PARK  $499,000
380 Rector Place  (Liberty Terrace)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,096-sq.-ft. condo in a 9-year-old building; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, dining area, terrace, 2 exposures, Hudson River view; common charge $1,341; taxes $7,114, listed at $525,000, 1 year on market (Broker: D.J. Knight)


Manhattan Shad Run
Those searching for harbingers of spring should disregard the photograph in last Tuesday's Times of two surf casters on a pier at Coney Island.
This is simply a coastal variant of the pre-vernal mania more commonly observed in ice fishermen.
However, we can report a legitimate harbinger of unfailing reliability.
The first shad roe sightings have occurred in Manhattan with the attendant quibbling in the ticket line at Citarella.
The word among West Side seafood lovers is that these shad roe are from Georgia rivers.


Saturday Night Fever: Noise That Unnerves
LAST Saturday night, when the kick drum of one of the alternativerockgrungemetal bands began reverberating inside my skull and the bass line oscillated up and down my spine, I called the 13th Precinct.
As usual these Saturday nights, the officer was friendly: he told me there had already been a number of complaints about the Pit, on East 15th Street, and that they'd send a car over.
He unctuously suggested that I get involved in community organizations.
Monday afternoon, for the first time, I descended into the Pit, a narrow duplex set somewhere between a crack house and the fancy brownstone of the New York Correctional Society on a block facing the Con Ed Building.
I was in a surly mood, but when the bartender turned from watching A &amp; E to say, "Hi, Doc, what's your pleasure?" I began to lose some of my edge.
It was Cindy Hawkins, an acquaintance from the nabe.


Reinventing Overpasses On Ninth Ave.
Wanted: a fresh, enticing look for the drab steel and concrete overpasses above Ninth Avenue that carry 7,000 buses in and out of the Port Authority terminal every day.
Community leaders have long complained about the dismal esthetics.
Now, with renovations to the bridges pending, there is a plan to transform the setting into a unifying gateway -- with a design contest seeking proposals from the public.


Kansas State Flies, but Kansas Has Height
Kansas 78, Kansas State 67
Kansas State's determination couldn't overcome Kansas' height yesterday.


Brooklyn Tenants Told Gas Is Cleared
Tenants of a building in Brooklynwho were forced out of their homes for two nights by poisonous gas from an underground cable fire in the street were allowed to return yesterday after the city's Department of Environmental Protection found that the air in the building had cleared.
A 60-year-old woman died of a heart attack after the evacuation Thursday morning at 1010 President Street in Crown Heights.
Two of the 24 residents from the four-story building remained hospitalized yesterday, still suffering from the effects of carbon monoxide poisoning.


The Neediest Cases; With Help, a Driver Prevails In His Struggle to Find a Job
While driving a bus and escorting elderly residents may not be as exciting as working in a field that produces cumulus rain clouds, Saveliy Khusid is still thankful for his job.
Mr.
Khusid, 54, is a bus driver for the United Jewish Council of the East Side, a job he has held since July 1994.
He transports elderly New Yorkers to doctor's appointments, shopping trips and museum visits.


Huskies Deflated By Kittles's 37 Points
The bandwagon needed air bags.
Just when the state of Connecticut had mobilized to respond to the first No. 1 ranking in the history of its men's basketball program, the Huskies fell hard today.
The Villanova Wildcats produced a sudden closure to the longest winning streak in Big East history with a 96-73 defeat of the Huskies at Gampel Pavilion that ended Connecticut's 18-game conference streak and became its worst loss on campus in 22 years.


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and the satellite booth at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold at Duffy Square beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
The World Trade Center booth opens at 11 A.M. and also sells matinee tickets for the next day.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


Some Spying Secrets Will Stay out the Cold
THREE years ago this week, Robert M. Gates, then Director of Central Intelligence, promised "a real shift on the C.I.A.'s part toward greater openness." He said the "continuing undifferentiated secrecy" would end, and that its old files on the great secret operations of the cold war would be made public.
Mr.
Gates's promise remains unkept, and much evidence suggests that it will not soon come true.


Commercial Property/Home-Improvement Stores; Chains Are Tooling Up and Taking on Manhattan
THERE is a long list of reasons why home-improvement chains might not want to open stores in Manhattan.
It's a place where renters far outnumber homeowners, and renters generally spend less on improvements.
Co-op owners often have problems getting boards to approve major structural changes.
Repair work more often means a call to the super than a trip to the home-repair store.


SUNDAY, February 19, 1995: PLOWSHARES; Liftoff
Who is benefiting the most from the passing of the cold war?
Golfers.
Cary Schuman, who once hit a golf drive 463 yards and 10 inches (a one-time Guinness world record), has designed a driver made from Russian nuclear missile parts.
Some of the profits from the sale of the "Peace Missile" ($299 at 800-721-2060) will go to children's charities in Russia and the United States.
Plus, the driver is supposed to really launch the ball.


Perils in France
To the Editor: The south of France has warm and outgoing people, warm pebble beaches and truly delicious food.
But the area also has some surprises that tourists might not be prepared for.
My husband and I spent three weeks in France last fall.
As we were studying the menu in the small medieval town of Uzes, I was the victim of an unsuccessful purse-snatching.
The thief fled in a waiting car.


BARNEY AND BOSNIA
I could only laugh as I read Tara Sonenshine's Hers column "Barney and Bosnia" (Jan. 29), having just had what I thought must be the worst week of my professional career.
After dodging what seemed like bullets all week, I found out late at night that an early-morning breakfast meeting was set for the next day.
I figured I could leave one son waiting for his school bus in the lobby of my building and the other with a neighbor.
I managed to get to my office at Rockefeller Center on time only to see that some people actually ice-skate at 8 A.M. in the middle of the week!


Philip J. Rudd Dies; Developer Was 68
Philip Jerome Rudd, a leading real estate developer for many years on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, died on Feb. 11 at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 68.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 19, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
TOM CLANCY'S OP-CENTER, created by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik. (Berkley, $6.99.) The operations of a secret Government agency.
2
3
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $6.50.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her late son creates familial tension.
3
4
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Warner, $6.99.) A doctor stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
4
4
ICEBOUND, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The world's future is threatened by a tidal wave, storms and a psychopathic killer.
5
1
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
6
4
PRINCE CHARMING, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $6.50.) A lady in Victorian London discovers the man of her dreams, a Montanan.
7*
4
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $6.99.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a Vermont town.
8
36
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
9*
5
LOVERS, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $6.99.) Romance, rivalry and fun as experienced by half a dozen couples.
10
23
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
11
1
RIVER GOD, by Wilbur Smith. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Ambition, greed and romance in Egypt at the time of the Pharaohs.
12*
2
FOR MY DAUGHTERS, by Barbara Delinsky. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An aging mother attempts to reconcile with her three daughters.
13
4
LITTLE WOMEN, by Louisa May Alcott. (Pocket, $5.50.) The 1868 novel about four sisters in New England.
14
25
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
15
1
AMBUSH AT CORELLIA, by Roger MacBride Allen. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The first volume of a new "Star Wars" trilogy.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
22
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
4
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Vintage, $13.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
3
58
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
4
21
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
5
9
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of "Seinfeld."
6
10
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A discussion of love and relationships.
7
6
CONTRACT WITH AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich, Dick Armey, et al. (Times Books/Random House, $10.) A Republican program for reshaping the Government.
8
17
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
9*
589
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
10
25
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
11
31
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
12
103
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
13*
40
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
14
16
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great Plains.
15*
15
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
21
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
4
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Pocket, $6.99.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
3
199
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
4
1
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY: An Experiential Guide, by James Redfield and Carol Adrienne. (Warner, $8.99.) Ways to apply the inspirational message of the novel "The Celestine Prophecy."
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 4, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


John J. Sughrue, Newcast Director, 67,
John J. Sughrue, director of the Huntley-Brinkley newscasts on NBC-TV in the 1960's and an award-winning producer of documentaries, died on Feb. 10 at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 67.
Mr.
Sughrue, who lived in Forest Hills, Queens, died of lung cancer, said his sister Jane Giberga.


Death by Modem
COMPLICITY By Iain Banks. 299 pp. New York: Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $22.50.


Eroticizing Violence
To the Editor:
Abbe Smith's review of Nadine Strossen's "Defending Pornography" (Jan. 22) tried to explore fairly both Ms.
Strossen's pro-pornography campaign and the campaign of feminists working to raise consciousness about the documented effects pornography has on women's lives.


Journal; A Dropout Returns
A benevolent ruler is felled by a mysterious illness and is widely rumored to be mad -- then returns to power months later none the worse for wear.
While this happens to be the plot of Alan Bennett's "The Madness of King George," it is also the true story of Neil Rudenstine, the president of Harvard.
Suffering from "severe fatigue and exhaustion of unknown origin," Mr.
Rudenstine abruptly vacated the most visible job in American higher education in November, setting off both rumors about his mental state and a national reassessment of the role of university presidents in a stressful age.
During his absence, The Wall Street Journal questioned his ability to pass Management 101 at Harvard's own Business School.
The Harvard Crimson described him as "a grind," with "few grand accomplishments to show for his hard work" during his three-year tenure.


President Of Harvard Is Ready To Return
Three months after taking an unexpected leave of absence that raised speculation about his health and about the rigors of his job, Neil L. Rudenstine, the president of Harvard University, today pronounced himself "extremely refreshed, well, vigorous, ready to go," and said that he would return to work on Thursday.
Talking with reporters in the library of his colonial home here, Mr.
Rudenstine, 60, said that he had been suffering from simple exhaustion, nothing more.
"I was just tired," said the president, still slightly tanned from his recent and unaccustomed Caribbean vacation.


Wall Street; RJR Nabisco Takes a Tip From Penny Stocks
YOU say your company's stock isn't rising to the level it deserves?
Do what the penny stock folks do, and whip up a reverse split.
RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation said Wednesday that it was making two moves to bolster its stock price: the company's first regular quarterly cash dividend, payable on April 1, of 30 cents a share on an annualized basis, and a 1-for-5 reverse stock split.
Investors yawned.
On Wednesday, the stock closed unchanged at $5.75.
On Friday, the shares fell 6.25 cents, closing at $5.625.


Future Shock?
To the Editor:
Will the time come when theaters that do not amplify actors' voices advertise "acoustic performance" as a selling point, offering immediacy, intimacy, naturalness and authenticity of sound?
DEANE L. ROOT  Pittsburgh


Holiday Tomorrow
Washington's Birthday will be observed tomorrow.  NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Alternate-side street-cleaning regulations suspended.
SANITATION No pickups, street cleanings or recycling.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and subways on Saturday schedule.
Long Island and Metro-North railroads on holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and trains on Saturday schedule. CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on holiday schedule.


Combing the Century For a President to Honor
THE President's character, his contemporary critic wrote, was a "non-describable, chameleon-colored thing called prudence," which was "in many cases a substitute for principle" and "so nearly allied to hypocrisy that it easily slides into it."
The critic was Thomas Paine, the Revolutionary pamphleteer.
The President was George Washington, at the end of his second term in 1796.
Today, Washington is celebrated as the father of his country, the pretext for Macy's "Winter Fashion Clearance," and a swell excuse to sleep late tomorrow morning on the Federal holiday that marks his birth.


IT'S DRUGS, STUPID
Joseph A. Califano, Jr. speaks the truth in his article "It's Drugs, Stupid" (Jan. 29).
I would add only that the problem extends, in similar proportion, to the juvenile justice system.
To give juvenile delinquents a year of confinement and a few "Just Say No!" videos is not the cure for what ails them.
RUTH BRADLEY-WELD Moravia, N.Y.


Hooliganism in Britain Develops Political Slant
Soccer violence in Europe used to be largely a matter of drunken youths, inflamed team loyalties and spontaneous brawls, and it usually seemed to involve the English.
But soccer associations, the police and researchers have been tracking a steady growth in disturbances at and around games across Europe.
And although many incidents are still ignited by beer, boredom and being on the wrong end of the score, experts said there was a growing tendency for hooliganism to be premeditated and organized for political purposes by right-wing extremists.


For Sale: A Wing or Two (and a Prayer)
FOR SALE: G1, the Grumman Gulfstream twin-engine turboprop airplane that has transported New York governors, sometimes precariously, since 1977.
WHY: Because Gov.
George E. Pataki, in what one aide called "an unscripted moment," declared during last year's campaign that, if elected, he would sell the state plane.
As a candidate, Mr.
Pataki found that G1 served as an effective symbol of what he called the imperial style of his opponent, Mario M. Cuomo, particularly after news reports revealed that members of Governor Cuomo's family had used the plane for personal travel.
As Governor, Mr.
Pataki has apparently discovered that it can be nice to have an airplane at one's disposal.
But promises are promises.
The Governor will still have access to two state-owned Sikorsky S-76 helicopters.
His aides say the state may lease a plane in the future -- and there are always commercial flights.
BEST AIRBORNE CUOMO QUIP: "What's the matter, aren't you in a state of grace?" Said to a pale reporter in 1988 as the plane, filled with smoke, descended in a rainstorm to make an emergency landing.
SALE PRICE: Whatever the market bears.
The plane, which was built in 1966, was bought by the state in 1977 for $1.2 million and was refurbished in 1988 for $628,000.
It carries 13 passengers and two crew members and has a Rolls-Royce engine.
It has logged 7,960 flying hours.
With a range of 1,200 nautical miles, it can fly from Albany to St.
Louis without refueling.
ONE MAN'S GUESS: "That thing's a dinosaur," said one aircraft appraiser, who requested anonymity.
"You're looking at about $1.5 million, possibly as high as $1.6 million." Regrettably, that amount would not be enough to close New York State's $5 billion budget gap without, say, the help of $2 billion in social-services cuts and the elimination of some 11,400 state jobs.
FULL DISCLOSURE: While G1 has never been decertified by the Federal Aviation Administration, its reputation for airworthiness is not stellar.
Its recent record is much improved, but it did make at least four emergency landings between 1987 and 1990, with Mr.
Cuomo, former Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine and former Assembly Speaker Mel Miller each on board for at least one unscheduled descent.
Two of the landings were caused by faulty warning lights.
But in one instance, an engine generator malfunctioned, and in another an electrical fire broke out.
SALES PITCH: "It has always been a safe plane. New York doesn't fly its leaders in unsafe aircraft." Delivered by Benjamin A. Marvin, a spokesman for the state Department of Environmental Conservation, which operates G1.
KEVIN SACK


Hospitals Cope in Blood Quest
HOSPITALS in Westchester are maintaining adequate blood supplies despite a shortage that has affected the New York Blood Center, the major provider for the New York City area.
"We've been alerted, and we have to be cautious, but for now we are O.K.," said Cheryl Gainer, the county's deputy commissioner of hospitals.
"We're reviewing the daily reports."


Flawed History Standards Must Go
To the Editor:
Re "Maligning the History Standards" (editorial, Feb. 13):


Streetscapes/The Park Avenue Railroad Viaduct; A $120 Million Renovation for an 1897 Behemoth
IT is really the last of Manhattan's elevated lines, the giant four-track railroad viaduct going up Park Avenue from 111th Street to the Harlem River.
Workmen with torches are now carving out large chunks of this rusting behemoth, built in 1897, and debris litters the street below.
But this el is being rebuilt, not demolished, in a $120 million Metro-North Commuter Railroad project.


GIBSON IS OUSTED AS N.A.A.C.P. HEAD
Reacting to a rising chorus of criticism by rank-and-file members and threats by corporate benefactors to withhold financial support, the board of directors of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People yesterday voted to replace its chairman, Dr.
William F. Gibson.
By a vote of 30 to 29, the board elected Myrlie Evers-Williams, the widow of Medgar Evers, a former N.A.A.C.P. official who was murdered in Mississippi in 1963, to the chairmanship.


Irritating Assumption
To the Editor:
Verlyn Klinkenborg uses three documentary films to explore the inadequacy of an idealized myth of the family, currently rejuvenated by male conservative Republican leadership  [ "The Ideal Family Vanishes on Film," Jan. 29 ] .
Perhaps inadvertently, he equates the politicization of family values with all strains of Republican conservatism.


Berlin Museum
To the Editor: Were your Berlin correspondent, Stephen Kinzer, and I in the same Berlin?
He states, "This city boasts as great a variety of museums as any in the world. . . . Only the Checkpoint Charlie Museum, however, regularly brings tears to the eyes of visitors." With no intention of belittling the deaths that occurred at the Berlin Wall, I must call to attention the many other museums around Berlin, and other places, where buckets couldn't have contained my tears alone.
Among them are the ongoing Topography of Terror exhibition in the former Gestapo headquarters and the Wannsee Conference House, the meeting place for the planning of the "Final Solution," now displaying a history of anti-Semitism in the period, and the New Synagogue, which upon completion of restoration will be a museum.
This is, of course, an abbreviated list and doesn't even touch sites that mark where Jewish life once thrived.


A Cy Twombly Museum Opens in Houston
A gallery devoted solely to the works of the painter Cy Twombly, a native Virginian who has spent most of his time since the late 1950's living in Italy, was scheduled to open on Feb. 12 as part of the Menil Collection in Houston.
The Cy Twombly Gallery, with 9,300 square feet, will have a building of its own on the Menil "campus" and will house approximately 35 major paintings, sculptures and works on paper.
The building was designed by Renzo Piano, the Italian architect who also designed the Menil's main museum.
It is based on a square grid and contains eight rooms, one of which is twice the size of the others to allow for the exhibition of Twombly's larger canvases.


A Sioux Poet Whose Fiery Protests Now Come Packaged in Jewel Boxes
THERE IS A LINE IN THE title track from the American Indian poet John Trudell's latest album, "Johnny Damas and Me," that would be ironic if it weren't simply dead-on accurate.
"We've been laying real low," Mr.
Trudell says over the rock riffs of electric guitarists, nearly chanting the lines in a voice once described by the writer Peter Matthiessen as "merry and harsh at the same time." "Laying real low in the shadow of the road to success."
It can be in America's nature to embrace its harshest critics occasionally, even turn a few into stars.
John Trudell, 49, a Santee Sioux who headed the American Indian Movement during much of its confrontational and sometimes violent first decade in the 1970's, would be happy to emerge from the shadows.
Although he describes his work as "leafleting," and his rhymed rants attack "the industrial ruling class" that presides over the "Nazi Babylon," Mr.
Trudell's protests are now packaged in jewel boxes, and he wants to sell a million of them.


POP BRIEFS
'Ethel Ennis'  Hildner Productions, 306 Thornhill Road, Baltimore, Md. 21212; CD.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Penguins' Streak Ends  Robert Kron scored twice, including a crucial goal late in the game, as the Hartford Whalers beat the visiting Pittsburgh Penguins, 4-2, yesterday, ending the Penguins' bid for the best start in National Hockey League history.


15 Inventors Are Chosen For Honors
Graduates thank their parents.
Movie stars thank all the little people.
Inventors inducted into the New Jersey Inventors Hall of Fame banquet thanked their patent lawyers.
In fact, having the right lawyer may be nearly as important as having the inspiration, according to several of the inventors who joined Edison and Einstein as the Garden State's technology pioneers.
So is having the right job, preferably with a big company that has the money and time to wait for a breakthrough.


Corrections
A chart on page 42 of The Times Magazine today, with an article about poetry, misstates part of the title of a book by Dana Gioia, a poet and critic.
It is "Can Poetry Matter?," not "Does Poetry Matter?"


Sports of The Times; Giants Risk Meggett's Option Now
ARE the Giants about to lose David Meggett because they've waited too long to sign him?
Until the National Football League's free-agent auctions opened Friday, the Giants were the only team eligible to negotiate with their jack rabbit of all trades: punt returner, kickoff returner, running back, pass receiver, option passer and fans' pet.


Challenging a Literary Pick-10
To the Editor:
I must voice my disappointment over Gay Talese's discourse.
Almost two years ago, he wrote an article entitled "Where Are the Italian-American Novelists?" and applauded Mario Puzo's "A Fortune Pilgrim" and reminded readers that Pietro di Donato's "Christ in Concrete" became a Book-of-the Month selection (chosen over Steinbeck's "Grapes of Wrath").
Both are set in the streets of New York City and yet Talese didn't give them an honorable mention.
Che disgrazia!
SUSAN BARILE Manhattan


Another Battle of New Orleans: Mardi Gras
The little shotgun house is peeling and the Oldsmobile in front is missing a rear bumper, but Larry Bannock can glimpse glory through the eye of his needle.
For almost a year he has hunkered over his sewing table, joining beads, velvet, rhinestones, sequins, feathers and ostrich plumes into a Mardi Gras costume that is part African, part Native American.
"I'm pretty," said Mr.
Bannock, who is 6 feet tall and weighs 300 pounds.
"And baby, when I walk out that door there ain't nothing cheap on me."


A Film Festival That Spoofs Festivals
SHELTER ISLAND is a quiet place in winter.
Its 2,000 year-round residents hunker down.
Ferries from Greenport and Sag Harbor switch to off-season schedules, and visitors who do not leave the island before midnight do not leave until the next morning.
Shelter Island is an unlikely site for a midwinter film festival.
But last weekend the three-day Shelter Island International Invitational Counterculture Film Festival made its debut at the Ram's Head Inn there, and the two men who inspired the event, Dr.
Vincent DiGregorio and George Nemeth, are making plans for next year.


Struggling Red Storm Stays Out Of Cellar
In a season where there has been more disappointment than joy, St.
John's will gladly accept whatever positives come its way.
Not being in last place in the Big East isn't exactly something to brag about, but at this stage of the season, it sounds pretty good to the Red Storm.
St.
John's remained out of the league cellar, at least for now, by outlasting Boston College, 73-69, tonight at the Conte Forum.
The victory gave the Red Storm a season sweep of the Eagles and improved its record to 11-11 and 4-10 in the Big East.
Boston College dropped to 8-14 and 2-12.


Saving Money on Cable TV
A QUIET battle brewing among cable television service providers holds the possibility of significantly lower cable rates for owners of co-op and condominium units and even rental tenants in large apartment buildings.
In recent years, Liberty Cable, a cable provider based in Manhattan, has been nibbling away at what it calls the "cable monopoly" held by the Time Warner-New York City Cable Group and Cablevision -- the two largest franchised operators of cable television in New York City.
And now, with more than 30,000 subscribers in about 175 buildings, Liberty Cable is spreading its wings and sending its "cable" signal over the airwaves into suburbia.


L.I.R.R. Killer Plans Appeal Based on the Insanity Issue
After spending months insisting that he was sane and staging courtroom spectacles from the bizarre to the surreal, Colin Ferguson has turned to the lawyers he once dismissed to appeal his murder conviction on the ground that he was never mentally fit to stand trial, one of the lawyers said today.
Mr.
Ferguson, whose defense of himself included his claim that there were 93 charges against him because the killings occurred in 1993, had previously refused to seek a finding that he was mentally incompetent or to resort to an insanity defense at the trial.
Instead, he dismissed the lawyers who questioned his sanity, William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby, and based his case instead on conspiracy theories and straight-faced refutation of overwhelming witness testimony that it was he who killed 6 people and wounded 19 others on the Long Island Rail Road.


For Better and for Worse, Russia Endures Yeltsin
"I am an awkward person, and I know it," Boris N. Yeltsin wrote to his boss, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, in 1987, when Mr.
Yeltsin took the shocking and unheard-of step of quitting the Politburo.
It was the beginning of the intellectuals' infatuation with this brave, moody rapscallion from the industrial heart of the Urals, with his common touch, unusual self-knowledge and love of risk.


The Good Times? Long Gone for Stores at 'the Junction'
Known to some simply as "the junction," the intersection of Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues used to be nearly synonymous with shopping in Brooklyn.
For decades the area has served as a transportation hub for commuters as well as a hospitable home for new immigrants.
The shops are still here -- the mix today includes nine fast-food chains, four clothing outlets, two hair braiders and a thrift shop -- but the customers have dwindled.


The 'Legless Angel'
To the Editor:
In response to Peter Gay's essay "The 'Legless Angel' of 'David Copperfield': There's More to Her Than Victorian Piety" (Jan. 22), there is further evidence of Agnes Wickfield's sexuality when we remember her as Uriah Heep's anticipated prize.
While David Copperfield, temporarily distracted (and sexually attracted) by the childish Dora's curls and giggles, might have seen Agnes as a domestic sister-friend-guardian angel, "pointing upward," Uriah gloats over Agnes with lip-smacking anticipation, jerking about and struggling to restrain his ardent spirits as he talks of "my Agnes"; indeed, David has to restrain himself from throttling Uriah on such occasions and does once strike him.


These Firms Have a History, Too
To the Editor:
The firm Stevens, Rothchild &amp; Company did most certainly have a Rothchild in it ("Playing Games with Names," Wall Street, Jan. 15), and yes, his name was spelled without an "s" but it was his name.
The firm, started in 1942, was originally named L. H. Rothchild after one of its co-founders, Louis Howard Rothchild.
In the 1960's, the name was changed to Stevens, Rothchild -- specifically to avoid confusion with L. F. Rothschild, a much bigger firm.
My father, Charles W. Stevens, was Mr.
Rothchild's partner.
I deeply resent the implication that Stevens, Rothchild was using the name incorrectly.
SARAH STEVENS MEYER  Bronxville, N.Y., Jan. 15


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  In Brighton Beach, wearing fur is more than a way to keep warm; it's a way to keep memories alive.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  The stone lions of New York.
A couple of Cajuns make a mint off a status symbol.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 15  Beach volleyball at the Garden; Honoring the landmarks law; what zen means; sword dancing in Prospect Park.
MOVIE CLOCK 17  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 18  A tour of the Lincoln Center area.
At Baci, beguiling trattoria fare.
The spirited Cafe Luxembourg.
SOAPBOX 19 Challenges to the 10 best books about New York.
Also: about boys and thin ice -- a tale of Central Park.


THE CONCILIATOR
If Carter goes after "lost causes," what's a winning cause?
Earning enough money to buy a Porsche?
DEBORAH A. SMITH Brooklyn


Correction
An article on Jan. 22 about financially troubled co-op buildings in New York misstated the level of rents imposed when a property reverts to rental status as a result of a foreclosure action.
Detailed guidelines for such cases, which are rare, have not yet been set by the courts or the state agencies involved.
The rents paid by the former co-op owners who become tenants are not, as the article stated, generally rolled back to preconversion levels.


Fulbright Provided Footnote in Career of First Woman Senator
To the Editor:
Your obituary of J. William Fulbright (front page, Feb. 10) made mention of his victory in 1944 in a four-person Arkansas Democratic primary for the United States Senate.
What you didn't report is the most interesting part of the historical event.
One of the candidates defeated by Mr.
Fulbright was the incumbent United States Senator, Hattie Wyatt Caraway, the first woman ever elected to the Senate.


Women's Work Is (Sometimes) Done
IT ALL BEGAN IN THE "WOMB Room" -- my conversion to feminist art, that is.
Like many women of my generation -- too young or too out-of-it to have paid attention to what our older sisters stirred up in the 1970's -- I harbored prejudices against the art of the early women's movement.
It seemed embarrassing, preoccupied with bodily fluids and occasionally so bloody that it might have been executed at the scene of a traffic accident.
Paradoxically, much of it also seemed bloodless -- encumbered with so much theory that all the red paint in the world couldn't make it come alive.
And it was old news; after 25 years, who cared?


Ruth Masson, 104, Contributor To Mayo Clinic and a Hospital
Ruth Charlton Mitchell Masson, a philanthropist who made large contributions to the Mayo Clinic and to a hospital in her birthplace of Fall River, Mass., died on Feb. 11 at her home in Rochester, Minn.
She was 104.
The cause of death was pneumonia, an official at the Waring Funeral Home in Fall River said.


It's a Hard Job Saving Foreign Aid (but the Job Is Still There)
At a time when Government bureaucracies all over Washington are scrambling to survive, J. Brian Atwood is developing a reputation as a master of that particular game.
He is the director of the Government's principal agency for the distribution of foreign aid, a program the public in general regards with distaste and the Republicans in particular rate lower than welfare.


UNDER THE BIG TOP
Never have I read a pithier statement of what's wrong with fashion than the following passage in Holly Brubach's "Under the Big Top" (Style, Jan. 22): "Breasts are a perpetual source of annoyance for fashion designers . . . how to navigate these two mounds superimposed on the smooth cylinder that is the human torso." No wonder nothing fits!
Designers see breasts as problems, not as essential features of the female shape to be (as Brubach notes) accommodated and enhanced.
And how many women (over the age of 18) have a torso that is cylindrical?
PAULA SHIELDS Tacoma, Wash.


Take the South Out of the South Bronx?


Zipping Through School, but, Boy, Is He Dumb
Billy Madison  Adam Sandler, Bradley Whitford, Josh Mostel, Bridgette Wilson  Directed by Tamra Davis PG-13 88 minutes


February 12-18: Microsoft; An Antitrust Settlement With a Glitch
Seven months after Federal antitrust officials declared they had reined in the mighty Microsoft Corporation, they saw their work rebuffed by a hard-nosed judge.
Federal District Judge Stanley Sporkin refused to approve a consent decree between the Government and Microsoft, calling the deal "too little, too late."


Lauri A. Garfinkel And Paul B. Weitz
Lauri Ann Garfinkel, a daughter of JoAnn and Laurence Garfinkel of San Francisco, was married last evening to Paul Brian Weitz, a son of Tanya and Harvey Weitz of New York.
Rabbi David Davis performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in San Francisco.
Mrs.
Weitz, 27, graduated from Brown University.
Until recently she was an associate at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.
Her mother is the assistant headmaster of the Branson School, a private school in Ross, Calif.
Her father is the vice president for capital asset management and development of the Fairmont Hotel chain in San Francisco.


Clinton Backs Secretary Of Commerce As 'the Best'
President Clinton today expressed support for his Commerce Secretary, Ronald H. Brown, brushing aside questions about Mr.
Brown's business dealings and personal finances.
The Justice Department said Thursday that it had opened a preliminary investigation of Mr.
Brown's business dealings to determine whether an independent counsel should be appointed.


Planned Welfare Cuts Opposed
UNFAZED by the blistering cold and piles of icy snow that lingered on the sidewalks of downtown White Plains, a group of 40 or so social service advocates and recipients of those services gathered here last Tuesday to protest Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposed social service budget cuts.
The action here was part of a 71-city event to protest cutbacks nationwide.
The demonstrators held hand-lettered signs, many decorated with hearts, which featured slogans like "Have a Heart; Don't Balance the Budget on the Backs of the Poor" and "Welfare Cuts Mean Children Will Suffer." To chants of "George, hey hey, how many cuts did you make today?" "George, hey hey, how many kids did you hurt today?" and "Give Us Shelter," the protesters handed out fliers.


Mutual Funds; Ultrashort but Long on Choices
BECAUSE ultrashort-term bond funds occupy a niche squarely between money-market funds and short-term bond funds, you might think they are fairly simple investments.
Not so.


A Little Kurt Weill Revival in Germany
The German-American composer Kurt Weill, perhaps best known for "The Threepenny Opera," is the object of a mini-revival in Germany this year.
One of Weill's most fully realized works, "Street Scene," is now being staged at the Theater des Westens in Berlin.
Set on a city block in New York that is occupied by immigrants of various nationalities, "Street Scene" is based on the Pulitzer Prize-winning play of the same name by Elmer Rice.
Weill wrote the music, Langston Hughes the lyrics.


For All His Winning, Rusty Wallace Keeps Losing
Rusty Wallace does what one would think a race driver ought to do: win races.
Unfortunately for him, modern stock car racing takes Vince Lombardi's credo and stands it on its head: Winning isn't everything, sometimes it's not that much at all.
Over the past two years, Wallace has won 18 major stock car races, 8 more than his nearest rival, Dale Earnhardt.
Nonetheless, Earnhardt will open the 1995 season in the Daytona 500 on Sunday as the two-time defending Nascar Winston Cup champion.
In the preceding two seasons, he has won $6,654,522 to Wallace's $3,616,226.


Zipping Through School, but, Boy, Is He Dumb
Before Sunrise  Ethan Hawke, Julie Delpy Directed by Richard Linklater R 101 minutes


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Making a Building Stand Out in Midtown
Four illuminated 24-foot-high logos, one on each side of the building atop Pennsylvania Station, are the latest additions to the Manhattan skyline.
The owners of 1 Penn Plaza, a 57-story building with 2.4 million square feet of office and retail space, spent $800,000 to install the red-and-white logos, which were unveiled last week.
The building's manager, Daniel E. North, said they could be seen for 90 miles on a clear day.
"We wanted to give the building some recognition," Mr.
North said.
From Celebrity Diners To Mickey, Goofy, et al.
Goodbye, moules marinieres.
Hello, Mickey Mouse.
When La Cote Basque, the French restaurant that has been a New York institution for the last 41 years, closes its doors at 5 East 55th Street on March 4, contractors will start tearing out the banquettes and putting in shelves to hold the cartoon characters, T-shirts and other merchandise to fill the Walt Disney superstore.
La Cote Basque will move to a smaller space at 60 West 55th Street, on the other side of Fifth Avenue.
It is scheduled to reopen some time in the fall.
The Disney store will also occupy the space that now houses two neighboring establishments, a Bally shoe store and Gold Pfeil, a leather shop.
Have Some Coffee With Your Video?
Luis Adorno, a former construction worker, grew up in Hell's Kitchen and dreamed of starting a business in the neighborhood.
Three years ago, after noticing that video stores were replacing the ubiquitous green grocers in many neighborhoods, Mr.
Adorno had his concept: a store where patrons could not just rent videos, but also watch movie highlights as they sipped coffee and ate pastries.
He borrowed $100,000 from his family and a single outside investor, and three months ago he opened the 1,600-square-foot Video Cafe, 697 Ninth Avenue, at 48th Street.
The rental section, with some 3,000 titles, is running and the cafe will be open in about a month, Mr.
Adorno said.


Books Covering Cars to Calypso
AS the guidebook field flourishes, topics become ever more specialized.
Here are some new books geared to travelers with particular interests.
"Moto Europa," a guide to driving in Europe, is a remarkable piece of research.
Eric Bredesen, the author, has gathered tables and charts and written a text that tells Americans almost everything imaginable about driving in Europe.
The book also contains information about bicycling, trains in Britain, hosteling and using an automated teller machine.
As an example of the extras, for each country in the guide, he gives average temperatures as well as frequencies and hours for listening to the BBC.


Corrections
A "Queens Update" report in the neighborhood pages on Jan. 15 about bus connections to the Hunters Point ferry, in Queens, omitted restrictions.
Both the the Q-67 and the Q-103 are able to connect to the ferry at Hunters Point.
All buses on the Q-103 go to the ferry booth, but only specially designated Q-67's (usually one out of two buses) go all the way to the ferry.
In each case, the bus to the ferry runs on weekdays from 7 to 10 A.M. and from 4 to 8 P.M.; bus drivers hand out vouchers or transfers to commuters, who can then get 50 percent off the $6 round-trip ferry ticket.
The cost does not include the $4 parking fee.
The half-price special will last through March.
A reader's letter dated Feb. 6 reported the omission.


Data Bank/February 19, 1995
Data Bank/February 19, 1995
Sales at Retail Outlets
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.2
0.4
Industrial Production Index
Monthly percent change
0.4
0.9
0.8
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
85.5
85.4
84.7
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.3
0.2
0.1
Housing Starts
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,377
1,527
1,536
Merchandise Imports
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
In billions
$70.9
$71.6
$69.9
Merchandise Exports
In billions
$63.6
$61.6
$59.8
Weekly Jobless Claims
Feb. 10
Feb. 3
Jan. 27
In thousands
338
318
326


Manager's Profile
Jeffrey A. Koch Fund: Strong Advantage; $863 million in assets.
Manager since 1991. (Sponsor: Strong Capital Management Inc., Menomonee Falls, Wis.)


SUNDAY, February 19, 1995: CLICHE WATCH; Call It Infectious
When a snappy first sentence is needed, there's one that's very much in favor now.
"Call it Rickigate." On a fur protest by Ricki Lake, talk show host.
New York Post, Nov. 16, 1994.


Keeping School Funds Safe
AN unusual reunion recently took place in Armonk at the headquarters of the financial services corporation known only by the initials MBIA.
At a lunch whose host was the corporation's president and chief executive, David H. Elliott, business officials from five school districts in northern Westchester County were honored for their willingness to take part in the investment-management program for local governments called Class, which stands for Cooperative Liquid Assets Securities System.
The concept behind the full-service investment-management program, which is operated by MBIA, calls for combining the funds of local school districts and municipalities in order to gain financial leverage to get more competitive yields on their short-term investments.


Challenging a Literary Pick-10
To the Editor:
Herewith, my two cents plain: how could Mr.
Roberts have missed "New York," a 1989 compilation of Djuna Barnes's newspaper writings of the nineteen-teens?
Barnes (novelist, playwright and poet) was a contrarian who achieved her best setting in Greenwich Village, where she finished her life among the ghosts of her literary neighbors on Patchin Place.
MARISA JANUZZI Manhattan


IN SHORT: FICTION
JASMINE NIGHTS  By S. P. Somtow. Wyatt/St. Martin's, $23.


New Buildings for Dependent Singles on the Way
NECESSITY in the 1980's gave rise to the invention of a new form of housing that has never had the benefit of a simple and attractive name.
To call it "supportive housing for dependent singles" is at least descriptive.
Awkward as it is, the phrase is more accurate than the term single-room occupancy housing, historically used to connote low-rent rooms with neither kitchens nor baths in buildings that had formerly had a different use -- a hotel, or family apartments that were divided into single rooms.


Confronting Head On the Face of the Afflicted
THE VERY CONCEPT OF "VICTIM ART" IS an appalling one.
Only a sensibility unwilling to attribute full humanity to persons who have suffered injury, illness or injustice could have invented such a crude and reductive label.
There is a long and honorable tradition of art that "bears witness" to human suffering, but this is not "victim art" as the current term would have it, still less an art that manipulates or intimidates its audience to any perverse degree. (Doesn't all art, especially the conventional and pleasing, have the goal of affecting an audience's emotions?) That a human being has been "victimized" does not reduce his or her humanity but may in fact amplify it.


'Arsenic,' Gem of the 40's, With a '95 Backdrop
EVEN before "Arsenic and Old Lace" starts up, an elderly pastor, over tea and biscuits, pines for "another day, the gentle virtues that went out with candlelight and good manners and low taxes."
Anyone who craves vintage plays of the 1940's has reason to welcome a rare professional production of one that still ranks among Broadway's longest runs ever -- all right, it's now in 38th place -- and has been a staple on the community theater circuit for half a century. (An amateur "Arsenic and Old Lace" just ended in Wilton.)


F.Y.I.
Choosing the Flags Q.  I've always noticed the flags of various nations hanging off the sides of Bloomingdale's.
How do they decide which countries' flags to display?
Also, how is it decided at the Plaza Hotel?


These Firms Have a History, Too
To the Editor:
I would like to set the record straight with respect to your incorrect depiction of J. J. Morgan &amp; Company; its president, Michael Metter, and me, Kenneth A. Orr, chairman and chief executive.


The 'Legless Angel'
To the Editor:
I appreciated Peter Gay's essay on Agnes Wickfield, as it brought back and validated memories of my own love affair with her.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Back-Country Greenwich; Winding Roads and Deep Pockets
THE farmers and shoemakers who settled the lonely northern reaches of Greenwich in the 18th and early 19th centuries would be astounded to see what has become of their neighborhood.
Renowned as one of America's most prestigious addresses, the back country of this Connecticut Gold Coast community is not for everyone who is rich.
Families of highly placed executives who traditionally shun publicity gravitate to its silent woods and quiet, winding roads, while celebrities tend to prefer the waterfront and a livelier atmosphere.


Riley Is Mum and Knicks Look Ahead
The day after describing the Knicks' attitude as unprofessional, Pat Riley declined to give specifics as to what touched off Friday's post-game outburst.
Meanwhile, the players' emotions ranged from confused to unfazed to angry.
Riley may have accomplished something he did not expect: becoming a distraction to his own team.
And he has certainly done something that he has cautioned players not to do: taking a problem to the news media instead of keeping it in-house.


Yield Day to Night


From Grasshoppers to Xoconostle, Mexican Is In
MEXICO CITY, a cosmopolitan capital with varied international tastes, is finally honoring its own.
During our last visit in the early 1980's, much of the best dining was French and Continental, with only a handful of the finer restaurants devoted to traditional Mexican cooking.
My husband and I returned to Mexico City last month to dramatic change.
Although the city still offers a vast array of restaurants, including some from New York and California like Vong, Remi and Spago, many of the newest, most stylish restaurants are serving Mexican food.


The G.O.P.'s Pro-Choice Majority
A tremor of fear ran through the Republican Party's professional ranks last week.
The reason is that a majority comprised of Republicans who favor abortion, either outright or with some restrictions, is threatening to take the party back from the zealots who have dictated its reactionary, anti-constitutional positions on this issue.
G.O.P. legislators and consultants know that a feud over abortion could divide mainstream Republicans from the pro-lifers who want to use the party as a vehicle for their single-issue crusade.
The result could be a party feud that blows the 1996 Presidential election.


Stephanie Rosen, Howard Halpern
Stephanie C. Rosen, a counsel at Shanley &amp; Fisher, a law firm in Morristown, N.J., and Dr.
Howard M. Halpern, a psychologist in New York, are to be married today.
Rabbi Jack Bemporad is to perform the ceremony at the home of the couple in Riverdale, the Bronx.
The bride is a graduate of Radcliffe College and received a law degree from Rutgers University.
She is a daughter of Shirley Wolff Dreitzer of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late William I. Cohen.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


The Jaspers' Late Surge Earns Conference Title
For a while last night at Madison Square Garden, the Manhattan basketball team's 12-game winning streak seemed in trouble, and never mind that the Jaspers had won more games than any other college team in the nation.
Underdog Siena led at halftime, 32-30, and with almost 17 minutes left in the game the score was 37-37.
Then Manhattan's superior speed, ball handling and bulk took over, and it was goodbye Siena.
If Manhattan didn't get a fast break, it swung the ball around the perimeter until it found an open shot.
And if the shot missed, it crashed the boards and got the offensive rebound.
With all that, it rolled to a 67-54 victory over a game rival from the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference.


A Requiem For Amadeus?
IN CLASSICAL MUSIC, AS IN MANY OTHER RELIGIOUS disciplines, the end is always nigh.
Every age believes itself the worst and the last.
True music lovers forever stand on a lonely outcrop shored up against the universal deluge of the crass.
Even strong-willed futurists like Richard Wagner and Arnold Schoenberg predicated their philosophy on an apocalyptic vision of contemporary culture that only drastic action could redeem.
Music is perpetually betraying the great tradition, lowering standards, surrendering to contemporary taste, dumbing down and dying off.
Walking through the aisles of the larger compact-disk emporiums, or reading some of the more impetuous announcements put out by P.R. firms, one is tempted to say, Yes, things always look worse than they are, but this time the world really is coming to an end.


Rare Bark Summons Suspects At Prayer
Given that all of the defendants are Muslims and most of the defense lawyers are Jews, the trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 others on terrorism charges has all along had a strange-bedfellows quality.
And there was a rare moment of conflict involving religion at the trial last week when the defendants were out of the courtroom on a regular break so they could perform their afternoon Muslim prayers.
With the jury out of the courtroom, Judge Michael B. Mukasey took the bench and, clearly annoyed, announced that a problem had arisen.
It seems, the judge said, that the marshals had summoned the defendants in the middle of their prayers and, feeling insulted, they "took the position" that "they are either starting all over, or don't want to come out, or whatever."


Wall Street; There's Little Comfort at Jennifer
THE company's stock is down 66 percent in four months.
It has been hit with so many shareholder lawsuits that the papers could serve as a sturdy doorstop.
And the company has moved from one accounting firm to the next the way some people change hairdressers.
Yet whatever its troubles, Jennifer Convertibles Inc. certainly seems to be a believer in family values.
The officers and directors of the 187-store sofa-bed retailer, based in Woodbury, L.I., have routinely worked with professional vendors who included a brother-in-law, a son and a father-in-law.


Manila Sees China Threat On Coral Reef
The sight of a Chinese flag fluttering over a coral reef 135 miles from the Philippines has alarmed China's Southeast Asian neighbors and raised fears that Beijing is prepared to use force in staking claim to shipping lanes and a chain of potentially oil-rich islands in the South China Sea.
The construction of what appears to be a Chinese military guard post atop the aptly named Mischief Reef is of direct concern to Manila, which has long claimed the reef as Philippine territory.


Free Agency Appears to Be a Big Problem for Some Teams and a Panacea for Others
As the National Football League heads into its third year of free agency, the realities of the system have settled in.
Owners and general managers of moribund teams know that the system is not a quick fix.
Players are getting a good idea of their real worth.
The union has had to face contentiousness from its constituents.


Centuries Old, but With an Update
Here's what's new: mixing as many as five different patterns of traditional African cloth into winter coats.
A single design might start with a background of brown and white mud cloth and end with a long dash of kente cloth, with its brilliant colors of orange, yellow and green.
Another design might start out with a pinch of Senegalese printed cloth.
They all add up to a striking Afrocentric style, seen recently in women's ankle-length coats and ponchos, accessorized with headwraps in a different fabric.
The coats are an extension of the one-of-kind clothing that grew out of the Western arts and crafts movement in the mid-1960's.


In New Zealand, This Film Beats 'Jurassic Park'
A BIT OF FILM HISTORY WAS made last month when the New Zealand movie "Once Were Warriors" passed "Jurassic Park" to become the highest-grossing film ever released in that country.
To date, rights to the film have been sold to 49 nations, and it is already doing well in Australia, Italy and South Africa.
It opens in the United States on Friday.
How can one account for such interest in a small film made for $1.4 million, from a country that produces no more than three films a year?
For one thing, says Lindsay Shelton, head of the New Zealand Film Commission, this story of a dysfunctional Maori family plagued by violence, poverty and alcoholism is "the ultimate word-of-mouth movie because everyone comes out of the theater weeping." For another, it is based on a recent best-selling novel of the same title by a controversial Maori writer named Alan Duff.


Enjoying an Occasional Buttery Indulgence of Brioche
LOW fat is simply not an option when it comes to certain baked goods.
Brioche, for example, must be buttery and eggy.
And for those who believe that when it comes to diet, moderation is the best advice, an occasional indulgence is not out of place.
This rich, golden brioche loaf has a bit of crunch in its texture, thanks to the addition of cornmeal.
It is excellent to serve with good jam for brunch or sliced thin alongside a salad, an elegant terrine or with smoked fish or meats.
Additional butter is not needed.


Stretching Your Money in Mexico
IF the Mexican peso stays near its current level it will cost a mere 19 cents on Presidents' Day vs. 29 cents last Thanksgiving.
Great news for potential travelers north of the border, you think.
But while the cheaper peso boosts Americans' purchasing power dramatically in theory, actually reaping the benefits will require some planning, a bit of extra legwork and a willingness to go somewhere other than the large beach resorts.


CRIME
The corruption that pervades Indian society in THE GANJA COAST (Fawcett Columbine, $22.50) beggars the imagination -- unless you come prepared by "Season of the Monsoon," Paul Mann's powerful earlier novel about the decay of civil order and moral spine in Bombay.
"Corruption is our biggest employer," according to one cynical civil servant.
"It is the only part of the economy that works."
George Sansi, the half-Indian, half-English hero of this bold, seductive series, has resigned in disgust from the Bombay police to go into private law practice.
But a veiled threat from his former boss sends Sansi undercover to Goa, a sybaritic haven for foreign hippies that is about to become an international free port.
For all his experience in human degradation, Sansi is aghast to find the local cops up to their eyes in dope dealing, land grabbing and an exotic new racket involving fresh corpses.


Designing Rooms That Tell Stories
WHEN Courtney Sloane was at Rutgers University, she created a fantasy world in her off-campus apartment.
"It had lots of color and stripes," she recalls.
"I was always painting and making different things out of practically nothing. I always did quirky stuff."
Today, Ms.
Sloane's artistic irreverence is expressed in her interior design ideas and the furniture she creates for clients like the rap artist Queen Latifah, the MTV veejay Bill Bellamy and Sean Combs, president of Bad Boy Entertainment, a record company.
They use Ms.
Sloane's company, Alternative Design in Jersey City, to give a surreal spin to their private offices and homes.


Remembering Iwo Jima and Victory's Price
AN 8-square-mile dot of volcanic land named Iwo Jima became the site of the Marine Corps' bloodiest campaign a half-century ago.


Two Who Cherish Symphony Orchestras
IN these days of MTV and rock music magazines, symphony orchestras remain curiously anonymous -- the object, it seems, of little curiosity.
Yet for those who see behind the scenes, an orchestra -- for all its black-clad sameness at performances -- teems with color and personality.
Few people know this better than Stephen and Elaine Stamas, who between them have connections to much of the classical music played in the Northeast.
Mr.
Stamas is chairman of the board of the New York Philharmonic, a position he also holds at the Marlboro Music Festival in Vermont.
Mrs.
Stamas is an active board member of Hoff-Barthelson Music School here, and her brother, Dr.
Nicholas T. Zervas, a Boston neurosurgeon, is president of the board of the Boston Symphony Orchestra.


Seeking a Policy On Young Athletes
ANTONIO QUINN, 17, adds an unusual accessory to his Somers High School varsity wrestling uniform.
Besides shorts, tank shirt and headgear, Antonio wears an electronic monitoring device on his right ankle, but it is tucked into his sock during practice and matches.
The monitor is a condition of a house-arrest sentence that the high school senior received last month after he and four other Somers High School students pleaded guilty to taking part in a series of burglaries last year.
But it has also become a symbol of a controversy that sharply divided this small northern Westchester community and one that caused many county school districts -- including Somers -- to examine their policies on disciplining students for their behavior on and off school grounds.


Challenging a Literary Pick-10
To the Editor:
For his spectacular and unique images about the city of the mind -- that have stayed in my mind for many years -- Mark Helprin's virtuoso novel "Winter's Tale" should be added to your worthy lists.


Court Decisions to Speed Up Thousands of Asbestos Claims
THE aging complex of boarded-up gray and brown buildings, once the home of Johns Manville, is headed for oblivion.
Maverick Construction of Hillsborough, which bought the site in Manville two months ago, has begun the demolition process, and once the buildings are leveled, the property will be resold.
During the peak asbestos production years of World War II and the construction boom of the 1950's, the Manville plant was the symbol of a New Jersey industry that included major companies like Raybestos, Owens Illinois and National Gypsum.
"We were the No. 1 asbestos-producing state," said Christopher Placitella, a lawyer at Wilentz &amp; Spitzer of Woodbridge.


An Empire of Cement Lions
It had been two years since the big man from New Orleans sold Jorge Washington Guevera a steel fence, security door and window guards to protect the first home his family ever owned, on Caldwell Avenue in Mott Haven, the Bronx.
Since then, the Gueveras, Ecuadorean immigrants, had built a patio, a basement guest room and more.
"You all got a palace here!" Brian S. Falgoust, boomed, his Cajun accent as smooth as a fine bourbon.


Formal Wear for Expectant Mothers
AN invitation to a black-tie dinner or a formal wedding sends most women into a what-to-wear? panic, but when you are five months' pregnant, finding a dress to suit a grand occasion presents a real challenge.
"I needed something smart and fashionable," said Sharon Robinson, who is expecting her first baby in June.
"I wanted to do my husband proud at a black-tie dinner held at the Waldorf for Manhattan College, which was his school. But I didn't want to spend a fortune on a one-time-occasion dress, and the few evening things I saw in maternity shops were out of the question. Either they were ugly or they were too expensive."


We Forgot to Write a Headline. But It's Not Our Fault.
LOOKING for an excuse?
Relax.
In a burst of innovation, imagination and, yes, desperation, American business has devised a collection of cop-outs to suit the harried executive who is "performance impaired." Try these "explanations" for recent foul-ups on for size:
*
A missing minus sign is the reason Fidelity Investments gave for a $2 billion-plus mistake in calculating Magellan Fund shareholders' payments, saying an accountant omitted the minus sign from a spread sheet and no one noticed.


POSTINGS: Employees Vote to Remain; General Motors Decides To Stay in G.M. Building
By now, a lot of New Yorkers are ready to scream, "Enough, already!" to the seemingly endless barrage of building name changes: Pan Am to Met Life, Burlington House to Alliance Capital Building, Helmsley Palace to plain old Palace, and so on.
So those New Yorkers will be delighted to learn that 767 Fifth Avenue will, for the foreseeable future, remain the General Motors Building.
Against all expectations, the huge automobile company has signed a new lease for some 110,000 square feet in the building at 58th Street.
But there's a catch: They are keeping only about 20,000 square feet of the space they have now.


Solo Flights in a Flock of Bach
BACH'S SUITES FOR unaccompanied cello live an almost unnatural double life in modern times.
Although there are daredevils who play the complete set in concert (several have done so in recent New York seasons), most cellists play one suite on a program, surrounded by works in different styles.
Indeed, Bach might have looked askance at anyone willing either to play or to hear all six works in a sitting or two.
But on recordings, resistance to the compendium approach is largely futile.
The medium imposes the expectation that works of a feather will flock together, concert hall esthetics notwithstanding.
Besides, the suites fit handily on two CD's and make powerful calling cards for cellists.
And there's a machismo issue.
Barring extenuating circumstances, a recording that offers only selections from the series is tacitly regarded as an installment toward a complete traversal or a sign that the musician who made it is an eccentric or a wimp.
This approach puts a strain on cellists' imaginations, which is not necessarily a bad thing.
As remarkably varied as these suites are once one looks into them, they are similar in their externals.
And however fondly one regards the sound of the cello, it can become monotonous in the two and a quarter hours it takes to play the suites.
The challenge for a cellist, therefore, is to magnify the variety Bach wrote into the set.


Bons Mots to Live By, From Tina Brown &amp; Co.
UPTOWN -- Even before Renata Adler, Brooke Astor, Betty Friedan, Susan Sontag and the 600 other guests had time to finish their first drink at the 70th anniversary party for The New Yorker on Feb. 12, the 272-page anniversary issue was being toasted as a success.
"You're getting nice press on the issue," a woman in the lobby of the Hudson Theater told David Kuhn, who edited it.


William Maxwell's Voice
To the Editor:
I had to meditate a little on the fact that William Maxwell's books have not made the best-seller lists.


Big Move for Jefferson Market (Est. 1929): Across the Street
In 1968, when Balducci's moved from Greenwich Avenue to Avenue of the Americas, a block away from the Jefferson Market, a rift emerged between the owners of the fabled West Village specialty food shops.
Andy Balducci, 70, whose father established the store in 1945, recalled that the proprietor of the Jefferson Market, the late John Montuori Sr., came in and said: "Andy, I've known you for so long. What are you trying to do to me?"


Mistake or Modern Marvel? Denver Airport Set to Open
It has been hailed as a technological marvel and derided as a civic booster's overpriced field of dreams.
Whatever it is, the new Denver International Airport is set finally to begin operating on Feb. 28 -- a year and a half behind schedule and at a cost of $4.2 billion, about 50 percent more than the original estimate.
The first passenger flight, United 1062, will depart for Kansas City at 6 A.M. to inaugurate the architecturally striking terminal, which juts up from an otherwise empty prairie 23 miles east of Denver.


Researchers See Gene Link To Violence, But Are Wary
Researchers at a scientific conference here said this week that there was tentative but growing evidence of a genetic basis for some criminal and aggressive behavior.
But clearly mindful of the controversy on this issue, most of the researchers emphasized that the "nature versus nurture" debate was not an either-or proposition in this case and that social and family conditions were major contributors to behavior as well.


14 Minutes of Love By a Choreographer With a Lasting Hold
HEINZ POLL CAN'T ESCAPE the trailblazing German choreographer Kurt Jooss.
Mr.
Poll studied at the school Jooss made famous.
For 10 years, he danced with a South American troupe that preserved Jooss's choreography.
Last season, "The Big City," one of Jooss's major works, was revived by the Ohio Ballet, which Mr.
Poll directs.
And his troupe, based in Akron, will perform "The Big City" during its weeklong engagement at the Joyce Theater, beginning on Tuesday.
Although Mr.
Poll actually met the German choreographer very few times, his influence proved inescapable.
Jooss, who was born in 1901, tried to bridge modern dance and ballet.
While he admired the seriousness of modern and the discipline of ballet, he scorned balletic escapism.
Believing that choreography should not be subservient to music or obscured by fancy trappings, he favored simple stage designs and two-piano accompaniment.


Man Killed by Subway
A 25-year-old man was struck and killed by a northbound No. 6 subway train in SoHo yesterday in an apparent suicide, the transit police said.
The man, whom police could not immediately identify, jumped in front of the train at just after 5 P.M. at the Spring Street station near Lafayette Street as several people looked on, said Lieut.
Thomas Russo, a transit police spokesman.


The 'Dear Father' of Mexican Indians Is the 'Assassin Bishop' to His Foes
The Maya Indians whom Bishop Samuel Ruiz Garcia has preached to and prayed for since 1960 call him Tatic, which in a Maya dialect means Dear Father.
Ranchers and other hard-line members of the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party in the southern state of Chiapas have a different name for Bishop Ruiz, who heads the Roman Catholic diocese of San Cristobal.
In graffiti on the grim gray walls of nearby towns they call him the Assassin Bishop.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Wed.
Treasury statement, Jan., $ bils.
-4.1
12.9
Thur.
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
338
330
Fri.
Durable-goods orders, Jan., pct. chg.
1.5
-0.3
Mon.
Washington's Birthday holiday; financial markets closed
Tues.
Johnson Redbook report released
*4*Denver Airport's new automated baggage system on display
Wed.
Greenspan to testify to Senate
Thur.
Greenspan to testify to House
*4*Commerce Dept. issues results of investment plans survey


The Three Bosnias Widen Their Gulfs
JADRANKO PRLIC, the self- styled president of the mini-state Croats have carved out in Bosnia, finds it hard to hide a certain contempt for the Bosnian Muslims.
"In Muslim territory there is nothing, not even any wages," he declared.
"Trying to link us with them is like trying to link west Germany and east Germany."
The analogy was a trifle bold -- the Croats' mini-state of Herceg-Bosna scarcely has a functioning factory, let alone a Daimler-Benz corporation -- but not entirely groundless.
The casinos, brash cafes and gleaming Mercedes (usually without number plates) of Herceg-Bosna testify to a sleazy boom fed by what Western officials call rampant Mafia-style rackets.


What Critters Lurk in the House Plants?
IT was hanging plant inspection day recently.
A fern had many dead or yellowing fronds and there was a strong suspicion that scales were the causing problem.
Right.
A close look revealed that these critters were indeed about.
There they were, adhered to the backs of the stems, motionless.
Scales thrive by sucking the plant's sap, eventually killing the fronds.


Sports of The Times; For Black Coaches, New Direction Needed
DURING an interview last August, Rudy Washington, the executive director of the Black Coaches Association, predicted that the next level of dissent in intercollegiate athletics would not come from coaches.
"These students are going to be the biggest fear," Washington said. "Not the coaches."


Afghan Force's Victories Overtake U.N. Peace Effort
After years of frustration, a United Nations effort to bring peace to Afghanistan reached a critical point today when an envoy began a round of shuttle diplomacy aimed at bringing the main warring groups into a new coalition Government.
The United Nations representative, Mahmoud Mestiri, had hoped that a new governing council would take power in Kabul, the capital, on Monday.
But as he opened the talks, Mr.
Mestiri said that the earliest date had slipped to Tuesday, and many Afghans involved in the talks judged the prospects for meeting that deadline increasingly slim.


Anatomy of a Highflying I.P.O., Nosebleeds and All
IF you want to know about the pressures -- and the payoff -- of taking a company public, talk to the founders and the chief executive of the Shiva Corporation.
Last November, Shiva, a highly touted software maker in Burlington, Mass., took off as one of the year's hottest initial public offerings.
Right out of the block, the offering price more than doubled, to $30.50 a share, as "buy" orders from eager investors flooded the Nasdaq market.


Zipping Through School, but, Boy, Is He Dumb
Boys on the Side  Whoopi Goldberg, Mary-Louise Parker, Drew Barrymore Directed by Herbert Ross R 115 minutes


Biscuits Are Falling in Texas, and They Carry Rabies Vaccine
Texas health officials this week began air-dropping rabies vaccine wrapped in lard-scented pellets to try to contain an epidemic of the deadly disease that has been spread by coyotes and dogs in South Texas in the last seven years.
In that time, two people in South Texas have died of the canine strain of the disease, and about 1,500 have received treatment for exposure to it.
More than 500 animal cases of rabies have been confirmed in both dogs and coyotes, officials said.


Debut for a Professional Stage Company
FOR openers, A. R. Gurney and Wendy Wasserstein may do just fine, but wait -- George Bernard Shaw isn't far behind.
"We're inching our way to the more weighty; ambition we've got plenty of," Robert M. Rechnitz said, making it clear that he was not going to dwell on playwrights.
The theater's the thing.


Fibrous Tissue In Neck Is Tied To One Type Of Headache
Researchers say they have discovered a patch of tissue near the base of the skull that links a neck muscle to the outer lining of the brain, a link that they said might be related to some tension headaches.
The researchers from the University of Maryland at Baltimore reported that anatomical studies on cadavers had disclosed the existence of the small web of fibrous tissue near the top of the spinal column that had not been described before in medical literature.


An Air of Mystery in Building on 62d Street
It's not unusual to see office building workers clustered by the front door taking smoking breaks.
But at 410 East 62d Street, an administrative center for Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, some employees go out for breathing breaks.
Inside, they say, something in the air makes them sick.
Last month, Geraldine Hopper, who worked for Sloan-Kettering for 16 years before being fired last year, sued the landlord for millions of dollars.
The hospital dismissed her when her doctor refused to give her medical clearance to work in the building, saying she suffered from a variety of ailments attributable to indoor pollution.


More Debate About Diversity and Texaco
To the Editor:


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association


Berlin Museum
To the Editor: Thank you for the Correspondent's Report "At Checkpoint Charlie, a Museum Remembers" (Dec. 18).
I visited Berlin and Checkpoint Charlie in May and was quite disappointed.
I walked past Rainer Hildebrandt's Checkpoint Charlie Museum, and although I was interested, did not enter.
In part, it was the admission price, probably higher because of the loss of grants.
But I was also dismayed that barely five years since one of the most historic events of the second half of this century, there is only minimal recognition that the checkpoint, the symbol of freedom for some and oppression for others, ever stood on Unter den Linden.
Only a small sign, not even an official one, reading "Checkpoint Charlie," and a few capitalists offering Cold War relics and chunks of the wall attest that this Berlin intersection has any significance.
I found it ironic that I nearly got lost on my way there, almost missing a landmark that was once so unmistakable.


Hoyas Prevail at Providence To Put End to Four-Game Slide
Georgetown 77, Providence 74
In Providence, R.I., a tap-in by Jerome Williams off a missed shot by Allen Iverson with 14 seconds remaining gave Georgetown a 77-74 victory over Providence last night in the Big East.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Seraphic Sublimation
FIRST there was Jimmy Stewart.
Now there is Carmen Seidel of Floral Park.
Ms.
Seidel found her guardian angel a month ago.
"Her name is Celeste," Ms.
Seidel said.
"She just came to me."
Just in time to help Ms.
Seidel with a little inspiration.
"I saw there was going to be this angel exposition," Ms.
Seidel said, "and I said to the family, 'We have to go.' " Not to learn about angels, but to sell them.


Corrections
A report in the Guide column of the Long Island Weekly today, about a talk next Saturday by Gloria Steinem at the Book Revue in Huntington, is outdated.
The talk has been canceled because Ms.
Steinem is ill.


Katherine Kamen, Steven Berkowitz
Katherine Sarah Kamen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry P. Kamen of New York, is to be married this evening to Steven Andrew Ber kowitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward C. Berkowitz of Washington.
Rabbi David Posner is to officiate at the Rainbow Room in New York.
The bride, 30, is an associate in the Washington office of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene &amp; MacRae, a New York law firm.
She graduated from Haverford College and received her law degree from George Washington University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in New York.
Her mother, Susan Kamen, retired as a vice president of the New York Life Insurance Company.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MY SISTER ROSEANNE  The True Story  of Roseanne Barr Arnold.
By Geraldine Barr with Ted Schwarz.
Birch Lane/Carol Publishing, $19.95.


Relief That the Book Is Closed on a Looking-Glass Trial
For weeks, he was a constant in their lives, never farther away than the nearest newspaper or television screen.
To some, he was an object of contempt, even rage; to others, a pathetic figure whose courtroom antics made them question the legal system's ability to judge a defendant's mental stability.
But try as they might, few Long Islanders -- particularly those from the Garden City area, where many of the victims of the Long Island Rail Road shooting live -- could bring themselves to turn off their sets when Colin Ferguson took center stage.
Fascinated or appalled, they watched, armchair psychiatrists for one of the strangest and most disturbing legal spectacles anyone here could recall.


Why Can't We Behave
THE DE-MORALIZATION OF SOCIETY From Victorian Virtues to Modern Values.
By Gertrude Himmelfarb. 314 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.


Basel
This affluent, cultured city on an elbow in the Rhine is preparing for another of its carnival follies, March 6 to 8, that give the lie to the stereotype of the staid Swiss.
Basel, predominantly Protestant, has for many years gone wild during its famous Fasnacht (Fasting Night) the week after Ash Wednesday, when Rio de Janeiro, New Orleans, Nice, Cologne, Venice and other places with Roman Catholic carnival traditions are already recovering from their pre-Lenten festivals.
Basel's merrymaking dates from the 16th century, when revelry surrounded the review of the civic militia at that time of the year.
To renew that tradition, more than 100 clubs of fun-loving Baselers, known as cliques, have been preparing over the last few months, painting grotesque masks and rehearsing skits for outdoor performances.


The Unfinished Alvin Ailey
REVELATIONS The Autobiography of Alvin Ailey.
By Alvin Ailey with A. Peter Bailey.
Illustrated. 183 pp.
New York: Birch Lane Press/ Carol Publishing Group. $18.95.


12 Studies in Esthetic Purpose
THE photograph advertising "A Dozen Different Ways," on view at the Schoolhouse Galleries here, is of 14 different forks laid in a bunch on a dark background.
It is one of several black-and-whites by Howard Goodman, which together threaten to steal the show, not because they are especially original -- studies of flatware, for example, are not exactly rare -- but because they reflect an esthetic purpose, as opposed to, say, technical virtuosity.
Light defines the outlines of Mr.
Goodman's forks, hitting only one of them full face; light rescues a bowl from darkness by emphasizing its glazed white rim and lapping over into the whiteness inside.
In a study of a back porch, the focus is on a glass glistening on a table in the foreground with traces of liquid.
Beyond this and the crisscrossing supports of the porch is a building with a white canopy.
Although the monochrome work is generally superior, in this party of 12 Mr.
Goodman is the visual equivalent of the woman who attracts all eyes at a fancy ball by wearing the proverbial little black dress.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
INSANELY GREAT: The Life and Times of Macintosh, the Computer That Changed Everything By Steven Levy.
Penguin, $9.95.
Cyberspace was largely uncharted territory way back in 1984 when Steven Jobs of Apple pulled the first Macintosh computer out of a canvas bag and introduced it to the public.
The author, a columnist for Macworld magazine, chronicles the Mac's creation and busy first decade.
"He has written a delightful and timely book," our reviewer, Samuel C. Florman, said last year.


Correction
An article on Feb. 12 about the coming movie "Showgirls" misstated the given name of the producer.
He is Alan Marshall, not Frank.


Enjoying an Occasional Buttery Indulgence of Brioche
LOW fat is simply not an option when it comes to certain baked goods.
Brioche, for example, must be buttery and eggy.
And for those who believe that when it comes to diet, moderation is the best advice, an occasional indulgence is not out of place.
This rich, golden brioche loaf has a bit of crunch in its texture, thanks to the addition of cornmeal.
It is excellent to serve with good jam for brunch or sliced thin alongside a salad, an elegant terrine or with smoked fish or meats.
Additional butter is not needed.


IT'S DRUGS, STUPID
The war against drugs is in reality a war against the biological nature of man.
People take drugs because they make them feel good.
There is no evidence to show that a society can successfully prohibit alcohol or drugs or can even discourage the consumption of high cholesterol junk food.


Pupils Lend a Hand to Japan
THE children eagerly crowded around the tables laden with books, confidently making their selections and discussing their purchases with their classmates.
What appeared to be an ordinary book fair at the F. E. Bellows Elementary School here in the Rye Neck school district was in fact an exercise in philanthropy intended to raise money for the beleaguered residents of earthquake-stricken Kobe, Japan.


Where the Mexican Arts May Feel Right at Home
RICARDO LEGORRETA, the Mexican architect who is gaining prominence on both sides of the Rio Grande, was once commissioned by a compatriot to design a house in Los Angeles that proved "Mexico is not the country of siesta or burros and manana." An innovative champion of native materials, forms and colors, he has likened his architecture to a fervent cry of "Viva Mexico! Viva los Mexicanos!"
Thus Mr.
Legorreta was a fitting choice to draw up the master plan and main buildings of Mexico's new National Center of the Arts, a 35-acre, $105 million complex in the nation's captial.
It is one of the country's most ambitious architectural undertakings since its modernist national university campus drew international acclaim in the 1950's.


Second Home for Old World Portuguese Barbecue
FIRST there was Churrasqueira Bairrada in Mineola.
Now there is a second Portuguese barbecue restaurant on Long Island, Churrasqueira Europa at 1075 Portion Road in Farmingville (696-7527).
That Suffolk outpost is almost as good as its Nassau counterpart.
Churrasqueira Europa, like Bairrada, uses a natural-wood charcoal flame, which combined with herbs and spices brushed onto the surface of the barbecuing meat, gives it a smoky seasoned flavor.


Popular Players By Lincoln Center
BACI + (212) 496-1550; 412 Amsterdam Avenue, near 80th Street; $$; no credit cards


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the Northern Westchester Center for the Arts misstated the location.
The center is in Mount Kisco, not Armonk.


The Turn Of the Thread
During a long career in engineering I have maintained an interest in the illustrative arts and have always been assured that the practitioners thereof are proud of their observational faculties.
Even so I frequently discover that in matters mechanical they have no conception of how things "go together" and little interest in learning.
For instance I have a large collection of pictures from various sources, including prominent artists, depicting steam locomotives in which the piston and connecting-rod assemblies are configured in all sorts of physically impossible ways.
The perpetrators obviously had only the vaguest notion of how these classic mechanisms are supposed to function.
Many artists show similar ignorance about the elements of nautical, aeronautical and other applied sciences.


Press Protests 'Gag' Bills In Argentina
The administration of President Carlos Sal Menem sent three bills to Congress last month that could muzzle the press in this an election year if they are approved, advocates of free speech say.
The bills, which have a good chance of passing the Menem-controlled legislature, would greatly increase the penalties for libel and slander, make it a crime to offend the memory of the dead, and force news outlets to take out costly libel insurance.


'Paging Eustace Tilley!'
The New Yorker's 70th, Hudson Theater, Feb 12.


Azerbaijanis Try to Learn English, Under U.S. Handicap
With Communists no longer dictating what they can hear, read and speak, and with capitalist oil companies offering astronomical salaries, the young of this former Soviet republic in the Caucasus are in hot pursuit of English.
This term alone, 700 new students enrolled in the four-year English program at the University for Foreign Languages, and now 80 percent of the university's 2,500 students are struggling to master the language.


Enjoying an Occasional Buttery Indulgence of Brioche
LOW fat is simply not an option when it comes to certain baked goods.
Brioche, for example, must be buttery and eggy.
And for those who believe that when it comes to diet, moderation is the best advice, an occasional indulgence is not out of place.
This rich, golden brioche loaf has a bit of crunch in its texture, thanks to the addition of cornmeal.
It is excellent to serve with good jam for brunch or sliced thin alongside a salad, an elegant terrine or with smoked fish or meats.
Additional butter is not needed.


'A Pain in the Ear'
To the Editor:
Vincent Canby's article "Look Who's Talking: Microphones"  [ Jan. 22 ]  does not present novel criticism, only a modernization.
On Jan. 15, 1940, Brooks Atkinson, the Times theater critic, wrote in his review of Earl Carroll's "Vanities," the first Broadway show to use microphones: "No revue that frantically hugs the microphone can be much more than a pain in the ear. . . . The microphones, which very nearly make this 'Vanities' a menace, could be yanked out and tossed in the alley, which would not be a bad idea at that." PAUL NEWMAN  San Francisco


Corrections
A Pop/Rock/Folk concert listing on page 41 of the Arts &amp; Leisure section today misstates the date of a benefit at Carnegie Hall for Tibet House New York.
It will be held at 7:30 P.M. on Feb. 28, not this Tuesday.


What Critters Lurk in the House Plants?
IT was hanging plant inspection day recently.
A fern had many dead or yellowing fronds and there was a strong suspicion that scales were the causing problem.
Right.
A close look revealed that these critters were indeed about.
There they were, adhered to the backs of the stems, motionless.
Scales thrive by sucking the plant's sap, eventually killing the fronds.


Technology; It's New, Costly and High-Tech. Is It Better? Perhaps.
TENNIS is a troubled industry, plagued by falling racquet sales, few transcendent young stars besides a resurgent Andre Agassi, a stodgy image and a gaggle of governing bodies that until recently resisted working together to market the sport.
But even as yesterday's teen-age sensation blurs into today's, the game's technology is slowly evolving -- with refinements in everything from court surfaces to shoes.
And in good times or bad, the quest continues for the ultimate better mousetrap -- the racquet that can improve a player's shot (and reduce wear and tear on the player).


Eric Walker, 84, Ex-President Of Pennsylvania State U., Dies
Eric A. Walker, a former president of Pennsylvania State University, died Friday afternoon at his home in State College, Pa.
He was 84.
The cause was a heart ailment, said Roger Williams, a spokesman for the university.


A Plug Pulled, A Career Made
Sam Cooke brought the purity of his gospel tenor to secular music, helping to invent modern soul singing.
In a new book, "You Send Me," Daniel Wolff, S. R. Crain, Clifton White and G. David Tenenbaum chronicle the life of the legendary singer.
In this excerpt, the authors recall Cooke's first appearance on national television.
SAM'S APPEARANCE ON ED Sullivan's show was a disaster -- helped make his career.
That Sunday, Nov. 3, 1957, Sullivan, as usual, had a hodgepodge of acts, and the nice-looking Negro singer was on last.
It was lip-synching, so all Sam had to do was keep up with the record, but, as he paced backstage in his natty suit, he knew it was his career-making introduction to middle America.


Yet Another European Import?
To the Editor:
The description of the elevator-go-round in "The Sears Tower Challenge" (Technology, Jan. 22) brought back memories of my youth in prewar Munich.
I remember running errands at a large government building -- perhaps eight stories -- that had a similar elevator system with small cabins that would move continuously and slowly up one side of the building and down the other.
The system was called "Pater Noster" (the Latin for the opening words of the Lord's Prayer) probably because the whole thing brought to mind a rosary and the cabins were reminiscent of the large beads on which the prayer is said.
Only a few people could ride at a time, and one had to step on and off while the elevator was moving.
The cabins, which were closely spaced, were only accessible from one side.
I wonder whether the mechanics of an eight-story building can be transferred to the 110-story Sears Tower, but the idea surely is not such a new one.
HENRY REINEMANN  Jackson Heights, Queens, Jan 23 Editor's note: Other readers have written about similar elevator systems in Hamburg, Frankfurt and Colchester, England.


Station House Is Bulging At the Seams
From the outside, the 66th Precinct station house in Borough Park looks more inviting than most municipal buildings.
Inside, the three-story red-brick structure exudes hominess.
It's cozy, really.
Too cozy, according to many officers and residents of the precinct, who complain that the station house, built in 1949, is simply too small.
The regulations governing the housing of derelicts and the homeless and the incarceration of criminals mean that their accommodations "are far superior to the substandard and inferior conditions that are accepted and condoned at this station house," wrote Priscilla Celano, the district manager of Community Board 12, in a letter to police and city officials.


3 Lives, 3 Museums, 3 Shrines
IN Mexico City, in Coyoacan, one of the city's most charming neighborhoods, at the corner of Abasolo and Viena Streets, are two hand-painted signs.
One points to the left and reads "Kahlo." The other, pointing right, says "Trotsky." In the quiet residential area, they are a reminder of the interrelationships between Mexican culture and Soviet politics that were played out in the 1930's.


Zipping Through School, but, Boy, Is He Dumb
The Quick and the Dead  Sharon Stone, Gene Hackman Directed by Sam Raimi R 103 minutes


Stores Sing the Parking Blues Over a New Meter Rate Rise
Many retailers in Queens believe that the availability of parking has become more important factor than selection or quality, more crucial even than price, when people choose where to shop.
In recent years, small merchants have watched as megastores like Kmart and Tops discovered Queens.
They watched, they say, as customers shunned crowded, metered streets for what used to be found only in the malls of Long Island or New Jersey -- ample free parking.


These Days, the Circus Animals Sneak Into Town
When the circus rolled into Richmond five years ago, disk jockeys broadcast live by cellular phone from the backs of the elephants, as they lumbered through downtown in a parade from the railyard to the big top.
Globes proclaiming "The Greatest Show on Earth" glittered from the harnesses of the great beasts as children of all ages waved in the streets.
This week, the circus tip-toed into town, an hour after sundown.
No riders.
No globes.
Officials of the circus, Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Combined Shows Inc., asked reporters not to publicize the arrival time.


Hunter Gains in Tournament
John Jay became the first casualty of Hunter's quest for its fourth consecutive City University of New York Athletic Conference championship.
In a quarterfinal game yesterday, Hunter defeated John Jay, 83-53, at Lehman's Apex Center in the Bronx.
The Hawks started slowly but received unexpected offensive production from the reserve freshman Nick Plevritis (18 points) to gain a comfortable lead before the rest of the team's offense meshed.


Movie Solutions
To the Sports Editor:
House Speaker Newt Gingrich says baseball's owners and players should go to the Caribbean or Yellowstone and watch "Field of Dreams" to settle their dispute.
We think they should pitch tents in Cooperstown and view "Eight Men Out" instead.
HENRY FINKELSTEIN and SHIRLEY RANZ  Brooklyn, N.Y.


Building a P.T.A.: The Struggle in Corona
MARINA PERALTA, a recent arrival from the Dominican Republic, is essentially baffled by the goings-on inside Intermediate School 61 in Corona, Queens, a squat, brick building where her son and 2,200 other students spend their days.
Her most basic link to understanding the school, the I.S. 61 Parent-Teacher Association, holds evening meetings once a month that she says she can rarely attend.
"I don't have enough time, even though I know they're important," she said in Spanish.
"And they're always in English. That's the main problem. I do understand one or two words, but that's not everything."


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
ELMHURST An Introduction To the World of Zen
"Zen is in your mind already, and no one can open it for you," said the Rev.
Guo-Chou Shi, a resident monk at the Ch'an Meditation Center in Elmhurst (founded by Sheng-yen, right).
"Teachers can only show you methods of reaching your nature, or your Zen. The practice is about realizing who you are."


Help on Death Bill Shows Senate Leader's Clout
Intentionally or not, Senator Joseph L. Bruno, the majority leader, wound up playing bad cop to Gov.
George E. Pataki's good cop in the negotiations that produced an agreement on a death penalty bill this week.
The agreement demonstrated, perhaps more than any aspect of Albany's radically changed politics, that the dynamic between the Republican Governor and the Republican Senate may be central to Mr.
Pataki's ability to push his conservative agenda through the Democratic-controlled Assembly.


Putting The Heat On 85th St.
"They come from all over and from all walks of life -- from a banker or a broker to the unemployed," said the 19th Police Precinct commander, George J. Kelly.
One arrived in a BMW, another in a taxicab.
They are men seeking streetwalkers, and on the Upper East Side that means their destination is 85th Street between Second and Third Avenues.
Since October, however, the police have been cracking down on both the prostitutes and their customers.
So far, decoy female officers have arrested 90 men for soliciting sex for pay on the "stroll," as streetwalkers call their promenade.
About a dozen prostitutes have also been arrested.


THE CONCILIATOR
My vote for Jimmy Carter has given me 19 years of satisfaction.
I got my money's worth and much more from that little vote in 1976.
JANICE ZWINGLI Montclair, N.J.


The Delany Sisters and Their Century
"BESSIE and I have been together since time began. Or so it seems," Miss Sadie, 103, is talking.
Bessie, her little sister, 101, plans to be as old as Moses -- 120.
"But she'll have to live to 122 so I can take care of her," Sadie figures.
Followers of best-seller lists (readers too), fans of oral history at its most popular and accessible and all pushovers for a human interest story of wraparound warmth and affirmation know these are the Delany sisters of Raleigh, N.C., now 105 and 103 and living in Mount Vernon, N.Y.


Challenging a Literary Pick-10
To the Editor:
I'm sure I'm not the first to recommend "Winter's Tale," by Mark Helprin.
It's an incredible book -- fantasy, history, fable -- and Helprin writes like an angel.
CAROLE LALLI Manhattan


Bettina Levin, David Weinberger
Bat Hamy Levin, a daughter of Fanny and Dan Levin of Lima, Peru, was married last evening to David Jon Weinberger, a son of Hazel and Michael Weinberger of New York.
Rabbi Peter Rubinstein officiated at the Mark Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Weinberger, 32, is known as Bettina.
She is an artist.
She graduated from California College of Arts and Crafts and received a master's degree in computer graphics from the School of Visual Arts.


February 12-18: Zedillo's Woes; A Big State Defeat For Mexico's Ruling Party
President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon's long-governing party suffered its worst defeat ever in elections in the western Mexican state of Jalisco last week, though some of his aides considered it the best of possible outcomes.
That was because a closer and less obvious result would have placed Mr.
Zedillo, who has pledged himself to democratic reform, in another potentially volatile showdown against forces within his party that are less inclined to accept elections as real contests for power.


Corrections
An essay on Jan. 22 about Venice misstated John Keats's relationship with the city.
He never visited Venice.


Jordan Is Trying to Play in a Minor Key
Michael Jordan was a lot less confused when he began his first spring training workout today than he was after he finished.
The batting cage and the weight room were far easier for him to handle than the discussion in the Chicago White Sox clubhouse afterward.
As became customary last year when he played his first season of professional baseball after a glittering basketball career, a large group of reporters greeted Jordan after the workout.
This time, though, the probing questions went beyond his baseball abilities, his lack of power, his progress and his future as a 32-year-old minor leaguer.


The Poetry Pantheon
Chancellors of the Academy of American Poets: John Ashbery, Anthony Hecht, Daniel Hoffman, John Hollander, Richard Howard, Stanley Kunitz, W.S.
Merwin, Mona Van Duyn, David Wagoner, Richard Wilbur American Academy of Arts and Letters Poet Members (often one and the same as the above): A.R.
Ammons, John Ashbery, Gwendolyn Brooks, Allen Ginsberg, Donald Hall, ANthony Hecht, John Hollander, Richard Howard, Donal Justice, Stanley Kunitz, W.S.
Merwin, Czeslaw Milosz, Adrienne Rich, W.D.
Snodgrass, Gary Snyder, Mark Strand, Mona Van Duyn, Richard Wilbur.
Best-Looking Male Poets: Galway Kinnel, W.S.
Merwin, Mark Strand Best-Looking Female Poets: Garolyn Forche, Louis Gluck, Jorie Graham, Gjertrude Schnackerberg.


International Artists On the Recital Stages
THE Russians are coming, not to mention artists from England, China, Greece, the Netherlands, Israel, Africa and Java.
Leonidas Kavakos, born in Greece, sprang to international fame in 1988 when he won both the Paganini and Naumburg violin competitions.
A major artist in Europe, Mr.
Kavakos has to date made infrequent appearances in the United States.
He will appear at the season's finale of the Wilton Candlelight Series at 4 P.M. today in Wilton Congregational Church.
With the pianist Peter Nagy, Mr.
Kavakos performs Beethoven's "Kreutzer" Sonata, suites by Stravinsky and de Falla, and a group of Sarasate showpieces.
For more details, the numbers are 762-3401 or 762-8354.


For Gay Couple, Vacation In Jamaica Was Frightening
To the Editor:
I thank you for running the Feb. 5 article "Gay Dollars on the Road" with its information about resorts that are gay friendly and gay hostile.
I wish my partner and I had read something like it some years ago when we went to Jamaica, which you describe as "generally hostile." Not only was Negril Beach hostile, it was downright dangerous.
Men constantly harassed us when we tried to relax on the beach.
When we politely rejected their advances, we were called "dykes" and "racists." Employees at our resort were Peeping Toms, looking into our room.
But the worst incident was when a beach bum, who knew where we were staying, threatened us with rape.
We were terrified.


Streetscapes/The Park Avenue Railroad Viaduct; A $120 Million Renovation for an 1897 Behemoth
IT is really the last of Manhattan's elevated lines, the giant four-track railroad viaduct going up Park Avenue from 111th Street to the Harlem River.
Workmen with torches are now carving out large chunks of this rusting behemoth, built in 1897, and debris litters the street below.
But this el is being rebuilt, not demolished, in a $120 million Metro-North Commuter Railroad project.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Polytechnic Preparatory Country Day School in Dyker Heights, Brooklyn, omitted part of the name of a statewide organization of private schools whose head commented on the Brooklyn school's changing demographics.
The group is the New York State Association of Independent Schools.


Ulster Threat To Peace Bid Seems to Fade
A threat by moderate Protestant Unionist leaders to disrupt the peace effort for Northern Ireland appeared to recede today, as high-ranking Irish and British officials agreed on the text of a new framework document intended to lead to a permanent political settlement of the sectarian warfare in the British province of Ulster.
After a four-hour meeting in Dublin, the Irish Foreign Minister, Dick Spring, and the British Northern Ireland Secretary, Sir Patrick Mayhew, said they had put the framework in final shape, with only a few minor details yet to be decided.


SUNDAY, February 19, 1995; Strange but True
Two families on the Ross Barnett Reservoir near Jackson, Miss., have brought modern technology to the sport of "grabbling."


There, There
THERE'S MILLIONS of elderly Americans who live on Social Security, who depend on Medicare," said the House minority leader, Richard Gephardt of Missouri, making a not unpopular observation, but treating all us geezers as singular.
The man who may be challenged for the 1996 Democratic nomination by fellow Democrat Gephardt also treats the real subjects of his sentences as singular: "There's the talkers," said President Clinton, "and there's the doers."


Berlin Museum
To the Editor: Thank you for the Correspondent's Report "At Checkpoint Charlie, a Museum Remembers" (Dec. 18).
I visited Berlin and Checkpoint Charlie in May and was quite disappointed.
I walked past Rainer Hildebrandt's Checkpoint Charlie Museum, and although I was interested, did not enter.
In part, it was the admission price, probably higher because of the loss of grants.
But I was also dismayed that barely five years since one of the most historic events of the second half of this century, there is only minimal recognition that the checkpoint, the symbol of freedom for some and oppression for others, ever stood on Unter den Linden.
Only a small sign, not even an official one, reading "Checkpoint Charlie," and a few capitalists offering Cold War relics and chunks of the wall attest that this Berlin intersection has any significance.
I found it ironic that I nearly got lost on my way there, almost missing a landmark that was once so unmistakable.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Three Cheers for America's Reborn Luxury Sedans; In a New Yorker State of Mind
TONY BENNETT is hot, hot, hot, and some young trend surfers are grooving to Mantovani and Henry Mancini.
Maybe there is hope after all for the squarest of American cars: the luxury barges of the Big Three.
Many of us born midway through the baby boom, even as we developed love handles and variable annuities, clearly have not shared our parents' enthusiasm for opera windows and self-closing trunk lids.
You can take a Deadhead out of a VW Microbus, but you can't make him pilot a land yacht to Woodstock II.


Wide Selection of Programs for Children in a Vacation Week
IT is vacation time for many children, and several organizations are offering programs for them.
Today at 1 P.M., the Children's Art Project presents "Story Art" at One Station Plaza in Peekskill.
The number to call for more details is 422-1400.
At 2:30 this afternoon, Classical Productions gives a free family program of operatic excerpts, spirituals and show tunes at the White Plains Public Library.
That information number is 422-1400.


Myra Mercado, F. F. Caramanico
Myra Mercado, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilberto Mercado of Manhattan, was married yesterday to Frederick F. Caramanico, a son of Frederick A. Caramanico of Brooklyn and the late Frances Caramanico.
The Rev.
Emmanuel Faraone officiated at St.
John Nepomucene Catholic Church in Manhattan.


'The 20th Century Should Have Been the Best'
FROM TIME TO TIME By Jack Finney.
Illustrated. 303 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


Q and A
Hiking in Spitsbergen
Q.
My wife and I are interested in hiking on the island of Spitsbergen this summer.
Can you tell me where I can obtain information on tours and hiking possibilities? -- J. Shannon, Tampa, Fla.


Abraham Shusterman, 88, Baltimore Rabbi
Rabbi Abraham Shusterman, a member and leader of interfaith groups that played a role in calming social unrest in American cities in the 1960's, died on Jan. 26 at his home in Baltimore.
He was 88.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Sara Lee Jacobson of Baltimore.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-18  RUSSIA'S DECLINING HEALTH  Russia is caught in a health crisis.
Curable diseases have reached epidemic levels, and cancer and heart disease are higher than in any other industrialized country.  1  TURNING POINT IN AFGHANISTAN  A U.N. effort to bring peace to Afghanistan reached a critical point as an envoy launched an effort to bring the main warring groups into a new coalition Government.  3


Mapping the Lower Bronx: It's South, but South of What?
In a city of countless boundaries of all kinds, none may be more notorious and elusive than the line dividing the South Bronx from the rest of the borough.
Most people say it is the Cross-Bronx Expressway or Fordham Road; others place it as far north as Mosholu Parkway.
But everyone agrees that pinpointing the South Bronx's northern boundary has little to do with geography -- Mosholu Parkway, in fact, is in the northern Bronx -- but has everything to do with money, race, ethnicity and image.


Honoring the 'Can Do' Spirit
Citizens Committee Awards, Waldorf-Astoria, Feb 14.


Susan C. Fritz, Jonathan B. Sweedler
Susan Carol Fritz, a daughter of Sylvia Fritz and Judge Abner Fritz of Whittier, Calif., is to be married today to Jonathan Benjamin Sweedler, the son of Bryna and Michael Sweedler of Ossining, N.Y.
Rabbi Joseph Smith is to officiate at the Westin South Coast Plaza in Costa Mesa, Calif.
The bride, 29, graduated from Brandeis University and received an M.B.A. degree from San Jose State University.
She is the operations manager for SEA Inc. in Santa Cruz, Calif., which is to begin manufacturing surfboard accessories this spring.
Her father is a judge of the Whittier Municipal Court.
Her mother retired as a manager of Royal 14K Gold, a jewelry store in Whittier.


No Headline
"People v. Ferguson could become a landmark decision on the issue of competency and whether competency hearings have any validity for all those people who are clearly not in their right mind to defend themselves. The issue is a powerful one that needs to be raised in this state and elsewhere across the country." WILLIAM KUNSTLER.  [ 1:2. ]


Word for Word.A Scholarly Debate; Rhett and Scarlett: Rough Sex Or Rape? Feminists Give a Damn
THE O.J.
Simpson trial is one reflection of how domestic violence haunts American society.
Is "Gone With the Wind" another?
Specifically, did Rhett Butler rape or, less offensively, ravish Scarlett O'Hara?
The debate began a few years back in academic journals and the lecture hall between two feminist philosophers -- one of them Christina Hoff Sommers, who has since outraged many feminists with her book "Who Stole Feminism? How Women Betrayed Women," published last year.
The argument in her book -- that feminism is dominated by those who seek to persuade the public that American women "are not the free creatures we think we are" -- is foreshadowed in the dispute over Margaret Mitchell's Civil War saga.


Foreign Affairs; Dissing The World
Reading over the Republican foreign policy bill that passed the House last week, I realized that on domestic policy the Republicans have a vision and on foreign policy they have graffiti.
Republicans backing this bill, which is the foreign policy component of their Contract With America, really don't need to pass a law to get their point across.
All they need is a can of spray paint and a blank wall of the United Nations so they can scrawl exactly what's on their minds: "Get Lost World. Newt Was Here."
This bill, unfortunately, is typical of the quality of Republican foreign policy thinking today.
It is drive-by foreign policy.
Shout whatever's on your mind as you drive by the White House and then hit the gas before you have to deal with the implications.


Joan Rivers's Grief Counseling
I read the piece on Joan Rivers and her grief-counseling act  [ "Joan Rivers Offers Some Stand-Up Therapy," Jan. 29 ] .
One of the women interviewed said, "I especially liked when she said each of us has to grieve in our own way."


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Balanced Budget: Vote to kill an amendment to a bill calling for a balanced budget constitutional amendment that would have placed Social Security income and expenses off limits for deficit reduction.
Approved 57 to 41, Feb. 14.
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Yea
Lieberman (D)
Nay
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Nay
Lautenberg (D)
Nay
New York
D'Amato (R)
Yea
Moynihan (D)
A
House
1.
Police and Crime Prevention: Vote on an amendment to a bill providing lump-sum grants to local communities to fight crime.
The amendment would have protected money for hiring new community police officers.
Rejected 235 to 196, Feb. 14.
2.
Police and Crime Prevention: Vote on passage of a bill that replaces money for police officers and prevention programs in last year's anti-crime bill and provides instead $10 billion in lump-sum grants that local governments can spend as they wished.
Approved 238 to 192, Feb. 14.
3.
Missiles: Vote on an amendment to a national security revitalization bill.
The amendment put a higher priority on financing combat readiness and deployment of defenses against Scud-like missiles than on a system to defend the United States against a ballistic missile attack.
Approved 218 to 212, Feb. 15.
4.
National Security: Vote on passage of a bill that would cut United States payments for United Nations peacekeeping efforts and give Congress a greater say in committing troops abroad.
Approved 241 to 181, Feb. 17.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
YeaNay
Yea
Nay
2. Gejdenson (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
3. DeLauro (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
4. Shays (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Yea
5. Franks (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
6. Johnson (R)
Yea
Nay
Nay
Yea
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Yea
Nay
Nay
Yea
2. LoBiondo (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
Yea
3. Saxton (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
4. Smith (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
5. Roukema (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
Yea
6. Pallone (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
7. Franks (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
Yea
8. Martini (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
Yea
9. Torricelli (D)
Yea
A
Yea
Nay
10. Payne (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
11. Frelinghuysen (R) li
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
12. Zimmer (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
13. Menendez (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
New York
1. Forbes (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
2. Lazio (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
3. King (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
4. Frisa (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
5. Ackerman (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
6. Flake (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
7. Manton (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
8. Nadler (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
9. Schumer (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
A
10. Towns (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
11. Owens (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
12. Velazquez (D)
Yea
Nay
Nay
Nay
13. Molinari (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
14. Maloney (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
15. Rangel (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
16. Serrano (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
17. Engel (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
18. Lowey (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
19. Kelly (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
20. Gilman (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
21. McNulty (D)
Nay
Yea
Yea
Yea
22. Solomon (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
23. Boehlert (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
24. McHugh (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
A
25. Walsh (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
26. Hinchey (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
27. Paxon (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
28. Slaughter (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
29. LaFalce (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
30. Quinn (R)
Yea
Nay
Nay
Yea
31. Houghton (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Lie Detectors Lie (Tell the C.I.A.)
In 1983, an Army intelligence officer made a desperate call to David Lykken, a psychology professor at the University of Minnesota and expert on polygraphs.
The officer said that he had just flunked two routine lie detector tests but that he hadn't done anything illegal, and wanted to know if Mr.
Lykken had any advice on beating the machine.
Sure, the professor said, offering a few suggestions involving altering the body's breathing rate and blood pressure at strategic times.
The officer passed the next test easily.
"The only hard part was learning how to keep a straight face," he later told Mr.
Lykken.


Among Haiti's Poor, a Land Rush Without Rules
In the absence of an effective police force, growing numbers of poor and homeless Haitians are moving onto state- and privately owned land to build homes for themselves.
For President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who was restored to power after 20,000 American troops arrived here in September, the wave of squatters presents a challenge to his authority and an awkward political problem.


Everybody Is Peculiar
AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS Seven Paradoxical Tales.
By Oliver Sacks.
Illustrated. 328 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.


Chinese Executive Tied to Deng Is Arrested in Corruption Case
In a corruption case that strikes close to China's first family, a prominent steel company chairman and close friend of Deng Xiaoping has resigned and his son has been arrested for "certain commercial crimes," Chinese officials said this weekend.
The details of the charges filed by the Beijing Municipal Procurator's Office were not spelled out, but senior Communist Party officials, including a Politburo member, Chen Xitong, were involved in making announcements related to the case.


Bridge
Bridge is perhaps the only competitive activity in which players can not only take part when facing major health problems but even win.
Early last year, a 46-year-old professional from Nashville, Bob Glenn, embarked on an ambitious tournament program, hoping to win the title for collecting most master points in the calendar year.
He did not feel well, and in March was told that he had inoperable pancreatic cancer, but he went on playing, and winning, until he died in June.
He had accumulated more than 1,000 master points in five months.
For some, it appears that the drive to succeed at the bridge table helps keeps health problems at bay.
An example is Lila Perlstein of Roslyn Heights, L.I., an expert who, despite a chronic illness, won two major titles last month at the Tri-State Regional Championships in Port Chester, N.Y.
Six weeks earlier, at the Fall Nationals in Minneapolis, she held the South cards on the diagramed deal.


Smart Money Rethinks Conflict Rule
Smart Money magazine is tightening its rules regarding its outside contributors after a columnist's holdings in three stocks jumped in value by more than $2 million after he endorsed those stocks in his February column.
James J. Cramer, president of Cramer &amp; Company, a private money management firm based in New York, and an "editor at large" for Smart Money, praised three small companies in which his firm held substantial positions.
Shortly after publication, the stocks, which are usually thinly traded, soared in value on unusually heavy trading.


CHRONICLE
Where can one get a tour of New York City that includes a spin through Times Square and Central Park, a leap over the Empire State Building and a "crash" on Wall Street?
No, not in a cab, but on "Skyride," the city's first flight-simulation ride.


Death and Madness Remain the Basics in Slayer's Repertory
For more than a decade, Slayer has proudly fused hard-core punk and heavy metal into loud, lugubrious songs that groan and grind over lyrics that depict suicide, murder and madness in almost cartoonish excess.
There will always be an audience for Slayer's music because there will always be a subculture trying to escape from prosaic day-to-day existence by making a fetish of death and the unknown.
And whether Slayer was singing morbidly realistic lines like "No mercy, no reason, just pain" or obsessive nonsense like "Demons are waiting to die for you" when it performed on Friday night at Roseland, it seemed like a group of entertainers caught on a treadmill of gore.
"Now we're going to do something we've never done before, a love song," Slayer's bassist and vocalist, Tom Araya, announced to a chorus of boos from the audience at the first of two sold-out shows.
"It ends in death," he continued as the crowd predictably burst into thunderous applause and Slayer began "213," named after Jeffrey Dahmer's old apartment number.
The song is from Slayer's new album, "Divine Intervention" (American Recordings), which went straight to No. 8 on the pop charts when it was released last year, proving just how many people share Slayer's morbid obsessions.


In Performance; DANCE
Dancing Not Just as Dancing But as a Form of Living  New York City Ballet New York State Theater
One of Nikolaj Hubbe's most attractive traits as a performer is the way he often seems not to be performing but to be living roles to the fullest on the stage.
That quality distinguished one of two debuts by Mr.
Hubbe on Thursday night, when the New York City Ballet presented an evening of works by Jerome Robbins.


Serbia Dazzles Itself: Terror Suspect Weds Singer
In a ceremony billed as Serbia's wedding of the decade, if not perhaps the century, the baby-faced Serbian paramilitary commander known as Arkan today took his country's best loved folk singer as his bride.
On one level, it was no more than the union of a rich thug with a particularly nasty war record and a glamorous young star with a hold on the hearts of Serbia.
But the wedding of Arkan and Ceca (pronounced tseh-tsa) turned into a kitsch pageant of Serbia's disarray.


With Kabul Largely in Ruins, Afghans Get Respite From War
Until last year, this ancient capital sat stolidly beneath the snow-capped mountains of the Hindu Kush.
None of the invaders who came in through the ages -- not even the Soviet divisions that abandoned a futile occupation six years ago this month -- left much imprint on the city's mud-colored sprawl.
But now Kabul lies largely in ruins, its old city reduced to street after street of rubble, its great forts and palaces blasted into pitiful monuments to past resilience.
What armies from afar could not do, Afghan fighters accomplished in a 13-month siege that ended suddenly last week at the hands of a new and mysterious Afghan force, the Taliban.


EMPLOYERS WARY OF SCHOOL SYSTEM
Employers say one-fifth of American workers are not fully proficient in their jobs, and they express a lack of confidence in the ability of schools and colleges to prepare young people for the workplace, according to the first national survey ever done by the Census Bureau of hiring, training and management practices in American business.
Researchers say the study, which was produced for the Federal Department of Education, illustrates an alarming divide between the schools and the workplace even as national education and labor policy calls for closer cooperation, both to improve the skills of the nation's work force and to smooth the transition from school to work.


Front Office Knows These Are Birds of Different Feather
Introducing the two-time defending World Series champion Toronto Blue Jays:
Catchers Julio Osuna and Victor Rojas, first baseman Wes Clements, infielders Robert Montalvo and Julian Yan, outfielders Rick Hirtensteiner and Darryl Brinkley, pitcher Pete Blohm and Manager Bob Didier.


Let's Give Mayor a Chance to Do a Mayor's Job
To the Editor:
Reality bites.
Particularly in the form of budget cuts and administrative purges.
But Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has demonstrated with his reality therapy prescription that he wants to heal this city.
And it is going to require daily doses of micromanagement tactics to put our city government back on the right track.


Recognize U.S. Interests in Cambodia
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 13 editorial warning against United States lethal military aid to the Cambodian Government missed an essential point.
It is in the interests of the United States to help the Cambodian military reform itself, to lay the groundwork for a real security relationship down the road.


Recognize U.S. Interests in Cambodia; Thai Links to Pol Pot
To the Editor:
Re "Lethal Aid to Cambodia: Not Now" (editorial, Feb. 13): The United States has an obvious, nonviolent option for ending the Khmer Rouge guerilla war -- force Thailand to shut down its lifeline to Pol Pot.


Politics as Entertainment, Politics Even as Play
It is tentatively titled George. (George?) Its editor and publisher have no publishing experience.
Its parent company puts out fashion, automobile and decorating magazines but knows nothing about political magazines, which is what George will be, or sort of be.
If all this sounds like a less than surefire formula for success, hold on.


Pataki's Hard Choice: Environmental Chief
In his search for a state environmental commissioner, Gov.
George E. Pataki has found himself torn between two clashing interests that have long considered him an ally: business leaders and environmentalists.
Mr.
Pataki has said his ideal environmental commissioner would blend an understanding and respect for business with a strong sensitivity to conservation issues.
His ideal candidate, he said, would have worked in both areas.


'Megan's Law' Prompts Lawsuit
A man beaten up, apparently when he was mistaken for a paroled sex offender, said he would sue the county government.
The man, Thomas Vacari, is the first person to contend he was injured by a law that allows authorities to alert communities to the presence of convicted sex offenders.
In a lawsuit to be filed this week, Mr.
Vacari, 41, wants the Warren County Prosecutor's office, the Phillipsburg Police Department and the Warren County government held responsible for what he called "reckless" notification before the Jan. 8 attack.


Fears of Fumes At a Building Emptied Before
In what initially appeared to be a recurrence of carbon-monoxide poisoning at a Brooklyn apartment building, six people were taken to hospitals yesterday after complaining of nausea and dizziness they said was caused by fumes in the building.
But this time, after gas company officials and as many as 50 firefighters descended on the building, at 1010 President Street in Crown Heights, preparing once again to evacuate residents, there was no trace of the lethal fumes.


Speed Limits
New York, New Jersey and Connecticut are among eight states that have not raised their statewide speed limits above 55 miles per hour, despite motorists' tendencies to exceed it.
The average speed of motorists on the region's major highways is about 60 miles per hour.
There have been calls in all three states to raise the limit to 65 on rural stretches of Interstate highway or state highways built to Instate standards, as allowed under Federal law.
Last week, the New York State Senate approved legislation raising the speed limit.
If an agreement on a joint bill is reached with the Assembly, Gov.
Geroge E. Pataki is expected to sign it.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Dramatized Summaries Are Added to the Morike-Lieder  Hugo Wolf Society Merkin Concert Hall
A new Hugo Wolf Society is presenting the Morike-Lieder spread over two concerts.
With four singers, a pianist, a set and lighting, the first of these on Thursday was an elaborate affair, though one kept asking under one's breath whether music this good needed that much elaboration.
A carpet and a few chairs and tables set the stage; singers gave dramatized English summaries of the German texts before they sang.
All this was to the good.


Finances and Fear Spurring Hospitals To Drop Abortions
The obstetrics and gynecology clinics at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center aim to give poor women one-stop health care, from pap smears to parenting classes to contraceptive counseling.
They are widely considered a model of comprehensive medicine.
But there is one service that they do not generally provide: a conventional outpatient first-trimester abortion.
Slowly, quietly, over the last 10 years, almost all of New York City's full-service hospitals have backed out of the abortion business, driven away in part by economics and in part by fear.
Even as they are rapidly expanding their repertory of treatments in an era of managed care, they are no longer doing many elective terminations or training residents in the procedure and are referring patients elsewhere.


Major League Managers Are Making the Best of It
Baseball's managers are attracting much attention in the early days of baseball's ersatz spring training, not surprising since they and their coaches are the only legitimate connections to major league-caliber baseball having donned uniforms.
So it was easy to understand why one manager, Lou Piniella of the Seattle Mariners, turned a head or two the other day when he said that if he were at the bargaining table, he would have had the players' strike, now in its seventh month, solved long ago.


UMass Glad to Be Back To Business As Usual
This was once the type of game that pushed a forgotten basketball program to the top of the charts.
The University of Massachusetts would step out of the Atlantic 10, take on the world and make a splash.
But the world around the Minutemen has changed, and so has the UMass modus operandi.
A bold statement was not necessary this afternoon when the Minutemen defeated a young, outmanned group of Louisville Cardinals, 91-76, at the Centrum.


For Health Agency, a Fiscal Wake-Up Call
Few agencies have ever enjoyed stronger bipartisan support than the National Institutes of Health.
Indeed, Congress has lavished billions of tax dollars on the Government's biomedical research enterprise.
And until now, the main question was how best to spend more money.
But that has abruptly changed.
The health agency is receiving skeptical scrutiny from Republican members of the House determined to cut the Federal budget deficit.
This change is most evident in the House Appropriations subcommittee that earmarks money for the institutes, $11.3 billion this year.


Rangers Seek Calls And Goals
When last seen on hockey business, Neil Smith was angrily stalking the Forum corridors following Saturday night's 5-2 loss to the Canadiens.
Next, the president and general manager of the Rangers will take his wrath westward for a different sort of forum this week.
Instead of making the trip to Florida, where his team will play the Lightning on Monday night in St.
Petersburg and the Panthers on Tuesday night in Miami, Smith will go to Laguna Niguel, Calif., to meet with other National Hockey League general managers.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
After three days of intense negotiations, the United States is preparing to announce the details of its plan to bail Mexico out of its continuing currency crisis, including toughened restrictions that are likely to send interest rates in Mexico soaring.  [ Page A1. ] Two months after devaluation set off Mexico's current crisis, the shock waves are rippling south.
The Sao Paulo and Buenos Aires stock markets fell almost every trading day in February.  [ D1. ]


Gov. Whitman's Plan for Tax Cuts Dates Back to Last October
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert, in his Feb. 1 column, "The Shell Game," makes some untrue and insulting allegations in describing Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman and New Jersey's fiscal 1996 budget.
If there is any shell game going on here, it is Bob Herbert's decision to ignore the truth, especially when it disagrees with his point of view.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Barkley Paces Suns' Rally Over Jazz  Charles Barkley made 2 free throws for the last of his 35 points last night as the Phoenix Suns came from 7 points down in the final 2 1/2 minutes to defeat the visiting Utah Jazz, 110-107.
Kevin Johnson, who had missed 11 games because of a strained right quadriceps, started and scored 16 for the Suns. (AP)


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about an attack on the Well computer network before the arrest of a computer vandalism suspect overstated the damage done.
The attack did not destroy all accounting records for the on-line service; it erased all data from the file containing records of that day's connections.


Abroad at Home; Crime and Politics
The political centerpiece of the Republican crime legislation passed by the House is the proposal for $10.5 billion in grants for the states to build prisons.
The operative word is political.
Because there is a deep public fear of violent crime in this country, every politician wants to look "tough" on crime.
What better way than building more prisons to house violent criminals for longer sentences?


Frozen in Time, Cold War Kitsch; In Riverdale Bunker, Nuclear Readiness Survived Antsy Era
Jose Lourenco remembers how the three men arrived, without warning, to replenish the supplies in the basement: emergency water drums, phenobarbital tablets, carbohydrate supplements and, of course, the yellow radiation detector.
It was the Office of Civil Defense's last inspection, in 1968, shortly after Mr.
Lourenco had been hired as the superintendent of the Cornellian apartment building in Riverdale.
Several weeks ago, Mr.
Lourenco, now 53 years old, began throwing out the unused supplies.
Tiptoeing around abandoned baby carriages and antique air conditioners, the forgotten possessions common to all storage rooms, he had tossed out almost 100 nuclear war survival kits when a tenant protested.


Keeping Families Intact Is the Goal That Fuels a Social Worker's Day
He cannot console the girl whose mother is dying of AIDS, or promise the frightened young woman that her boyfriend will not hit her again.
He cannot replace the father who was murdered, or comfort a child late at night, when the gunfire starts.
But on a good day, Carlos Scott can offer a family hope.


With Paper Prices Soaring, Book Publishers Are Moving to Cut Corners
Thinner margins.
Smaller type.
Higher prices.
And to the dismay of those who love the decadent covers of romance novels, some of the glitter literally will be gone.
Such are just a few examples of how soaring paper prices are affecting the book-publishing industry.
After several years of depressed paper prices, the cost of book paper, like that of newsprint, has begun ratcheting up, leaving publishers scrambling to devise ways to make up for lost dollars.


Briton Is Tied to K.G.B.
A man who became leader of the Labor Party in the 1980's accepted payments from Soviet agents during the 1960's for a leftist newspaper he ran, a British newspaper said.
The Sunday Times said the K.G.B. considered Michael Foot, now 81, one of its "agents of influence" in Britain.


Turkish Gatekeepers
To the Editor:
As an American who lived in Turkey for four years, I read your Feb. 14 article on the bawabs of Cairo with special interest.
In Turkey there is a similar tradition, that of the kapicis, who are also an integral part of every apartment house in Turkey.


Tempering Troubled Waters
At a noisy time in an organization never known for its quiet understatement, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People has turned to a leader who has shown that her silences can be as powerful as any oratory.
When Myrlie Evers-Williams took her place before a restless crowd of supporters on Saturday night after a raucous day of chants, shouts and loud complaint, the packed ballroom fell quiet.
The newly elected board chairwoman of the rights organization calmly adjusted her wire-rimmed glasses and smiled.
Without a word, she raised her hands to her lips.
Then she blew the room a kiss.


Egypt Criticizes Israel on Nuclear Arms and Palestinian Talks
Egypt's Foreign Minister, Amr Moussa, said today that after 15 years of relative serenity in relations with Israel, "serious difficulties" had emerged.
At issue, he said, are Israel's nuclear weapons program and the "fragile and vulnerable" state of talks between Israel, the Palestinians, Syria and Lebanon.
In a wide-ranging conversation here, he said Arab countries would insist that Israel accept some restraints on its nuclear arms, because of concerns that "Israeli extremists" could come to power and be tempted to use them.


The Book on Fernandez Is Not Yet Finished
Someday, Tony Fernandez imagines he might write a book about his life in baseball.
Not just about his career in the major leagues but about a life that has been dedicated to baseball ever since he limped around the dusty fields of the Dominican Republic wishing he could dash like the other wannabe shortstops.
Fernandez as a shortstop is believable.
So believable to the Yankees that they signed him to a two-year, $3 million contract in December and have been hoping he and the other major leaguers return soon.
The signing put Derek Jeter's ascension from Class AAA on standby for at least one year and nudged aside Mike Gallego and Randy Velarde.
But Fernandez as an author?
A difficult sell for someone who admits he is a silent loner.
Still, he is serious.


Florida Derby Is Next on the Rocky Road to Kentucky
The five top finishers in the Fountain of Youth Stakes are all headed for the Florida Derby, where they will join heavy traffic from both the East and West Coasts on the much-traveled, totally unpredictable road to the Kentucky Derby.
The Derby will be run at Churchill Downs on May 6, and the lure of Louisville is drawing horses from all over the country, plus one commuter from Europe, Henry Cecil's colt Eltish.
Like the fabled Arazi, he has been there before: He flew the Atlantic last fall and ran second in the Breeders' Cup Juvenile.


Star Violinist Back After An Injury
Notes from the infirmary: Daniele Gatti, a rising Italian maestro who was to have starred in the New York Philharmonic's conductor-debut week, beginning last Thursday, had to cancel because of a shoulder injury.
But the violinist Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg returned to action for the first time since she sliced the little finger of her left hand late last year.
She played Barber's Concerto with the orchestra and its substitute conductor, Neeme Jarvi, who was not exactly a debutant.
Ms.
Salerno-Sonnenberg, it has been suggested, may be entering a stage of settled maturity, jolted to a new seriousness in part by her accident.
She looked her old self on Thursday, however, bobbing and weaving, mooning and grimacing.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7 PRICE OF A BAILOUT  The U.S. is preparing to announce details of its plan to help rescue Mexico from its currency crisis, including toughened restrictions that will most likely send interest rates in Mexico soaring.
A1  RESPITE IN AFGHANISTAN WAR  A 13-month siege of Kabul has ended with the city in ruins and much of Afghanistan in the hands of a new and mysterious force led by Muslim clerics known as the Taliban.
A1  WEDDING OF SERBIAN NATIONALIST  The paramilitary commander known as Arkan married Serbia's best-loved folk singer in a wedding that fused Serbia's nationalist harkening for a folkloric past and its embrace of the spoils of war.
A3  EGYPT CRITICIZES ISRAEL  Egypt's Foreign Minister says serious difficulties have emerged in his country's relations with Israel over its nuclear weapons program and the state of peace talks.
A3  CORRUPTION CASE HITS CHINA  A prominent steel company chairman and close friend of Deng Xiaoping has resigned and his son has been arrested for "certain commercial crimes," Chinese officials said.
A2  BRITON IS LINKED TO K.G.B.
A British newspaper reported that Michael Foot, the leader of the opposition Labor Party in the early 1980's, accepted payments from Soviet agents during the 1960's for a left-wing newspaper he ran.
A6  SOUTH AFRICA DEATH SQUAD TRIAL  In the new South Africa's first hard look at its recent past, a court is scheduled to begin the trial of the colonel who presided over a notorious police unit that fought the opponents of apartheid.
A7  New evidence is offered against a former Italian leader.
A6  Corofin Journal: Harsh memories of Ireland's potato famine.
A4 National A8-13 REPORT FAILS SCHOOLS  A national study says employers are rapidly losing confidence in the ability of the nation's schools to adequately prepare young people for the workplace.
A1  AND NOW, THE NEXT . . .
With the primary just a year away, contenders for the 1996 Republican Presidential nomination made early pitches to challenge President Clinton.
A1  'A RELUCTANT REBEL'  Woman in the News: Being "very vocal" is a familiar role for Myrlie Evers-Williams, but it was not always that way.
She was, in fact, a reluctant rebel at first.
A1  NEW FOCUS FOR N.A.A.C.P.
The N.A.A.C.P.'s new chairwoman, Myrlie Evers-Williams, struck a conciliatory note, hoping to take the focus away from the organization's internal problems and toward a new era of renewed relevance.
A10  RESEARCH FUNDS MAY BE REDUCED  After decades of strong support, the National Institutes of Health and its annual research budget of $11.3 billion are now being scrutinized by House Republicans looking to cut the Federal budget deficit.
A8  THE CONNOISSEURS OF COLD  Scientists who live and work at an observatory 6,288 feet above sea level call themselves weather junkies.
They crave extremes.
And when it comes to extreme winter, Mount Washington is the place to be.
A8  MORE TANGLING OVER NOMINEE  The Senate majority leader, Robert Dole, said the White House ought to withdraw the nomination of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. as Surgeon General, but the President gave no indication that he would.
A11  GINGRICH COURSE QUESTIONED  The House ethics committee is looking into a course being taught by Speaker Newt Gingrich after critics questioned the use of his House office and political contributions to set it up.
A12  GAY BLACKS PLEDGE FIGHT  Organizers of a weekend gathering of the National Black Lesbian and Gay Leadership Summit said they needed to work harder to counter the efforts of religious conservatives and the new Congress.
A13 Metro Digest B1 PEQUOTS ADJUST TO JACKPOT  The cash-raking phenomenon of Foxwoods Casino has given the Mashantucket Pequot tribe of Connecticut a rocket ride to a new world.
But it has its stresses, like cultural shock and racial tension.
A1  FULL SERVICE, BUT NOT ABORTION  Slowly, quietly, over the last 10 years, almost all New York City's full-service hospitals have backed out of the abortion business, driven away in part by economics and in part by fear.
A1  Sports C1-8  Auto Racing: Marlin holds off Earnhardt.
C1  Baseball: Jays spare Gaston.
C1  Managers work, and hope.
C4  Basketball: Knicks and Ewing top Rockets.
C1  Loss to cost Tar Heels No.1.
C2  UMass makes a statement.
C2  Columns: Vecsey on the tax.
C4  Araton on Riley.
C8  Skating: Another controversy.
C3  Sports People C8  Business Digest D1  Neediest Cases B2  Obituaries B8  Massimo Pallottino, an Italian archeologist.
Arts/Entertainment C9-16  "King Arthur" in France.
C9  Lawrence L. Langer's view of the Holocaust.
C9  Theater: "A Dybbuk." C9  Music: Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg and Neeme Jarvi.
C14  Slayer at Roseland.
C14  Books: A goal for Amerian education.
C15  Television: "Dance in America." B6  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  Microsoft back in the dock.
An investment worth saving.
Strengthening public housing.
Letters  William Safire: Cover-up triumphs.
Anthony Lewis: Crime and politics.
Harvey Ginsberg: Everyone owned a Lincoln.
John F. Heimerdinger: Help the blind?
Change the dollar.
Bridge B6 Chronicle B6 Crossword C16


A College Help Program That Faces the Budget Ax
YES, this is yet another story about budget cuts.
But it reveals something more about New York and its self-image, how it saw itself in more generous times and how it is beginning to redefine itself in a deficit-ridden, conservative-leaning America.
Twenty-six years ago, New York created a program to help needy, motivated students attend private colleges.
The Higher Education Opportunity Program, or H.E.O.P., is small, relatively inexpensive ($22 million out of a $32.4 billion state budget), and is one of the few such efforts that even critics of government largesse acknowledge is a success.
But $22 million is $22 million.
The program is headed for extinction in Gov.
George E. Pataki's budget.


Knicks Walk Off With Winning Review
Playing in New York, playing for Pat Riley and playing to win championships have forced the Knicks to cope with high expectations.
So in their first game after their coach described their attitude as "unprofessional," the Knicks played one of their best games of the season.


'King Arthur' Goes to Paris After 300 Years
When John Dryden and Henry Purcell joined forces to create "King Arthur" in 1691, they apparently had in mind a sort of patriotic divertimento, a play with music that glorified England and its monarchs but also provided a good dose of farce, magic, romance and dance to draw the crowds to London's Dorset Garden theater.
In time, though, "King Arthur" was best remembered as one of Purcell's semi-operas and was invariably performed in concert version only.
Now, on the occasion of the tercentenary of Purcell's death, a rare full production of the work has been mounted here.
And for once, Dryden, the dominant English playwright of his day, has not been forgotten.


INSIDE
Boy Shot by Bodega Clerk
A bodega clerk chasing robbers in the Bronx shot and killed a 15-year-old boy who the police said was not one of the robbers.
Page B1.
South African Police on Trial
The commander of a police unit accused of slaying apartheid's opponents goes on trial.
Page A6.


Connecticut Pounds B.C. And Remains Unbeaten
UConn 86, Boston College 34
Rebecca Lobo scored 18 points as No. 1 Connecticut stayed unbeaten with an 86-34 rout of Boston College yesterday in Storrs, Conn.


P.S.A.L. Playoff Pairings Set
Lincoln, Grady and Robeson -- all of Brooklyn -- were named the top three seeded teams as the Public Schools Athletic League basketball playoff pairings were announced yesterday.
Brooklyn led all the boroughs with six teams advancing to the A Division Sweet 16.
The other Brooklyn schools are New Utrecht, Erasmus Hall and Boys &amp; Girls.
Queens will be represented by four teams -- Edison, Newtown, Springfield Gardens and Cardozo.


Scholarly Call For Unclouded View Of the Holocaust
If life were, as Lawrence L. Langer contends, a tightrope stretched over an abyss, some would walk across watching treetops, the sun and clouds.
Others, including this scholar of the art and testimony born of the Holocaust, would tread the rope with lowered eyes, fixed on anguish, sorrow and the human capacity for cruelty.
"It seems to me you're ignoring half of reality, or maybe three-quarters, if you're only looking up," said Mr.
Langer, whose most recent book of essays has been acclaimed as a work of groundbreaking insight, a tour de force condemning a failure the author detects among students of the Holocaust to confront squarely the evil of Nazi Germany.


Soderstrom Bids for No. 1
It's a little early to anoint Tommy Soderstrom the Islanders' No. 1 goaltender.
But Saturday night's Nassau Coliseum crowd made its choice clear, showering the Swedish goalie with "Tommy! Tommy!" as he left the ice.
Afterward, when asked if Soderstrom had earned the regular job over Jamie McLennan, Islanders Coach Lorne Henning replied, "Whoever's hot is going to play."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Signed John Gibbons, outfielder, and Joe Cipolloni, catcher.


For N.A.A.C.P., Time to Pick Up the Pieces
Having won a close and contentious fight for the chairmanship of the N.A.A.C.P., Myrlie Evers-Williams set out yesterday on the far more difficult task of shifting the venerable group's focus from uncivil bickering to civil rights.
To that end, the widow of the slain civil rights leader Medgar Evers struck a conciliatory tone that she hopes will shift the focus from unseemly talk of financial misdeeds and sexual harassment toward an era of renewed relevance for the 86-year-old National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.


Blair Takes Another Title
Serenaded by 300 friends and family members ringing cowbells and singing "My Bonnie Lies Over the Ocean," Bonnie Blair won her second consecutive world sprint speed-skating championship today at the Pettit National Ice Center.
Blair swept all four races of the weekend, winning today's 500 meters in 39.54 seconds and the 1,000 meters in 1:19.52.
She also won both races on Saturday.


MEXICO IS FACING NEW RESTRICTIONS TO GET U.S. HELP
After three days of intense negotiations with top Mexican officials, the United States is preparing to announce details of a plan to bail the country out of a continuing currency crisis, including newly toughened restrictions that are likely to send already high Mexican interest rates soaring.
Details of the plan were still being negotiated here tonight between Secretary of the Treasury Robert E. Rubin and Mexico's Finance Minister, Guillermo Ortiz, who has been in Washington since Thursday.
A spokesman for Mr.
Rubin said that negotiators were making progress, but it was unclear whether any agreement would be concluded on Monday.


Book Links Former British Labor Party Chief to K.G.B.
A British newspaper reported today that Michael Foot, the leader of the opposition Labor Party in the early 1980's, had met with Soviet K.G.B. agents during the 1960's and accepted a series of cash payments for a left-wing newspaper he ran.
The report in The Sunday Times said that at the time the Soviet intelligence service considered Mr.
Foot, who is now 81 and retired from active politics, to be one its "agents of influence" in Britain.


Sports of The Times; Economics 101: Baseball Owners' Egos Would Ease the Luxury Tax
IT'S almost time for the baseball players to end this thing.
Time for them to proclaim: "The war is over. We won." They have outlasted the salary cap, and isn't that why they tipped over their water buckets and marched out of the coal mines last August?
The wonderful owners are no longer demanding an artificial salary ceiling for every club, and isn't that why those jokers killed the World Series?
Instead of fighting over a salary cap, the owners and the players are now fighting over something called a luxury tax.


Washington's Birthday
Washington's Birthday, which is Feb. 22, is being legally observed today.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Alternate-side street-cleaning regulations suspended.
SANITATION: No pickups, street cleanings or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and subways on Saturday schedule.
Long Island and Metro-North railroads on holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and trains on Saturday schedule.
CONNECTICUT GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on holiday schedule.


Bronx Teen-Ager Slain by a Bodega Clerk Firing at Robbers
After being held up for the second time in two weeks, a Bronx bodega clerk grabbed his unlicensed handgun Saturday night, tore after the robbers and shot at two people on the street.
But the police and witnesses said he opened fire on the wrong people, killing a 15-year-old boy.
Several witnesses told of seeing Sigfrido Pena, a 33-year-old Dominican immigrant, firing wildly after the fleeing robbers and then walking back into the store, ignoring Nelson Cordero, who lay bleeding in the arms of a friend who begged him, "Don't die on me."


In Performance; POP MUSIC
Hypnotic Sounds With Some Alterations  Sonic Boom Maxwell's, Hoboken, N.J.
Sonic Boom has a sound in his head.
It is hypnotic, ecstatic and timeless, as intangible as a hot summer mist and as vivid as a lucid dream.
When he performed with his band, Spectrum, on Wednesday night, Sonic Boom (whose real name is Pete Kember) tried to replicate that sound by altering and stretching material written by other people, whether it was lyrics by the Detroit pre-punk band MC5 ("Revolution") or music by the English art-rock band Red Crayola ("Transparent Radiation").
Only two of the feedback-drenched songs Spectrum played were from its entrancing new album, "Highs, Lows and Heavenly Blows" (Silvertone UK); most of the rest were recorded by Sonic Boom's former band, Spacemen 3.


CHRONICLE
The rock singer PHIL COLLINS can count on a big crowd for his concert in Jakarta, Indonesia, even if no one buys any tickets.
The Associated Press reports that about 5,000 security officers will safeguard Mr.
Collins's show next month, the first concert by a foreigner in Jakarta since one by the heavy-metal group Metallica ended in violence two years ago.


Television
THROUGHOUT NBC's challenge to the Fox network over ownership of its television stations, many NBC executives had described the action in the stark terms of right fighting wrong:
NBC was doing the right thing; Fox, whose growth had been aided by numerous waivers and favorable rulings by the Federal Communications Commission, had gotten away with enough; Rupert Murdoch, the chairman of Fox, had become a force in American television using questionable ethics and somebody of principle had to stand up to him.


This Week's Debt Sales
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week consists of the regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills tomorrow, two-year notes to be auctioned Wednesday and five-year notes on Thursday.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate was 5.68 percent on the outstanding three-month bill and 6.98 percent on the six-month issue.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was offered at a price to yield 7.04 percent and the five-year note at 7.31 percent.


Microsoft Back in the Dock
Judge Stanley Sporkin has every right to feel frustrated.
After four years of Federal investigation, the Justice Department and the Microsoft Corporation reached an antitrust settlement designed to end unfair, anticompetitive practices by the software giant.
But neither Judge Sporkin nor any other outsider has the foggiest idea whether the agreement is adequate or a mere wrist slap when stronger measures are needed.
We still don't know whether Microsoft for the most part competes fairly, in which case it is a crown jewel of the American economy, just the sort of technological and business success this nation badly needs to compete in world markets in the coming information age.
Or is Microsoft a predator that uses its market dominance to freeze out the superior products of competitors while insuring success for clunkier products of its own?


METRO DIGEST
TRIBE'S LAND IS RICH BUT UNEASY
Eight years ago, Joey Carter was chopping wood for a living, earning $5 an hour and living in a two-bedroom apartment he shared with seven other people.
He recalled his grandfather, Clifford Sebastian, a half-blood Mashantucket Pequot Indian who lived on a pig farm with no electricity or running water.
The grandfather would spit on the ground in bitterness every time he talked about the fate of the once proud Pequots.
But new Pequot stories are about sudden and astounding success.
The lives of Mr.
Carter and all other Pequots have been transformed by the booming, cash-raking phenomenon of Foxwoods Casino, the tribe's huge gambling development in the Ledyard woods of southeastern Connecticut.
A1.
HOSPITALS ARE SPURNING ABORTIONS
Slowly, quietly, over the last 10 years, almost all of New York City's full-service hospitals have backed out of the abortion business, driven away in part by economics and in part by fear.
Even as they are rapidly expanding their repertory of treatments in an era of managed care, they are no longer doing many elective terminations or training residents in the procedure and refer patients elsewhere.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY 4 IN S.I.
FAMILY SHOT TO DEATH
Four members of a Staten Island family died of gunshot wounds in a bloody quarrel that the police said followed years of disputes and numerous police visits to their quiet, working-class neighborhood of Arden Heights.
A 55-year-old Staten Island man surrendered to the police a few hours after the discovery of the bodies of his wife, his stepson and a man and woman believed to be his in-laws.
B3.
CHILD KILLED AND 2 HURT IN FIRE
On Saturday night, Catalina Figueroa sat with her granddaughters, 11-month-old Ashley and 6-year-old Shaina, and watched the video "Cinderella" before putting them to bed in their apartment in a Mott Haven housing project.
Hours later, Ashley Figueroa was dead and Shaina Perez and a friend of Mrs.
Figueroa's were in critical condition, victims of a fire that gutted the apartment.
B3.
MORE COMPLAIN OF ILLNESS FROM FUMES
Six people were taken to hospitals after complaining of nausea and dizziness that they said was caused by fumes in a Brooklyn apartment building, where two dozen residents were overcome on Thursday by poisonous carbon monoxide.
But investigators armed with carbon-monoxide detectors said they could find no trace of the lethal fumes.
B3.
COLLEGE-HELP PROGRAM FACES AX
Twenty-six years ago, New York created a program to help needy, motivated students attend private colleges.
The Higher Education Opportunity Program, or H.E.O.P., is small, relatively inexpensive ($22 million out of a $32.4 billion state budget), and is one of the few such efforts that even critics of government largesse acknowledge is a success.
But $22 million is $22 million.
The program is headed for extinction in Governor Pataki's budget.
B3.
KEEPING FAMILIES INTACT IS HIS GOAL
He cannot console the girl whose mother is dying of AIDS, or promise the frightened young woman that her boyfriend will not hit her again.
He cannot replace the father who was murdered, or comfort a child late at night, when the gunfire starts.
But on a good day, Carlos Scott can offer a family hope.
Mr.
Scott is a social worker at the Children's Aid Society, one of the largest social welfare agencies in New York and one of seven organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Although his field is preventive services, he fights problems that have plagued poor families for centuries: domestic violence, drug abuse, illness and emotional distress.
B2.
REGION PATAKI FACES A TOUGH CHOICE
In his search for a state environmental commissioner, Governor Pataki has found himself torn between two clashing interests that have long considered him an ally: business leaders and environmentalists.
Mr.
Pataki has said his ideal environmental commissioner would blend an understanding and respect for business with a strong sensitivity to conservation issues.
His ideal candidate, he said, would have worked in both areas.
B5.
Holiday schedule B3 Chronicle B6


The 2 Big Apparel Unions To Outline a Merger Today
The nation's two major apparel unions, formed from some of the same roots early in the 20th century yet often bitter rivals, are about to join forces.
The International Ladies Garment Workers Union and the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union -- both organized by Jewish socialists who emigrated from Eastern Europe and eventually helped define the American workplace -- are expected to announce merger plans today.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Recital Starts and Ends With 2 Kinds of Hard  Cecile Licad, pianist 92d Street Y
Cecile Licad began and ended her Wednesday night recital with two of the hardest pieces in the piano repertory.
They are hard for different reasons.
Ravel's "Gaspard de la Nuit," played after intermission, is a garden of virtuoso overgrowth, a tangle of bravura writing that only the best techniques dare approach.
Ms.
Licad was absolutely comfortable with all three movements.
"Ondine" had not only rich coloring but also weight; "Le Gibet" went along at a nice brisk tempo; the dreaded "Scarbo" was attacked with relish and confidence.
It was quite a show.


Dole Suggests Clinton Should Not Force Battle on Surgeon General Nominee
The battle over the choice of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. as Surgeon General took a divisive new turn today as the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, said President Clinton should withdraw the nomination if it becomes evident that he cannot win its confirmation.
The White House has already made clear that it intends to seek a Senate vote on Dr.
Foster, and Senator Dole's comments in a television interview this morning suggested that the Clinton Administration's strategy of painting Dr.
Foster's opponents as captives of the anti-abortion movement is proving discomfiting for Senate Republicans.


Mexican Bishop's Supporters Attacked


Founders Provided for Budget Amendment
To the Editor:
In "Would Federalists Like Their Fans?" (Week in Review, Feb. 12), David Lawsky maintains that James Madison and Alexander Hamilton would not be amused by the proposed balanced-budget amendment.
Well and good.
As a founder of The Federalist Society, I am well aware that amending the Constitution is serious business.
But Madison and Hamilton would be amused by Mr.
Lawsky's use of their words.


Another U.S. Champion Swirls in Controversy
Shortly after the 17-year-old Nicole Bobek won the national figure-skating title last weekend in Providence, R.I., one of her former coaches laughed and said: "We've just gone from Tonya Harding to Nicole Bobek. Oh my God."
What Frank Carroll didn't know at the time was Bobek had more in common with Harding than a taste for cigarettes and a distaste for practice.
As it turns out, Bobek has had her own, albeit less severe, run-in with the law.


Massimo Pallottino, 85, Expert On Ancient Etruscans, Is Dead
Massimo Pallottino, an Italian archeologist who was an authority on the Etruscans, died on Feb. 7 at his home in Rome.
He was 85.
The cause was a heart attack, The Associated Press reported.


The Ice Proves Treacherous
Thin ice is not a good place to be.
Generations of parents tell their children, but some learn the hard way.
Three Gloucester County girls fell through the ice Saturday while trying to walk across the frozen Washington Township Lake, the police said.
One managed to climb out and run for help.
A man jumped into the lake in a rescue attempt and was himself trapped under the ice.


Travel Agents Fight Back
Irate travel agents are organizing rallies and protest marches across the country in an attempt to force airlines to restore the traditional 10 percent commission on plane tickets, which the carriers revised two weeks ago.
Some agents have said that if the cap is not lifted, they will also try to steer customers to foreign carriers on lucrative international flights.


In Performance; DANCE
Hurtling, Balancing, Struggling Through Dangerous Realms  William Douglas Dance St.
Mark's Church
William Douglas Dance, a troupe from Montreal, explored dark corners of the imagination in the program it offered on Thursday night.


Officer Shoots Himself
An off-duty police officer shot himself with his 9-millimeter service pistol in his apartment in Queens on Saturday, the police said, but they said they were uncertain yesterday whether it was a suicide attempt or an accident.
The officer, Thomas Wrenn, 24, was in critical condition on life support at Elmhurst Hospital Center and was not expected to live, police officials said.


New Jersey Shows Links In Tax Levels Are Complex
Boiled down to its essentials, the criticism of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's tax cut plan goes like this: the less state revenue there is to share with towns and schools, the more the local property taxes must rise to make up the difference.
"Property taxpayers beware," reads the latest critique of the Governor's 1996 budget from the state's Democratic legislators, in which they spell out a cause-and-effect connection between lower state income taxes and higher local taxes.


Tribe's Promised Land Is Rich but Uneasy
Eight years ago, Joey Carter was chopping wood for a living, earning $5 an hour and living in a two-bedroom apartment he shared with seven other people.
He recalled his boyhood, growing up poor in Rhode Island, and his grandfather, Clifford Sebastian, a half-blood Mashantucket Pequot Indian who lived on a pig farm with no electricity or running water.
The grandfather would spit on the ground in bitterness every time he talked about the fate of the once proud Pequots.
Old stories rooted in the tribe's centuries-long decline into poverty and near extinction abound in Pequot country.
New Pequot stories are all about sudden and astounding success.
Mr.
Carter now owns a rock crushing business, valued -- he volunteers -- at $3.9 million.
On his office wall are blueprints for another private business under development for a nightclub restaurant.
His sister, Carrie, owns a masonry company that has done well, too, he said.


Japanese Deficit to Grow Sharply
After years in which it lectured Washington on the need to reduce the Federal budget deficit, Japan is now facing a Government deficit of its own that is by some measures larger than that of the United States.
The deficit is making it difficult to pay for the reconstruction from the devastating earthquake in Kobe last month, a job that will cost tens of billions of dollars and which will only strain Japan's finances further.
"The fiscal flexibility is so low now," lamented an official in the budget bureau of the Ministry of Finance.


Whitman to Talk on Schools
The state's school system will be the topic when Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman holds a "town meeting" on Thursday in the studio of the New Jersey Network.
Richard Reilly, the United States Secretary of Education, will join her for the 90-minute meeting, which will be televised starting at 7:30 P.M.


Teachers Still Hate Vouchers
A year ago, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman upset teachers when she said she wanted to experiment with private-school vouchers for students.
On Saturday, the state's largest teachers union said it still hates the idea.
Hundreds of teachers taking part in the New Jersey Education Association's legislative strategy session cheered speakers who opposed vouchers.


An Investment Worth Saving
The Senate Budget Committee staff has circulated a proposal to terminate American contributions to multilateral development banks.
It is a callous and shortsighted idea that should be disowned by the committee.
The United States contributes money to the United Nations Development Program -- which the proposal also threatens -- as well as several development banks, the most important of which is the World Bank.
Other recipients include the Africa, Asia and Inter-American development banks, which lend to poor countries for economic development.


A Simple Idea for Schools Turns Complicated
NATIONAL STANDARDS IN AMERICAN EDUCATION A Citizen's Guide  By Diane Ravitch  223 pages.
The Brookings Institution. $22.95.
A simple message lies at the heart of Diane Ravitch's useful new book, "National Standards in American Education: A Citizen's Guide." If clear and consistent goals of learning could be set for all American children, rich and poor, gifted and ordinary, then all of these children would end up better educated than they now are likely to be.


Rachid Mimouni; Algerian Novelist, 49
Rachid Mimouni, a prominent Algerian writer, died on Feb. 12 in a hospital in Paris.
He was 49 and had lived in Morocco for the last two years.
The cause was acute viral hepatitis, the British newspaper The Independent reported.


Mount Washington Journal; Relishing Ice, Fog and Brrr! Factor on a Mountain
At 11:30 A.M. the temperature was 7 degrees below zero; with the wind it felt more like 50 or 60 below.
Mark Parent, the meteorologist on duty at the Mount Washington Observatory here, had ice on his beard.
Taking the hourly measurements on the tower, he could not conceal his disappointment.
It was, he said, merely chilly.


Educators Divided on Course by Gingrich
David King teaches in what Newt Gingrich might consider the heart of the Evil Empire of liberal academia, the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard.
But after viewing videotapes of "Renewing American Civilization," Professor King says Mr.
Gingrich's course may not be to everyone's liking but is clearly more than a partisan screed.
"The course is not polished, it is repetitive, it's not muddled and it's not partisan," Professor King said.
"It touts conservative ideas, but those ideas are never explicitly linked to the Republican Party."


A Dance Tells the Tale Of Urban Vicissitudes
Dance is given a thrilling spin on tonight's "Great Performances" presentation of Garth Fagan's "Griot New York." The "Dance in America" production is a studio version of the choreographer's full-evening theater piece that has been winning the enthusiasm of international audiences.
The work represents an intense collaboration between Mr.
Fagan, the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis and the sculptor Martin Puryear.
This television version opens with a documentary taped during rehearsals in Rochester.
There is some pompous palaver about timeless concepts and the duality of metaphors, but what comes across most clearly in interviews with Mr.
Fagan and Mr.
Marsalis, who composed and arranged the jazz score, is the almost spiritual dedication involved.
The choreographer searches for "a brand new way of moving"; the musician, exploring the myriad urban sounds of Manhattan, fastens on "optimism in the face of destruction." A griot is, of course, a West African term for storyteller and memory-keeper.


Stocks Rise in Japan
Stocks were trading higher here this morning.
At midday, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 33.02 points, or 0.18 percent, at 18,053.53.
On Friday, the Nikkei rose 239.92 points, or 1.35 percent.


Corofin Journal; When the 'Hungry Fiend' Was Loose in Ireland
Patrick Stephens is a prosperous farmer most of whose ancestors emigrated to America from this stony-soil hamlet in western Ireland during the Great Famine of the 1840's.
Recently Mr.
Stephens showed off several tons of healthy potatoes in his shed, holding one in his hand.
Then he smiled and said that his family of six, plus a hired man, now eat about 90 pounds of them every week.
The 49-year-old farmer said this would be a good year for Irish potato farmers.
He has been busy with his crop, but he has also been spending some time studying the past as Ireland marks the 150th anniversary of the start of the potato famine that was the defining event in modern Irish history.


It Is a Twice-Told Tale As Marlin Wins Daytona
Whether the new Chevy Monte Carlos had an inherent edge over the Fords and Pontiacs today in the Daytona 500 did not matter as much as this: Sterling Marlin's Monte Carlo was faster than anything else speeding around the track.
Marlin became the first driver to win consecutive Daytona 500's since Cale Yarborough did it in 1983-84.
He held off a charging Dale Earnhardt to win by 0.61 seconds and earn $300,460.
The 37-year-old driver from Columbia, Tenn., led for 105 of the 200 laps, but that does not adequately reflect his domination today.
The only thing that stopped him was rain, which halted the race for 1 hour 44 minutes after 71 laps.


A Proposal to Roll Back a Change in Patent Law is Gaining Support, and Generating Debate.
HE may appear to be just another unassuming aide toiling anonymously in a cramped warren of the Rayburn House Office Building on Capitol Hill.
But Paul B. Crilly has fashioned himself as a savior of sorts for independent American inventors.
Dr.
Crilly, a professor of electrical engineering at the University of Tennessee, is spending a fellowship in the office of Representative Dana Rohrabacher, Republican of California.
Together, they have managed to generate enormous enthusiasm for an otherwise somnolent issue by casting it as nothing less than a quest to preserve that mythic figure, the independent American inventor.


Sports of The Times; Riley Sent a Message To a Particular Point
PAT RILEY wanted us to think he'd said more than he intended to say.
"You sucked me right in," the Knicks coach said after his team's 122-117 victory over Houston yesterday, which was if nothing else a professional effort against the defending champs and their newest star, Clyde Drexler.
Sure we did.
We took Riley into the bowels of Madison Square Garden, bound him to a chair, offered him drags on a cigarette, put a gun to his head, made him sing.
Made him explain why two days earlier he said his Knicks had "the most unprofessional attitude of a team that I've been around."


A Fickle Winter Is Friendly Again


A Bronx Fire Kills a Child And Leaves 2 Others Hurt
Weekday mornings, Catalina Figueroa would take her granddaughters, 11-month-old Ashley and 6-year-old Shaina, from their Mott Haven housing project in the Bronx to Shaina's school.
In the afternoons, she would make sure Shaina took her asthma medicine.
On Saturday night, she sat with them and watched the video "Cinderella" before putting them to bed in the apartment's shoebox of a bedroom.


In Performance; DANCE
Slowly, for 90 Minutes, Not Very Much Happens  Onafhankelijk Toneel New York Theater Workshop
Almost nothing happened, at an exceedingly slow pace, for 90 minutes on Wednesday night when Onafhankelijk Toneel presented "Nobody's Neighbor." Modern-day anomie was invoked as three women and two men, gathered in a large, unidentifiable room, talked and danced out cryptic messages about who they might be and why they might be in this unatmospheric place.


A Vision of the Dead
The body found last month in a trash bin behind a store was so badly burned that few could even imagine what its face looked like.
But Frank Bender could imagine; more than that, he is finishing a bust showing what he thinks the man looked like.
Mr.
Bender, who describes himself as a forensic sculptor, constructed the bust by studying the skull in his Philadelphia home.
The Burlington County Prosecutor's office said it expects to get the bust tomorrow and will immediately distribute pictures of it.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week: Monday  None Tuesday  Federal Budget Jan.
Wednesday  None  Thursday
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  Durable-Goods Orders Jan.


A Glimpse of Apartheid's Dying Sting
In February 1991, a human rights lawyer named Bheki Mlangeni received a package containing a tape player and a cassette marked "Evidence of hit squads."
Curious, he put on the headphones and pushed the play button.
Explosives hidden in the earpieces blew his head open.


Politicians Start Yearlong Siege of New Hampshire
In this make-or-break state for Presidential contenders, the battle for the 1996 Republican nomination broke out in earnest tonight as each of nine contenders made a case for who would be the best President.
The parade of candidates at a fund-raising dinner sponsored by the New Hampshire Republican Party afforded 1,400 party members here the first chance to assess the field of those who seek to replace Bill Clinton in the White House.


Markets Closed
Because of the observance of Washington's Birthday, financial markets in the United States will be closed today.
Most foreign markets will be open.


In Gingrich's College Course, Critics Find a Wealth of Ethical Concerns
The letter delivered to 1,000 college Republican chapters in May 1993 did not sound like a promotion for a typical academic course.
It began by noting with approval "the recent tribulations of the Clinton Administration," talked about the need for conservatives to define a future that would capture the imagination and votes of the American people and then said, "In that context, I am going to devote much of the next four years, starting this fall, to teaching a course entitled 'Renewing American Civilization.' "


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Recital Starts and Ends With 2 Kinds of Hard  Cecile Licad, pianist 92d Street Y
Cecile Licad began and ended her Wednesday night recital with two of the hardest pieces in the piano repertory.
They are hard for different reasons.
Ravel's "Gaspard de la Nuit," played after intermission, is a garden of virtuoso overgrowth, a tangle of bravura writing that only the best techniques dare approach.
Ms.
Licad was absolutely comfortable with all three movements.
"Ondine" had not only rich coloring but also weight; "Le Gibet" went along at a nice brisk tempo; the dreaded "Scarbo" was attacked with relish and confidence.
It was quite a show.


Leaders of Gay Blacks Emphasize Local Issues
Even as they speak of a national political movement to counter the new Congress, organizers who are black and gay often find the most challenging arena to be their own neighborhoods, where pastors fervently condemn homosexuality and youngsters seem beyond the reach of AIDS-prevention messages.
So what goes on in cities was as much discussed as what goes on in the House when some 350 people gathered here this weekend for a conference of national black lesbian and gay leaders.


Essay; Cover-Up Triumphs
Janet Reno's wrongheaded refusal to appoint an independent counsel in the Iraqgate scandal has just cost the U.S. taxpayer an additional $400 million.
She decided last week to make this huge payoff to Italy's Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, which used U.S. guarantees to finance Saddam Hussein's buildup in the late 80's.
Mr.
Clinton's Attorney General, who airily told us "I have no conflict on Iraqgate," made certain no impartial special prosecutor would disturb the Justice establishment.
She assigned her longtime Florida aide, John Hogan, to demonstrate that $5 billion of loans guaranteed by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture passed through an Atlanta branch of B.N.L. with the bank's Rome headquarters blissfully ignorant.


No Headline
"God, is the primary a week from now? I thought it was a year from now." -- PATRICK J. BUCHANAN, in New Hampshire for a Republican Party dinner.  [ A1:5. ]


A Mafia Witness Offers New Evidence Against Andreotti
A witness with an insider's knowledge of links between the Sicilian Mafia and Italian politicians has given prosecutors tantalizing new evidence against Giulio Andreotti, a former Prime Minister who has been under investigation for two years on suspicion of Mafia ties.
Testimony from the witness, a confessed Mafia member who served here as a city councilman from Mr.
Andreotti's Christian Democratic Party, led defense lawyers to seek and win another postponement on Friday -- the fourth in a year -- of a pre-trial hearing in the case.


Nets Stop Just Short of Falling to Sleep
Let the record reflect that the longest 12 minutes of Butch Beard's coaching career began with a traveling violation against Benoit Benjamin.
They ended with a poor pass by Kenny Anderson.
And it wasn't long after that the first-year coach formulated his opinion, calling his team's performance a "disgrace."
Two field goals.
Six turnovers.
Seven points.
A sum so small that it tied a franchise record for fewest points in a quarter.


4 in Staten Island Family Found Slain in Their Home
Four members of a Staten Island family died of gunshot wounds yesterday in a bloody quarrel that followed years of domestic disputes and numerous police visits to their quiet, working-class neighborhood, the police said.
A 56-year-old man surrendered yesterday to the 123d Precinct police a few hours after the discovery of the bodies of his wife, his stepson and a man and woman in their 60's who were believed to be his in-laws.


A Course on Politics, Or Partisanship 101?
Speaker Newt Gingrich says the televised college course he teaches each Saturday is not about partisanship, but he says the material in it will be essential for anyone who hopes to be involved in politics over the next several decades.


O'Bannon Has Come All the Way Back
He and Bernard King are from the same fraternity: Phi Anterior Cruciate.
On a cruel day five years ago, Ed O'Bannon was introduced to a pair of crutches, and not a lasagna dinner at home nor a muscle massage could soothe him.
He needed not one, but two knee operations, and at times, it took both his parents to pry him from a chair.
"Then, in the locker room one day, this random guy came and found me," O'Bannon said today.
"I was a cripple still, saying to myself, 'When is this going to end?' and he just handed me this basketball card. I looked; it was Bernard King's card.


Mexican Crisis Depressing Brazil and Argentina Stocks
Two months after the start of Mexico's financial crisis, the shock waves are rippling south, depressing stock markets in Latin America's two other major economies -- Brazil and Argentina.
Despite rallies Friday, the markets in Sao Paulo and Buenos Aires fell almost every trading day in February.
Since Dec. 20, the day the Mexican crisis broke, Sao Paulo's Bovespa index has dropped 34 percent and Buenos Aires's Merval index has dropped 37 percent.


Critics of Standards Need History Lesson
To the Editor:
As a member of the council that oversaw the preparation of the National History Standards, I was heartened by your sensible editorial (Feb. 13) weighing their major virtues and minor shortcomings.


Uta Graf, 80, Singer And Voice Teacher
Uta Graf, a German-born soprano and teacher, died on Friday at the Nathaniel Witherill nursing home in Greenwich, Conn.
She was 80 and had lived mainly in New York City after coming to the United States in 1948.
She had a long illness, said her daughter, Angele A. Elliott-Smith.


Remembering Iwo Jima


Strengthening Public Housing
In much of the country, what began as decent public housing for the working poor has degenerated into dumping grounds for troubled families.
Federal regulations discriminate against letting in poor people who work while favoring the desperately poor and long-term unemployed.
New York's public housing is well kept and orderly compared to harrowing places like Chicago's Robert Taylor Homes, but it, too, has suffered.
So Ruben Franco, chairman of the New York City Housing Authority, is wisely taking steps to preserve New York's standing.
Last month Mr.
Franco unveiled an ambitious plan to persuade police officers to move into public housing in exchange for career incentives.
Now Mr.
Franco says the Housing Authority will give preference to the working poor over welfare recipients in filling vacancies.


Talking to the Dead, Yearning for Answers
Seventy-four years after its first production, "A Dybbuk," S. Ansky's tale of supernatural possession in a 19th-century Polish village, still haunts the imagination with the fierce tenacity of the homeless spirit of its title.
And really, who would have thought it?
The only completed drama by a man known chiefly as an ethnologist, and created from the whole cloth of Hasidic folk tales, it would seem to belong more to the realm of sociology than theater.
It is filled with elaborate dialectics about the Torah, apocryphal tales of rabbis' powers and painstaking analyses of numerology from the cabala.


Death Penalty Sought in Killing
Prosecutors say they will seek the death penalty against the man accused of fatally shooting a Newark police officer in the Essex County Courthouse in 1993.


Simpson Case Gives Cable An Edge on the Networks
While jurors and trial watchers ponder the DNA factor in the O. J. Simpson trial, it's the CNN factor that is worrying people inside the news divisions of the three major television networks.
A news story as big and juicy as Mr.
Simpson's murder trial would once have attracted huge audiences to the networks' evening news programs.
But in the age of CNN, which is available in about two-thirds of the nation's households, the Simpson trial has done the opposite: it has taken viewers away from the newscasts, reducing their weeknight audiences as much as 10 percent.
While specifics are hard to come by, those audience losses, if sustained for a few months, could cost the networks hundreds of thousands of dollars a week.
When a big story breaks -- or unfolds, as with the Simpson trial -- Americans need not wait to get home and hear a brief account of it from Tom Brokaw, Peter Jennings or Dan Rather and Connie Chung.
Instead, they can flip to CNN at their convenience for the latest -- often live -- coverage.
And they can do so from offices, hotels or airport lounges.
The Simpson case is the most dramatic, and melodramatic, example of this phenomenon to date.
Because the trial is taking place in Los Angeles, live coverage on CNN and Court TV continues well into the evening in the East and Midwest -- often as late as 8 P.M., but certainly through the network news time slots.
And the fact that a trial is a continuing defined event makes it easy to know when to tune in.
With other kinds of dominant news events -- a foreign war, an earthquake or other disaster -- viewers might be better served by the summing-up coverage offered in a scheduled newscast.
"You just have to look at CNN's ratings and Court TV's ratings," said Andrew Lack, president of NBC News, "especially in the 5 to 7 P.M. Eastern time period, and the correlation is so strikingly clear: O. J. is the only explanation."
CNN's afternoon ratings for the first three weeks of the Simpson trial coverage were 5.1, 5.6 and 6.3 -- far above its 0.7 average for that time period.
And the ratings for Court TV were even higher -- as much as double those of CNN in the 20 million homes that receive both CNN and Court TV.
At the same time, the evening news ratings for ABC, CBS and NBC have declined, collectively, nearly two ratings points from the period in 1994, to an average of 9.4 from 11.3 last year.
CNN's ratings do not directly compare with the networks' because CNN is available in about 64 million homes, while all three main networks reach about 95 million homes.
A CNN rating point represents 658,000 households, while a Court TV rating point equals 200,000 households.
A network rating point represents 954,000 households.
The Simpson trial has aggravated an overall decline in the network nightly news ratings.
The collective audience for network news has shrunk from a 77 share in 1979-80 -- that is, network news was on 77 percent of all sets that were tuned to something -- to a 58 share last season and a 54 so far this season.
That shrinkage is costly.
In the last year, the three networks have each added a minute of commercial time to their nightly newscasts to make up some revenue.
But it is too early to tell how costly the Simpson-related defections will be.
Generally, advertisers buy commercial time in news packages that include the evening news and morning shows like "Today" or "Good Morning America" and prime-time news programs like "Dateline" or "20/20." So as the year progresses, the ratings for these packages may recover enough so that the networks meet their minimum-ratings guarantees to advertisers.
"Still," Mr.
Lack of NBC said, "if this trial goes on for four or five months and the audience for it remains undiminished, we'll take a significant economic hit."
A media buyer with many clients who advertise on news programs, speaking on condition of anonymity, said: "I think people will get tired of this trial as it drags on. But if audiences stay down or erode further, and the trial lasts until mid-May or June 1, it could cost a network $1 million or more per week."
David F. Poltrack, executive vice president for planning and research at CBS, said, "Even after accounting for the normal pattern of erosion we've been seeing, the network news audiences are down about 10 percent since the O. J. Simpson trial began" on Jan. 24.
The trial also provides daily fodder for tabloid television, talk shows and local newscasts, as well as radio programs -- all potential competition for the network newscasts.
"It's a relatively recent phenomenon of our business that people have so many choices at any given time," said Mr.
Brokaw, the anchor and managing editor for the NBC Nightly News.
"I sometimes say, in not entirely mock frustration, that when I started out in the 1960's, there were effectively two network news programs, and at 6:30 P.M. people turned on either Huntley-Brinkley or Walter Cronkite and got their news for the day. And I'd like to have that back again."
The networks will never regain such a near-monopoly.
But not all agree that the Simpson trial will accelerate the long-term erosion of the network news audience.
"The O. J. trial is unique in terms of the huge interest in it and the availability of live coverage on a regular schedule," said Lane Venardos, a vice president for news and special events at CBS.
"Those two streams converged to make this a larger-than-life event, and I don't think we'll see that again soon."
Mr.
Lack seems to agree.
"Last year, when we had the L.A. earthquake, for example, CNN's ratings didn't spike up the way they have for O. J.," he said.
"Most people still tuned in to us at night to get the major news coverage."
This time last year, intense interest was focused on the assault on the Olympic figure skater Nancy Kerrigan by men said to have been commissioned by her rival Tonya Harding.
"With the Nancy-Tonya story, people couldn't get any better or more coverage from CNN than they could get on the network news," Mr.
Poltrack said.
"But a lot of people would rather watch O. J. itself live, instead of the network news account of it later."
Indeed, figures from CNN show that Simpson-related events have been the highest-rated programs on cable television in the last 14 months excluding National Football League games.
Mr.
Venardos of CBS said the network news divisions had offered extended live coverage of the 1989 and 1994 California earthquakes and of the Persian Gulf war.
They also covered the opening statements in the Simpson trial live and will presumably televise the closing statements and the verdict.
"Any time there's a big enough event, we can break in and go live," Mr.
Venardos said.
"CNN does not have the franchise on live coverage of news events."
But CNN, which will celebrate its 15th birthday in June, does not have to worry about pre-empting lucrative entertainment programming.
A broadcast network loses money whenever it bumps afternoon soap operas or prime-time shows to cover news live.
The same big news story can earn extra money for CNN because its ratings go up.
Mr.
Brokaw cautioned those who would conclude that the cable ratings for the Simpson trial were an omen of future decline for network news audiences, because of this story's "soap opera quality."
"In most instances," he said, "a big story will take away from us for 24 hours or so, and then the country gets back to normal."


Wounded Goose Tastes Freedom
"All his friends are around him, and he's going to be fine." That was the word from an animal control officer, John DeCando, as he released a Canada goose back into the wild, or at least back into a city park.


By Any Name, Is It Garbage?
It is true that newspapers have been insulted forever.
Birdcage liner.
Fish wrap.
That kind of thing.
But Judge Don Gladstone of the Municipal Court in Sparks, Nev., could earn a place in the antimedia hall of fame with a recent ruling.
He made a formal determination that the local paper in Sparks qualified as "garbage, rubbish or waste" under the law.
It seems that a Mr.
Donald Glock, a resident of Sparks, which is on the outskirts of Reno, had made it clear that he did not want The Daily Sparks Tribune left on his driveway, either by the neighborhood 12-year-old newspaper carrier or anyone else.
The 7,000-circulation paper, like many other publications, sometimes gives out free copies to attract subscribers.
This promotional tactic definitely did not work with Mr.
Glock.
He filed a criminal complaint.
According to legal documents, "Mr. Glock received three (3) unsolicited newspapers on his driveway between May 2, 1994 and Nov. 17, 1994."
The City Attorney pursued the case under section 7.08.040 of the Sparks municipal code, which declares it unlawful to "deposit, or cause to be deposited, any garbage, rubbish or waste" within the city limits.
After a trial, Judge Gladstone found the paper guilty and fined it $1,000 plus $100 in costs.
Randy C. Frisch, president of the Sparks Tribune Publishing Company, the newspaper's parent, filed an appeal in January arguing First Amendment protection to distribute newspapers.
The Nevada Press Association has filed a friend-of-the-court brief in support of Sparks Tribune.
Publishers in several states have resisted littering laws that aimed to free homeowners from the annoyance of unwanted newspaper deliveries.
But in the Sparks case, the constitutional battle seems to be quite personal.
Mr. Frisch said Judge Gladstone was biased.
Why?
"Because I have spent six years writing editorials about how incompetent the judge is," Mr.
Frisch explained.
Judge Gladstone said he decided each case on its legal merits and would not respond to Mr.
Frisch.
But he hinted that the publisher simply resented his independence.
"I work for the City of Sparks," Judge Gladstone said.
"I do not work for a newspaper or any other group."
Despite the heat of the dispute, however, Mr.
Frisch insisted that he was not insulted by the legal interpretation that his newspaper could be described as garbage.
"You have to have respect for the interpreter before you can be insulted," he said.


13 Grenades Found In an Empty Bodega
Workers renovating an empty bodega in the Bronx presented the police with an unusual mystery yesterday: Who stashed 13 grenades in a refrigerator and inside the walls of the store?
The discovery brought the Bomb Squad and Emergency Service units to the scene and prompted the police to evacuate about 35 people from the five-story brick building housing the bodega at 914 Hoe Avenue, at East 163d Street in Hunts Point.


Immature Immune Cells May Sustain Brunt of H.I.V. Attack
AS exhaustively studied as AIDS is by thousands of researchers around the world, the mysteries surrounding this most insidious of diseases are so great that there is always room for another radical new paradigm to explain its features.
Declaring that their work could force a re-evaluation of many current laboratory and clinical studies of AIDS, researchers at the Stanford University School of Medicine have announced that the population of the body's immune cells most devastated by the human immunodeficiency virus is not the familiar CD4 cells, the helper T cells, as scientists have long believed, but rather a group of powerful if poorly understood cells called naive T cells.


Hopes for Peace in a Russian Region Are Dimmer


French Boat Loses Its Keel
Calamity struck the French America's Cup team today about an hour after racing ended off San Diego.
During a practice session eight miles off shore, the keel abruptly fell from the bottom of the 75-foot training yacht, France 2.
None of the crew was injured, said Barbara Barrielle, spokeswoman for the Defi France syndicate.
The dark-blue hull was left floating on its side.
The yacht's keel, along with its 40,000-pound lead ballast bulb, had sunk to the bottom.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL A Title for Manhattan
Jason Hoover scored all 12 of his points in the second half -- including Manhattan's final 5 points over the last 29 seconds -- to help the Jaspers defeat Fairfield, 65-56, last night and clinch the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference regular-season title.


Rates Up Sharply In Mexico
Responding to pressure from the United States, Mexico's central bank said today that it was raising already high short-term interest rates a further 10 percentage points, pushing the rate on some Government debts to 50 percent.
United States officials have insisted that Mexico tighten its credit substantially and reduce its money supply as part of the conditions of $20 billion in American assistance proposed by the Clinton Administration.


We Must Keep Commitment to Clean Air Act
To the Editor:
"Texas Joins Parade of States Colliding With Clean Air Act" (front page, Feb. 14), which reports that motorists have been resisting automobile emissions inspection programs, paints a sad but true picture of dwindling clean air programs around the United States.


The Pitfalls of a Balanced Budget
The unemployment rate, which peaked at 7.7 percent after the last recession, could have reached 9 percent if a balanced budget had been required, Government and private economists estimate.
And a laid-off worker who collected $12,000 in unemployment pay might have received only $7,000 or so.
Such estimates of the potential economic impact are not emphasized very much, however, in the debate over the balanced budget amendment.
So far, the battle has focused on its value as a tool to shrink government or to discipline spending.
But if the amendment is enacted, the side effect would be huge: a system that has softened recessions since the 1930's would be dismantled.


GORE SAYS CLINTON WILL MOVE TO HELP STRIKING WORKERS
Vice President Al Gore told labor leaders today that President Clinton would soon issue an executive order whose goal is to stop Government agencies from contracting to make purchases from companies that permanently replace workers on strike.
But the order would not be an outright ban on such contracts.
Mr.
Gore's announcement, made behind closed doors at the winter meeting of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s executive council, was quickly made public by a labor federation spokesman and Administration officials.
The Vice President's appearance was part of a Democratic effort to improve relations with organized labor.


Calder Willingham Is Dead; Novelist and Screenwriter, 72
Calder Willingham, the novelist and screenwriter whose first book, "End as a Man," made him a literary star at 24, died on Sunday at the Lakes Region General Hospital in Laconia, N.H.
He was 72 and lived in New Hampton, N.H.
The cause was lung cancer, said his son Tom.


For Washington, a Happy 263d


Anti-Crime Bill as Political Dispute: President and G.O.P. Define the Issue


Review/Fashion; The Calm Before the Fall: Function Without Drama
"This is prefall, the base of what you'll see in April without the razzmatazz," Isaac Mizrahi said before showing his minicollection last week.
That sentiment pretty much summed up the season that has come to be known as prefall, when designers show clothes that will hit the stores in June for those customers who just can't wait until September to buy new fall clothes.
As opposed to the runway shows set for next month in Milan, Italy, and in Paris, or the shows scheduled for April in New York, whose real purpose is to drum up excitement in the press, these prefall shows are aimed at store buyers.
Their purpose is to sell garments, so they tend to be long on wearable styles and short on drama.


Peacetime Vision for the Presidio in Jeopardy
In the 219 years that the Presidio has been a military garrison, the guardian of the Golden Gate has never once fired a shot in its defense.
But now the old Army post, having ended up as an odd child of the National Park Service, is in for the fight of its life.
Billed last year as a model for a new kind of national urban park, the 1,480-acre site in the beautiful northwest corner of San Francisco has turned into a crisis for the Park Service and an anchor of debt.


Neighborhood Tests Students' Courage
"I don't think you could get a more challenging neighborhood for a school child to have to deal with," said Margo Spielberg, the principal of Junior High School 263, a squat brick building in Brownsville, Brooklyn, surrounded by some of the city's most troubled housing projects and violent and perilous streets.
But day after day, imperfect morning after imperfect morning, hundreds of students, by whatever means necessary, come up with the required courage.
Article, page B3.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the scarcity of abortion services at many New York City hospitals misspelled the given name of the dean of the School of Public Health at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in some editions.
He is Allan Rosenfield, not Alan.


Islanders' Big Effort Spoiled by a Fluke Overtime Goal
After playing one of their best games of the season and coming from behind to force overtime, the Islanders lost tonight by 3-2 to the Montreal Canadiens in a thriller at the Forum.
The winning goal was scored by Donald Brashear on a fluke play after 1 minute 54 seconds of extra time.


The Talk of Hollywood; The Name Costner Acquires a Question Mark
For a while, Kevin Costner could do no wrong.
Along with Tom Cruise, Harrison Ford, Arnold Schwarzenegger and a handful of others, Mr.
Costner was a star with the box-office clout to "open" a picture, that is, to lure big audiences on a movie's first, all-important weekend.
Whether it was "Dances With Wolves" in 1990 -- which won the Academy Award for best picture, and for which he won the Oscar for best director -- or "Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves" in 1991 or "The Bodyguard" in 1992, his name on the marquee guaranteed success.


Topics of The Times; Gay-Bashing by Senator Helms
Senator Jesse Helms has introduced legislation that would threaten the ability of gay and lesbian employees of the Federal Government to form employee associations.
The broadly worded measure would bar the spending of Federal money to promote or carry out any program for Federal workers that somehow encourages the acceptance of homosexuality "as a legitimate and normal lifestyle."
According to the North Carolina Republican, the bill is an attempt to roll back "special rights" granted to homosexuals by the Clinton Administration.
But Mr.
Helms does not specify what those special rights are, and for a very good reason: they are a figment of his imagination.
Far from removing "special rights," the Helms bill, if enacted, could deny homosexuals the same use of meeting rooms and bulletin boards for posting notices routinely enjoyed by other employee groups, including black or Hispanic employee organizations, and clubs like Weight Watchers.


Patterns
Ghost Becomes a Tentbuster
The British designer Tanya Sarne will not be showing her Ghost collection in the Bryant Park tents in April, after two seasons in which it was one of the most sought-after tickets.


Epson Narrows Review to 5 Agencies
Epson America, the marketer of computers and printers in Torrance, Calif., has narrowed the review on its North American account to 5 agencies from 10.
The account, with billings estimated at $25 million, had been at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in San Francisco for the last 11 years until it was shifted last month to that agency's FCB Technology division in San Francisco.


Controversy Over a Wiretap Ruffles French Ruling Party
The campaign of the front-runner in this spring's French presidential election, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, suffered a heavy blow tonight when a wiretap order he had authorized in one of the many corruption cases plaguing his party blew up in his face.
Mr.
Balladur had vigorously defended the wiretap order in an appearance on television on Sunday night.


CHRONICLE
The conductor KENT NAGANO, who spends most of his time in Europe, is taking advantage of a home visit to his native California to organize a benefit for the victims of last month's earthquake in Japan.
Mr.
Nagano, who is the music director of the Opera of Lyons, in France; associate principal guest conductor of the London Symphony, and music director and principal conductor-designate of the Halle Orchestra in England, will be a host for a concert on Feb. 24 at the Palace of Fine Arts Theater in San Francisco, featuring the Berkeley Symphony Orchestra and the San Francisco Taiko Dojo Drummers.


A Detective Could Become An Issue at Simpson Trial
Sometime this week in the O. J. Simpson murder trial, a tough, straight-talking police detective, Mark Fuhrman, will be called to testify about how he found a single bloody glove behind Mr.
Simpson's Brentwood home.
The glove is considered crucial evidence because prosecutors say it matches one found near the bodies of Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend Ronald L. Goldman.
In the minds of some, however, Mr.
Fuhrman himself will be on trial, depicted by defense lawyers as a racist rogue cop who may have tampered with or planted evidence to frame an innocent man.


Baruch's 5-Foot-4-Inch Smith Is One Athlete to Look Up To
Never mind that the nation's leading rebounder in any college division -- 23.7 a game -- stands only 5 feet 4 inches tall.
Or that the player is 34 years old.
The remarkable thing is that the player shows up for the game at all, since the player never practices with the team and almost never manages to get to the game in time to warm up.
Too busy.
The player, though, is no prima donna, in the colloquial sense, though, in fact, she is a donna, and supremely prima, at that.


Investors Having Second Thoughts on Hungary
Hungary, once the lustrous pioneer in attracting Western investment to Eastern Europe, is losing its glamour as a result of the ambivalent policies of a coalition Government led by former Communists.
Analysts and investors point most recently to the cancellation of a big American hotel deal because of the personal intervention of Prime Minister Gyula Horn and the resulting resignation two weeks ago of the country's internationally respected Finance Minister, Laszlo Bekesi.
He is being replaced by Lajos Bokros, chairman of the state-owned Budapest Bank, the nation's sixth largest.


Treatment for Manley
The former Washington Redskin defensive end DEXTER MANLEY appeared headed for a psychiatric hospital after three drug arrests in four months.
Manley's arraignment, scheduled for yesterday in a Houston court, was postponed until March 3 so his attorney could prepare a petition for an involuntary psychiatric commitment to a county hospital.
"He's going to have to have the extra assistance to get and keep him on track," said PAULA ASHER, Manley's attorney.


SOCCER REPORT
Women's World Cup
The United States women's team will have a difficult time defending the title it captured in the first World Cup four years ago in China when it outscored it opponents by 25-5.
When FIFA held the draw for the 12 finalists last Saturday in Sweden, where the event will be held June 5-18, the Americans were drawn in a first-round group with China, Denmark and Australia.


A New Chance for the N.A.A.C.P.
For an organization with a central role in America's unfinished journey toward racial equality, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People has been frighteningly close to collapse.
The election of Myrlie Evers-Williams as chairman vouches that the N.A.A.C.P. is ready for its own journey back from the brink.
Mrs.
Evers-Williams's challenges are formidable, but she has several advantages.
One is her deep personal tie to a civil rights group whose history is its most sacred asset.
She is the widow of Medgar Evers, a truly heroic figure in the Southern civil rights movement.
She worked at her husband's side in that lonely and dangerous outpost of justice, the Jackson, Miss., field office of the N.A.A.C.P.
After Mr.
Evers's murder in 1963, she never flagged in a 31-year crusade to put his killer in jail.


A Machine That Bridges 2 Worlds
FOR the young Macintosh enthusiast, it was agony.
He had access to a Mac Quadra computer with a CD-ROM drive, but a relative had given him two tantalizing Windows CD-ROM programs, "Monty Python's Complete Waste of Time" and "Wing Commander III."
Spending $2,000 or more for a Windows multimedia computer just to run the games was out of the question, given the pittance he received each week for his allowance.
And Dad's Windows machine had been off limits ever since the young man replaced all of its boring system sounds with an assortment of belches, sneezes, screams and other rude noises.


Will soda buyers be building their own boys in bottles? And has Chrysler asked enough questions?
YES indeed, it's time again to ask 20 questions about advertising, marketing and the media.
*Did anyone involved in creating a print campaign for Capri cigarettes consider that the theme -- "She's gone to Capri and she's not coming back" -- would evoke thoughts about smokers who contract lung cancer?


Casablanca Journal; Jokes From Underground Keep Morocco Laughing
Ahmed Sanoussi paced his cluttered living room and waved his black razor in the air about as often as he employed it to clean the white shaving cream from his face.
"Dictators detest political satire," he said.
"They cannot laugh and they cannot bear to have anyone else laugh at their pomposity, their arrogance and their power. But humor helps us cope. Humor is the tip of tragedy. Now the Government wants to deny us the right to laugh and plunge us into even deeper despair."


The Bosnia Follies Roll On
Despite Administration rhetoric about backing diplomacy with a credible threat of force, the U.S. and its allies are doing exactly the opposite in Bosnia.
In recent weeks, direct talks with the Bosnian Serbs have failed to induce them to accept the map of a future Bosnia drafted by the five-country "contact group." So much for the U.N. resolution prohibiting states from political talks with the Bosnian Serb leaders as long as they reject the settlement plan!


Outboard Marine Gets New Chief
The Outboard Marine Corporation replaced its chairman, chief executive and president today, abruptly ending James C. Chapman's tumultuous five year's at Outboard's helm.
Succeeding Mr.
Chapman is Harry W. Bowman, a top Whirlpool Corporation executive with a strong marketing background.


Fossil Find May Show If Prehuman Walked
WHEN Dr.
Tim D. White returned to the fossil fields of Ethiopia last November, he was not looking for just any old bones.
He wanted -- needed -- to find the feet, legs, knees and pelvic bones of what is thought to be the earliest known human ancestor.
Only then could he answer the pressing question: did this 4.4-million-year-old ancestor walk upright?
The answer should help resolve a simmering debate among scholars over the place on the early human family tree of the recently discovered Australopithecus ramidus, if it belongs there at all.
At the announcement of the discovery last year, enthusiastic scientists hailed the new fossil specimens as evidence of a long-sought missing link, a creature who lived close to the split between human and chimpanzee lineages.
They agreed that this must represent at least a new species, and perhaps a whole new genus, which is the more inclusive classification of life.


For Panhandlers, the Truth Is a Start
Been wondering how the panhandlers around town got that way, whether their pitches resemble the truth, how much they make, where they bed down?
Such questions are raised if not laid to rest by "The Begging Game," a look at several people who work the sidewalks of New York.
These are among the findings:


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about Colin Ferguson's plan to appeal his conviction in the Long Island Rail Road killings misstated the given name of a Hofstra University Law Professor in some editions.
The professor, who discussed the chances for a successful appeal, is Leon Friedman, not Lawrence.


First Five for Track Hall
A New York City Track and Field Hall of Fame has been created to honor outstanding athletes who attended high schools in the city.
With the support of Chase Manhattan, the hall will be housed at the Armory Track and Field Center on 168th Street in Manhattan.
The five charter members include three from Queens high schools: Bob Beamon of Jamaica High and Texas-El Paso, who held the world long-jump record of 29 feet 2 1/2 inches from 1968 to 1991; Mae Faggs of Bayside and Tennessee State, who ran on three Olympic teams; and Tom Farrell of Archbishop Molloy and St.
John's, the 1968 Olympic 800-meter bronze medalist.


Will the Joffrey Ballet Leave New York?
Say "Joffrey Ballet" to New York dancegoers, and you're likely to hear a flood of happy recollections.
But future balletomanes may not grow up with the feisty little company and its vital repertory of 20th-century classics.
For it looks increasingly as if the Joffrey may move to Chicago this year.
No one at the Joffrey Ballet will say more than that there are continuing negotiations.
But there has been speculation about a possible move for several months as well as published reports recently about the likelihood of a move to Chicago.
Daniel Duell, the director of Ballet Chicago, confirmed yesterday that "we continue to be in negotiations and remain optimistic" about a merger.


Skilled Asians Leaving U.S. For High-Tech Jobs at Home
Twenty-five years after coming to the United States from Taiwan, David Chiang had all the trappings of the American dream: a job as a jet engine engineer, three happy children and a home in the suburbs with a station wagon in the driveway.
But for all his achievements, he felt as if he was in a rut -- one of hundreds of engineers at General Electric Aircraft Engines vying for the few promotions that would pop up every now and then.


Some Hugs for Rutgers Chief
New Jersey college presidents adopted a resolution yesterday denouncing the idea of race-based genetic differences in intellectual ability -- the idea that got the president of Rutgers University in trouble.
Then they made it clear that they believe the Rutgers president, Francis L. Lawrence, who says he did not mean to say that.


Political Memo; A Budget Flap Brings Whitman (Rare) Criticism
Christine Todd Whitman has always been proud of the way she bucked New Jersey's ingrown political establishment to win the governorship.
And once in office, she created an inner circle of friends and technocrats, with few old political hands to guide her.
These days, some Republicans in the legislative majority are saying privately that a cynical old politician or two in Mrs.
Whitman's inner circle might have spared Mrs.
Whitman some criticism over parts of her recent budget proposal.


Israeli Leftists Now Feel Frustration With Rabin
When the leaders of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization shook hands at the White House in September 1993, the Israeli left was euphoric.
After years of wandering in Israel's political wilderness, the leftists thought that their agenda was about to be realized.
The Government recognized the P.L.O., declared its readiness for territorial compromise in the Gaza Strip and West Bank and accepted the concept that Palestinians would govern themselves.
No doubt there would be more to come, many thought, including a dismantling of Israeli settlements in the territories and -- who knew? -- maybe the rise of an independent Palestinian state.


By Design; Dots and Spots
Come spring, fashion watchers will be seeing spots.
Pin dots, polka dots and coin dots are popping up on dresses, sportswear and accessories.
With designers in a retro mood, it was natural for a popular pattern of bygone days to get a new lease on life.
And there is something exceedingly young and perky about dots, whether on a chiffon scarf knotted at the neck or on a bustle-back party dress by Bill Blass.


Stray Bullet Strikes Boy Lying on Couch
Two weeks ago, it was a bullet into Emily Berger's metal front door that brought the police rushing to her apartment on the second floor of a four-story walk-up in East Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Then yesterday, a bullet crashed through a window pane and buried itself in the stomach of Ms.
Berger's 8-year-old son.
Random gunfire crackles across the drug-ridden neighborhood of East Flatbush almost every night, and a police spokeswoman, Officer Merri Pearsall, said that investigators have so far classified the bullet, which struck the boy as he lay on a couch, as a stray.


Serb Leader Rejects U.S.-Backed Proposal
The Serbian President has rejected an American-backed proposal offering a lifting of trade sanctions on Serbia in exchange for recognition of Bosnia and Croatia, Government officials said today.
The offer, prepared by the United States, Britain, France, Germany and Russia, always appeared far-fetched in that the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, has consistently said the status of the Serbs holding 70 percent of Bosnia and 30 percent of Croatia must be resolved before recognition of the two countries is possible.


Animals Left the Water Earlier Than Thought
THE first marine animals to colonize the land came ashore some 50 million years earlier than scientists previously estimated, recent discoveries in the English Lake District have shown.
Scientists from the British Geological Survey in Edinburgh and the University of Bristol report that the creatures that introduced multicellular life to the land environment were apparently arthropods resembling modern centipedes.
While conducting a survey of rocks at several sites in northwestern England, geologists and paleontologists came across tracks left by at least one species of arthropod in the late Ordovician period 440 million years ago.
The earliest previously known fossil records of land-dwelling creatures date from the Silurian period some 50 million years later.


Rangers Get Cozy, Then Sweat It Out a Bit
Scoring first for only the sixth time this season was just the jump-start the Rangers needed tonight.
In the end, the Rangers needed every bit of their early punch as they held off a late-charging Tampa Bay Lightning team by 3-1 at the Thunderdome before a crowd of 24,224 that included the Yankees' owner, George Steinbrenner.


Now, German TV Wants to Cover Trials Live
The high ratings American television stations are winning by broadcasting the O. J. Simpson trial have led German television executives to ask that they too be allowed to broadcast trials live.
German judges and politicians are resisting the idea.
Some have said with disdain that while such broadcasts may be appropriate in a country like the United States, the judicial process in Germany is still conducted with a seriousness that necessarily excludes cameras.


'I Was Juror No. 6, the Lone Dissenter in the Libby Zion Case'
To the Editor:
I served as a juror on the Zion v.
New York Hospital case and have followed your coverage of the trial since the verdict.
I felt enraged by the views expressed by Dr.
R.
Gordon Douglas, physician in chief of New York Hospital, 1982-90 (letters, Feb. 14), portraying "the standards of New York Hospital as second to none." If this institution represents the best, then it's a sad commentary on medical care in this country.


Leading the Charge And Loving the Lights; Westchester Prosecutor Courts a TV Jury
Jeanine Ferris Pirro has been District Attorney of Westchester County for just over a year, but already the stage seems too small to contain her.
"Wouldn't you love to be Marcia Clark today?" she says to one of her bureau chiefs, Barbara DiTata, on a day of important arguments in the O.J.
Simpson trial.


It's Brodeur Who Helps Devils Get Job Done
Sports DeskThe Devils made an early, quirky goal stand up today at a Presidents Day matinee.
Martin Brodeur notched his first shutout of the season by stopping Washington's 27 shots in New Jersey's 2-0 victory at USAir Arena.


U.S. Navy's Attack Subs to Be Lent For Study of Arctic Icecap
IN a major peace dividend, the Navy has agreed to let civilian scientists use its multibillion-dollar fleet of nuclear attack submarines on a regular basis to study the Arctic Ocean, a vast body of water whose riddles have long eluded scientific scrutiny.
Experts say detailed knowledge of polar ice and the Arctic depths is vital for understanding such things as climate change.
For instance, such research could reveal if the predicted warming of the earth is under way and starting to melt the Arctic icecap, an icy wilderness considered one of the most sensitive and reliable indicators of global temperature change.


Mexican Rights Monitor Says Some Guerrillas Were Tortured
Contradicting the Government's assertion that it carefully respected the law in its offensive against peasant rebels in the southern state of Chiapas, an official human rights commission confirmed today that at least some captured rebels had been tortured.
The conclusion of the Government's own ombudsman's agency, the National Commission of Human Rights, added to a series of questions that have been raised in recent days about military and police conduct in the takeover of former rebel areas that began on Feb. 9.


Both 'Beauty and the Beast' And the Mouse and the Duck
Send in the clones.
In the beginning was the word: the fable of Beauty and the Beast.
And in the fullness of time, Jean Cocteau was delivered of the memorable film version.
So, too, Disney.
And Disney's animated "Beauty and the Beast" begat the Broadway musical.
And now comes the Walt Disney's World on Ice "Beauty and the Beast," at Radio City Musical Hall through Sunday.


American Luminaries Venture Into the Wild With Agendas in Tow
The historical inspiration for Mark St.
Germain's "Camping With Henry and Tom," which opened last night off Broadway at the Lucille Lortel Theater, is rich with seriously satirical potential.
It's so rich, in fact, that it's difficult to understand why, to my knowledge, no one before has explored it with the freedom of fiction.
If Mr.
St.
Germain does nothing else in his new comedy, he calls attention to a colorful footnote to American history, one packed with giddy possibilities, even if they go largely unrealized here.
The known facts are these:


Older Americans Cited in Studies Of National Savings Rate Slump
Despite their reputations as role models of thrift, older Americans appear to be the ones chiefly responsible for the slump in the country's savings rate.
That is the surprising conclusion of several recent studies comparing the spending and saving of different generations over several decades.


'Little Terrors' Turned Into the Dogs of the Day
UNTIL "Frasier," life was rurally sweet for Catherine Brown.
She and her husband were humming along, raising their 10 Jack Russell terriers away from the glare of a nosy world.
Now, the dog is out of the foxhole.
The phone rings and rings, letters pour in and Ms.
Brown gets quoted in supermarket tabloids.


Road Paved by Power and Reunions
There are a couple of sure-fire ways for actors to play the television game.
One is to use the clout from starring in a successful series to snag an occasional role in a television movie.
Example: Tonight Jennie Garth of "Beverly Hills 90210" and Costas Mandylor of "Picket Fences" can be seen in a CBS serial-killer thriller called "Falling for You."
Another is to go the reunion route, in the form of either an elaborate reminiscence or a one-shot guest appearance.
Example: Tonight Ted Danson returns to the role of Sam Malone, "Cheers" bartender, to drop in on "Frasier," the "Cheers" spinoff that has kept Kelsey Grammer's career on the fast track.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Signed Henry Cotto, outfielder, and Dann Howitt, outfielder-first baseman, to minor-league contracts.


Japan's Favorite Import From America: English
A century after a famous Japanese scholar proposed that the country drop Japanese and switch to English, it sometimes seems he almost got his way.
Take the latest scheme by the Liberal Democratic Party.
The party has decided to use the Roman letters JF as its new nickname, apparently in the belief that a Western-sounding nickname may be the first step to a more sprightly image.


In Performance; DANCE
South Koreans Create Harmonious Communities  Hak-Ryun Yang and Dance Company Weill Recital Hall
Weill Recital Hall is clearly not one of the usual theatrical homes of Hak-Ryun Yang and Dance Company.
That was evident when the troupe from South Korea performed there on Friday night.
The company's stage manager could often be heard shouting orders in the wings.
And solo dancers looked ill at ease when they ventured into the space.


CHRONICLE
WILLIAM E. CURRY JR., who ran for Governor in Connecticut last year and lost to John G. Rowland, will join the White House as an adviser to President Clinton.
A White House spokeswoman said that Mr.
Curry would be working in an advisory role, probably focusing on domestic policy, but that it was premature to discuss the details at this time.


AT&amp;T's Expansion Angers E.D.S.
The AT&amp;T Corporation's entry into computer services has provoked one of its largest customers, Electronic Data Systems, to threaten to look elsewhere rather than do business with a competitor.
E.D.S., the country's largest provider of computer services, would not have to look far for that elsewhere.
Although its merger talks with the Sprint Corporation collapsed last June, the companies have since been doing twice as much business together and are sharing customers.


Reporter's Notebook; A Candidate Plans Some Spontaneity
It may be too early for Republicans in New Hampshire to get interested in, let alone excited about, Lamar Alexander's bid for President.
But that did not stop his advisers from cooking up a scheme to demonstrate that their man is catching fire.
Mr.
Alexander and several other candidates were due to arrive at WMUR-TV studios here on Sunday for a televised forum.
So aides to the former Tennessee Governor enlisted several sorority sisters at New Hampshire College, asking them to wave "Lamar!" signs, chant his name and burst into spasms of joy when Mr.
Alexander descended from his car.


Mets' Batteries: Resumes Not Included
Joe McIlvaine had never heard of Chris Walpole.
Neither had Gerry Hunsicker, the Mets' assistant vice president of baseball operations.
More than likely, Manager Dallas Green still cannot match the name to the face.
A 26-year-old third baseman, Walpole was never drafted by a major league club and has never played in any team's system.
His professional baseball career is limited to 25 games with the independent Thunder Bay Whiskey Jacks, who play in the Class A Northern League.


On My Mind; Working in Tijuana
Here I am in Tijuana and instead of buying a rhinestoned sombrero souvenir, licking salt and slugging down a tequila, peering around for Mexicans plotting to sneak into the United States or doing other useful border-type things, I am just wandering around thinking of four fellows I have left in the car -- Rudy Giuliani, Jack Kemp, Mario Cuomo and William Bennett.
They are in the trunk -- in the suitcase stuffed with the immigration file.
Of the hundreds of politicians, academics and journalists who have committed articles, speeches or interviews about what is known as the immigration problem, these four keep coming to mind.


Bankers Fear New Lending Risks
Remember the credit crunch, when executives and entrepreneurs around the country squawked that banks had raised standards so high that no one could get a loan?
Well, the only crunch today is the sound of bankers slamming into each other as they race to shower new loans on business and consumers.


Gay Lobbyists Arrived On Capitol Hill in 70's
To the Editor:
Re your Feb. 12 news article on the changed climate for gay rights on Capitol Hill: Richard L. Tafel of the Log Cabin Republicans claims no one in the gay movement visited Congressional Republicans before he did.
This disserves many talented lobbyists who preceded the four-year-old gay Republican emergence.


Lyme Disease Offers a Diagnostic Puzzle; Try Malariotherapy
To the Editor:
Jane E. Brody (Personal Health, Feb. 15) accurately reports that Lyme disease can be incurable when spirochetes invade the brain, spinal cord and nerves.
Similarly, when the spirochetes causing syphilis invade the brain (neurosyphilis), antibiotics are frequently ineffective.


Nations to Consider Toughening Curbs on Global Warming
AFTER world leaders met in Rio de Janeiro nearly three years ago and signed a treaty to prevent human interference from causing dangerous changes in the earth's climate, the question quietly slipped down the international agenda.
It was drained of urgency not least by an interruption of the global warming trend that had propelled the issue to the forefront in the 1980's and early 1990's.
But the issue has simmered along as scientists advising the 120 nations that have ratified the treaty continue to warn of grave risks if humanity persists in pumping heat-trapping industrial waste gases like carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
And next month, as new signs emerge that the warming trend may have resumed, the parties to the treaty will meet for the first time, in Berlin, to confront the issue of whether stronger measures are necessary.


Topics of The Times; Ban the Span
The proposed $15 million footbridge from a waterfront park in New Jersey to Ellis Island in New York harbor can still be snuffed out.
New Jersey wants it.
New York doesn't, nor do a raft of historians.
But Congress has appropriated the money, so the National Park Service is proceeding to survey the environmental impact.
Citizens Against Government Waste, successor to the Grace Commission that sniffed out waste for President Reagan, has now weighed in against the pork.
In its annual compilation of projects the nation can do without, called "The Congressional Pig Book," the group ranks this bridge as an "Oinker" -- the worst of the worst -- and blames its sponsor, Senator Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey.


For U.S. Energy Industry, Big Barriers in China
With a trade dispute pushing China's relationship with the United States toward the rocks, this week is not a particularly good time for American business people to drop in and talk deals.
But several dozen executives from the energy industry showed up anyway, accompanying the United States Secretary of Energy, Hazel R. O'Leary, for a five-day visit to Shanghai and Beijing that was planned months ago.
Ms.
O'Leary and the executives seem to think that the Chinese-American talks in Beijing this week have little bearing on the financing or construction of power plants.


In Performance; POP
Strange Asian Sounds That Defy Western Notation  Huun-Huur-Tu, singers Symphony Space
Western musical notation couldn't capture the startling beauty of the songs from Tuva that Huun-Huur-Tu performed on Friday night.
Most of the songs are jaunty, foursquare folk tunes with drone harmonies and often clip-clop rhythms derived from horseback riding.
Timbre, not structure, is what makes the songs so remarkable.


For Soulima Stravinsky
A concert to honor Soulima Stravinsky, the composer, pianist and youngest son of Igor Stravinsky, is to be presented by the Amici Chamber Players at 8 P.M. on Sunday at Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan.
Soulima Stravinsky died in November at the age of 84.
The concert is to feature Heather Sarris, a soprano; Eric Pritchard, a violinist; Christopher Pegis, a cellist, and Brandt Fredriksen, a pianist, in the New York premieres of the composer's early "Chantefables," a song cycle based on children's poems, and three late works, a piano trio, a cello sonata and Three Pieces for Violin and Piano.
Tickets are $20.
Information: (212) 355-6160.


Robert Barton, 91, Executive Who Bought Rights to Monopoly
Robert B. M. Barton, the president of Parker Brothers who first rejected and then acquired the rights to Monopoly, died last Tuesday at his home in Marblehead, Mass.
He was 91.
The cause was old age, said Mr. Barton's son Randolph.


N.E.A. Hysteria, On Both Sides
Twice in one recent week, my concert program contained a flyer headlined "Warning! The performances you enjoy could be canceled!" This referred, of course, to the National Endowment for the Arts, presented as a pure virgin cruelly lashed to the railroad tracks.
Driving the oncoming train were the usual grinning villains: the House majority leader, Dick Armey ("the N.E.A. is an affront to the taxpayer") and Speaker Newt Gingrich ("the endowment is a sandbox for the nation's affluent cultural elite").


Bernard V. Dryer, 77, Doctor, Educator, Novelist
Dr.
Bernard V. Dryer, a physician, medical educator and best-selling novelist, died on Wednesday at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 77.
He had had Parkinson's disease for 15 years, his family said.


Times Appointment
The New York Times has named Jyll F. Holzman vice president for advertising sales, effect March 20.
Ms.
Holzman, 42, will be in charge of advertising sales for The New York Times Magazine.
She will also coordinate advertising sales for The Times involving fashion products, jewelry, home furnishings, cosmetics, sporting goods and packaged goods.
Most recently, Ms.
Holzman was associate publisher for the Walt Disney Company's Family Fun magazine.
Before that, Ms.
Holzman was advertising director for Child magazine when it was owned by The New York Times Company.


C.I.A. Mission: Strengthen Ties On Capitol Hill
The Central Intelligence Agency has given its covert operators many tough tasks over the years: recruiting agents inside the former Soviet Union, stealing secrets from terrorists.
Now the clandestine service of the C.I.A. has a new mission: winning friends and influencing people in Congress.
A message to the C.I.A.'s spies went out this month on the intelligence agency's internal computer bulletin board from the top levels of the C.I.A.'s directorate of operations.
It asked its spies to list everyone in Congress with whom they had "personal ties" or a "working relationship," in an effort to help the directorate begin a campaign to improve its standing on Capitol Hill.


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States were closed yesterday in observance of Washington's Birthday.
But most markets in other countries were open.


Bus Catches Fire Across the Street From the White House


Bad Justice
What could be more appealing than a law called "The Common Sense Legal Reform Act of 1995"?Who is against reform or common sense?
As it turns out, that very mislabeled bill, a part of the House Republican Contract With America, runs counter to America's longstanding law reform tradition and fails the test of common sense.
The principal offender is a feature in the bill called "Loser Pays." Overturning two centuries of American tradition by which each side in a lawsuit ordinarily pays its own legal costs, the bill would force the losing party to pay the winner's legal bill in suits alleging defective products or securities fraud.


Sampras to Miss Cup
PETE SAMPRAS, the world's No. 1 player, confirmed yesterday that he will not be available to face Italy in the Davis Cup quarterfinals on red clay in Palermo March 31-April 2.
Even before the opponent's identity or the site of the quarterfinals was known, Sampras, who believes red clay to be the one surface that compromises his power game, said he didn't plan to play because the round was scheduled so close to the Lipton championships.


Dividend Meetings


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Under the Influence Of the Russians  Tian Jiang, pianist Merkin Concert Hall
Tian Jiang was trained in Shanghai and at the Juilliard School, but his main pianistic influences seem to be the Russian powerhouse players.
He has an enormous technique, which he uses without restraint, but though he is partial to grandiose textures, he also plays with extraordinary clarity.


Seal the Iraq Embargo
A United Nations-sanctioned embargo compels Iraq to give up its weapons of mass destruction and accept monitoring of its arms-making.
Iraq has yet to comply fully with the embargo.
That makes it particularly dispiriting to discover that two of America's allies, Turkey and Jordan, have been helping Baghdad circumvent it by permitting Iraqi oil exports to be trucked unimpeded across their borders.
Turkey and Jordan should seal the leaks.
Until Baghdad lives up to the letter of the law, it is essential to maintain U.N. sanctions.
Yet if Washington wants to sustain political support for disarming Iraq, it must be ready to relax the embargo when Baghdad does comply.


A Schooling in Rock and Roll
Prof.
Robert Santelli of Monmouth College has been appointed to posts at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Cuyahoga Community College, both in Cleveland.
Professor Santelli, 43, will be education director at the rock hall and director of popular culture studies at the college.
The rock hall will open in September.


Bickerstaff Takes Over On the Denver Sideline
The Denver Nuggets general manager BERNIE BICKERSTAFF left that job yesterday to become head coach, hoping to pull the team from a tailspin that began with the resignation of DAN ISSEL last month.
GENE LITTLES, who had been the interim coach since Issel resigned Jan. 15, will return to his assistant's job after leading the Nuggets to a 3-13 record.


Debating a Crime Bill's Costs
A plan to keep violent criminals behind bars for life could cost New Jersey more than $2 billion over 30 years, the Department of Corrections says.
But a sponsor of the bill, known as "Three Strikes and You're In," disagrees.
Senator Louis Kosco, a Republican of Bergen County, says the legislation would save money since taxpayers would not have to pay for repeatedly apprehending and prosecuting the same criminals.


FCB Direct Awarded A Citibank Account
The Citibank unit of Citicorp has named FCB Direct in New York to handle its direct marketing account, which had been at Lowe Direct in New York since December 1993.
Billings on the account, which involves retail banks in six states and Washington, were estimated at $10 million to $20 million.
FCB Direct, which had handled a portion of the account from 1987 to late 1993, was awarded the account Friday after a two-month review that was narrowed to FCB Direct and Lowe Direct.
A sibling agency of FCB Direct, FCB/ Leber Katz Partners in New York, has handled the Citibank retail bank advertising account for 12 years.


Hungry Coyote Gets New Diet, and Maybe a New Home
For the last four months, Wiley, an emaciated, mangy coyote, has roamed the grounds of Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx, visiting with the ghosts of Irving Berlin, Miles Davis, Herman Melville and Fiorello La Guardia, and surviving on leftovers and canned dog food brought it by John and Donna Dudar of Yonkers.
But this paw-to-mouth existence is likely to change soon.
The city's Parks Department -- alerted by the Dudars after the couple read news accounts about other coyotes in the Bronx -- is working with zoologists from the Bronx Zoo and the Wildlife Society to determine what to do with the animal.


Market Place; For Buffett wannabes, mixed views of his latest strategy.
THE periodic disclosure of new holdings by the Omaha billionaire Warren E. Buffett is as eagerly awaited by some investors as the new spring styles in Paris are by the fashion conscious.
With well-timed picks in such companies as Coca-Cola and Capital Cities/ABC, Mr.
Buffett has racked up an enviable long-term record.
So it was no surprise last week that there was keen interest in the shares of American Express and the PNC Bank Corporation, in which Mr.
Buffett's company, Berkshire Hathaway Inc., said it had large holdings.
Both stocks surged on heavy volume on Tuesday, when the holdings were disclosed.


Health Factor In Vegetables Still Elusive
AS doubts increase about the wisdom of taking supplements of beta carotene, the Cinderella nutrient of the 1990's, some of its relatives are threatening to walk away with the glass slipper and the prince's heart.
Researchers who study the carotenoids, the family of nutrients to which beta carotene belongs, are now thinking that beta carotene may be only partly responsible for the health benefits that have been attributed to it, and that one or more of the hundreds of other carotenoids should be sharing, if not stealing, the limelight.
Using modern laboratory methods, chemists have recently identified more than 600 carotenoids in plants, including about 40 that are prominent in common fruits and vegetables.
Beta carotene has long been the focus of attention for three main reasons: it makes up about one-quarter of edible carotenoids, it is the one that is most efficiently converted in the body into vitamin A and it is a powerful antioxidant that may block free radical damage to cell membranes and body chemicals.


Monday in the Park With Friends


Gambling Helps Tribe Invest In Education and the Future
In July 1990, Margaret Field, headmaster of the Pine Point School left the campus and drove north with the school's banker in tow, to sing the praises of private education to leaders of the Mashantucket Pequot Indian tribe in Ledyard.
The Pequots were on the verge of striking it rich in the casino business, and the headmaster was hoping to build a connection.


Chess
Aleksei Dreyev of Russia won the 57th running of the traditional Hoogoven International Tournament in Wijk-aan-Zee, the Netherlands, by toughly repelling those opponents who tried to put the positional squeeze on him and landing some sharp shots when he got the chance.
His first prize was 15,000 Dutch guilders, or about $8,800.
In the tournament, 32 players contested two-game elimination matches until the final round, when the two survivors played a four-game match.
Dreyev won the first of the four final games from the runner-up, Yevgeny Bareyev, also of Russia, and then hung on with three draws to emerge the victor.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  CONFRONTING RACIAL ATTACKS  A series of attacks has caused Austria to confront racial hatred coming from the right, reflecting a broader pattern across Europe, that particularly affects Gypsies.
A1


Girl, 3, Is Raped on a Visit
A 3-year-old girl was raped in the apartment of a family friend where she had spent the night, the authorities said yesterday.
They said the child was found bleeding Saturday morning by the friend, a woman, who notified the girl's mother.
No one has been charged, and the authorities would release no further details.
The girl underwent surgery at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston and was listed in stable condition yesterday.


Judge in the Microsoft Case Is Willing to Test the Limits
There has been a recurring scene in the long career of Stanley Sporkin, in which somebody very powerful is sputtering in outraged disbelief at what Mr.
Sporkin has done.
Over the years the cast of characters has varied from giant corporations like Lockheed and Exxon to powerful Government actors like the White House and State Department.
Their protests generally come down to this: "Now see here! This is not the way things are done! You don't understand! You simply cannot do this!"


Giants Lose Fox, Will Look At Tolbert
The Giants lost defensive tackle Mike Fox to the Carolina Panthers yesterday, as the expansion team doubled the salary of the 27-year-old free agent.
The move will probably force the Giants to intensify their efforts to get a big-time presence on their defensive line.
That player just might be Tony Tolbert of the Dallas Cowboys.
The Giants are taking a good, hard look at Tolbert, one of the game's best pass rushers, especially with Fox gone and defensive tackle Erik Howard now an unrestricted free agent.
Besides, the Giants aren't sure which Keith Hamilton will show up at defensive end next season, the one who had 6 1/2 sacks in 1994 or the player who had 11 1/2 in 1993.


INSIDE
Serbia Rejects Offer
Serbia rejected an American-backed proposal that offered to lift sanctions in exchange for recognizing Bosnia and Croatia.
Page A8.
Mexican Interest Rates Soar
Mexico's central bank is raising its interest rates by 10 percentage points in response to pressure from Washington.
Page D1.
Republicans Aim at Agency
The Department of Education, which some Republicans have long opposed as unnecessary, is now squarely in their sights.
Page A15.


Opportunity for Rabin
To the Editor:
The go-slow pace of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's intertwined "peace process" and election strategy has been premised on the belief that his and his party's electoral chances would be enhanced by taking no steps and by saying and doing nothing before the 1996 elections that could seriously upset any significant Israeli constituency.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  Despite their reputations as role models of thrift, older Americans appear to be chiefly responsible for the slump in the country's savings rate.
That surprising conclusion of recent studies suggests that the savings incentives for younger families outlined in the Republican Contract With America and in the White House's new tax proposal will do little to lift savings.  [ Page A1. ] Bankers are racing to lend to business and consumers, a far cry from the recent credit squeeze.
The loans are helping fuel an economic rebound, but banking officials fear there are risks.  [ D1. ] A balanced budget amendment could have huge side effects, notably higher unemployment, less unemployment insurance and deeper and more painful recessions.
Economic Analysis.  [ D1. ] For Federal Judge Stanley Sporkin, the sputtering disbelief that met his rejection of the Justice Department's proposed settlement of its case against Microsoft was deja vu all over again.  [ D1. ]
Vice President Al Gore told labor leaders that the Administration would not do business with companies that replace strikers.  [ A1. ] International Mexico's central bank raised short-term interest rates by 10 percentage points, pushing the rate on some Government debts to 50 percent.
It was responding to United States pressure.  [ D1. ] The German mark continues to defy gravity, despite labor unrest and strong economic growth.
But the dollar and the pound have even more weighing them down, with the Mexican financial crisis and uncertainty surrounding John Major's Government.  [ D1. ] Hungary is losing its appeal to foreign investors.
Analysts point most recently to the cancellation of a big American hotel deal after the intervention of Prime Minister Gyula Horn.  [ D2. ] Several dozen executives of American energy companies accompanied Secretary of Energy Hazel R. O'Leary to China, notwithstanding a big U.S.-Chinese trade dispute.  [ D9. ] Companies  Nextel Communications agreed to acquire Dial Page for a substantially lower price than planned.
Falling stock prices pushed the deal's value to $260 million from $700 million.  [ D5. ] Outboard Marine replaced its chief, James C. Chapman.
Outboard has been losing market share to its rival, Brunswick.  [ D5. ] Electronic Data Systems responded angrily to AT&amp;T's entry into computer services.
Now a client of AT&amp;T, it said it would look elsewhere rather than do business with a rival.  [ D7. ] The New Mexico Superintendent of Insurance was ordered to drop opposition to the issuance and sale of annuities by the First National Bank of Santa Fe, cheering bankers.  [ D10. ] Today's Columns  Disclosures of Warren E. Buffett's stakes in American Express and PNC Bank have brought keen interest from other investors, but mixed reviews from analysts.
Market Place.  [ D6. ] Would George Washington or Abraham Lincoln have wanted to be President had either known how he would appear in auto dealers' holiday ads?
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D13. ]


Republicans Skeptical of Its Worth Would Like to Eliminate Education Department
Terrel H. Bell was on the way to a State of the Union address by Ronald Reagan more than a decade ago when he received a lesson in relativity.
His car phone rang and the President's chief of staff told Mr.
Bell, who was the Secretary of Education, to turn back and head home.
Someone had realized that it was not the practice to have the entire Cabinet in one place because of the question of succession.
"And I ranked dead last," Mr.
Bell said.


Coleman Is Set To Give Nets A Needed Lift
Perhaps having to take in the Nets' miserable record-tying second-half performance from the sideline Saturday night made Derrick Coleman feel that he could watch no longer.
After missing the last six games with a chip fracture of the left side of his pelvic bone, Coleman practiced today for the first time in 17 days and said he plans to play against Indiana on Wednesday night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Police Cite Marital Strife In S.I. Deaths
A Staten Island man charged with shooting to death four members of his family on Sunday may have been angry about his wife's request for a divorce or separation, the police said yesterday.
"He was supposedly upset over the upcoming breakup," Lieut.
Raymond Ferrari said.
"I know for a fact they were married four years and they were having family problems. I'd imagine he was despondent and the problem just caught up with him."


CHRONICLE
MADONNA is trying to sell her rather eccentrically painted Los Angeles home for $7 million, The Associated Press reported on Sunday.
The four-bedroom house, which the performer had painted in red and yellow stripes, has in the past prompted complaints from the neighbors.
But it was apparently not public opinion that moved her to give up the Hollywood Hills home.


Cartoon Camel Out in the Cold
A citizens group has prevailed on several stores to stop displaying the Joe Camel cartoon, whose appeal to children has been blamed for increasing the Camel brand's popularity among underage smokers.


Big-Money Bids for Tyson Return On Hold Until He Picks an Agent
Is HBO Sports preparing a monster offer to insure Mike Tyson's post-pokey place on TVKO, its pay-per-view arm?
How about $50 million?
No, said Seth Abraham, the president of Time Warner Sports, the parent company of HBO Sports.
Not yet.
Not until Tyson's status with Don King, who claims to have an existing deal with Tyson, is clarified.
But HBO has certainly bean-counted Tyson's enormous value in the hungry pay-per-view market.
And HBO would certainly write a check for mega millions if Tyson said okey-dokey.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Off the Beaten Path With Two Composers  Christopher Hogwood and the Handel and Haydn Society Avery Fisher Hall
Christopher Hogwood and the Handel and Haydn Society arrived on Friday night with a characteristically elegant and symmetrical program.
The first half was devoted to Bach (the "Brandenburg" Concerto No. 4 and Mass in G minor) and the second to Handel (the Sonata in G minor and "Dixit Dominus").
All four works were in the key of G, with the concerto and sonata serving as instrumental preludes to the two choral pieces.


Another Bank Victory on Annuities
In another victory for bankers who want to expand into the insurance business, a Federal court has ordered the office of the New Mexico Superintendent of Insurance to drop its opposition to the issuance and sale of annuities by a local bank.
The order last week by the Federal District Court for New Mexico said the state Insurance Department had "no right to supervise, regulate or otherwise interfere with or harass" the First National Bank of Santa Fe as it accepted deposits for annuities.


Well-Armed or Not, Starks Is Going to Play
John Starks has suffered an assortment of injuries that has forced him to wear knee braces, ankle wraps, face masks and, most recently, a shoulder splint.
Through all the ailments, Starks has always maintained the same positive attitude about playing in pain.
If the shooting guard is capable of lacing up his sneakers, he'll most likely be able to play.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
When a Preconcert Lecture Is Turned on Its Head  Concert Royal Gould Hall
All in good humor, Brent Wissick, a violist da gamba, began an eveninglong lobbying effort in a preconcert lecture on Friday.
Antoine Forqueray, an 18th-century master of the gamba, Mr.
Wissick set out to prove, was at least as fascinating as his historical counterpart Marin Marais, who was the subject of the film "Tous les Matins du Monde."


Hoyas Beat No. 9 Team In Front of No. 1 Alum
That thud you heard was the sound of the Villanova Wildcats crashing back to earth, viciously jerked from atop Cloud 9 by the Georgetown Hoyas, who wanted to show off in front of a famous alum.
Villanova entered tonight's game with an 11-game winning streak, a new No. 9 ranking in the Associated Press poll and a pleasant after-glow from a 96-73 victory over then top-ranked Connecticut Saturday.
But all of it was of no help against a Georgetown team that, as Villanova Coach Steve Lappas put it, "played as if someone was going to shoot them if they lost."


Baiul Wants Olympics
The Olympic figure skating champion OKSANA BAIUL plans to return to the amateur ranks in time to qualify for the next Winter Olympics, the president of the Ukrainian Figure Skating Federation said yesterday.
Baiul, who turned professional after taking the gold medal in Lillehammer, Norway, last year, will seek reinstatement to amateur status for the next season beginning in September, LYUDMILA MYKHAILOVSKA said.


How Science and Religion Can Coexist
To the Editor:
It is strange to find the creationism versus evolution debate alive at this late date (news article, Feb. 13).
Bible scholars should have learned from the Galileo incident not to use the Bible as a science textbook.
If they do so, religion becomes discredited.


METRO DIGEST
A TRIBE'S CLOSE TIES TO EDUCATION
In July 1990, Margaret Field, headmaster of the Pine Point School, went to sing the praises of private education to leaders of the Mashantucket Pequot Indian tribe in Ledyard.
The Pequots were on the verge of striking it rich in the casino business, and the headmaster was hoping to build a connection.
She did.
A1.


Selig Joining Talks Today, But Expecting No Progress
Talks in the longest work stoppage in sports history were scheduled to resume Tuesday at a new site and with a relatively new face.
But this new phase of the baseball talks, said to deal with process rather than substance, is not expected to result in any significant developments.
Small groups representing the striking players and their employers were to meet in Milwaukee, home of baseball's acting commissioner, Bud Selig, who will join the talks.
Selig has spent little time in the negotiations, making his longest appearance when the two sides met at the White House the evening of Feb. 7.


New Austerity Might Stall Continued Subway Improvements
When a Manhattan-bound subway train rear-ended another one in Brooklyn this month, transit officials explained apologetically that the track would have been cleared more quickly if the accident had occurred a decade ago.
Back then, work crews had much more practice at removing derailed wrecks.
Thirteen years and more than $20 billion into an ambitious rebuilding effort, the subways have come a long way from the time when the system was a staple of jokes and a symbol of a city in decline.
The trains are faster, cleaner and far more reliable, ridership is up and dozens of stations have been made over.


Tribute to Robin Williams
The American Museum of the Moving Image is to honor Robin Williams at its 10th annual tribute Thursday night at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The tribute to Mr.
Williams is to include clips from his films introduced by Penny Marshall, Billy Crystal, Barry Levinson, Jeff Bridges, John Lithgow and Julie Kavner, among others.
Information: (212) 245-6570.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press on Saturday about changes expected by 2050 in the American diet misstated an affiliation of a researcher, Albert Allen Bartlett.
He is at the University of Colorado, not the University of Chicago.


Lyme Disease Offers a Diagnostic Puzzle
To the Editor:
Although Jane E. Brody's Feb. 15 Personal Health column emphasizes important issues in the diagnosis and treatment of neurological problems associated with Lyme disease, there are several inconsistencies that require clarification.


Global Warming Study Shows Sagebrush as King of Hills
AS rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide and other gases cause global temperatures to increase in coming decades, lush grassy mountain meadows may be overrun by sagebrush and other woody shrubs, researchers at the University of California at Berkeley say.
In a four-year experiment, the researchers simulated warming in such a greenhouse atmosphere by suspending infrared heating lamps above a meadow at the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory in Gunnison County, Colo.
Results of the study were reported on Feb. 10 in the journal Science.


Yankees Introduce A Cast of Strangers
The Yankees unveiled their complete roster of replacement players today and the list was startling, startling in its lack of any recognizable names.
Does anyone remember Randy Kutcher or Bob MacDonald?
If not, you won't recognize the other 53 players who are parading around in Yankee uniforms.
Even though it was obvious teams would have difficulty stocking their rosters, the Yankees surely did not expect to have as many players from New Jersey's semipro Metropolitan Baseball League as players with major league experience.
But they do.
There are six potential replacement Yankees from the Met League and six former major leaguers.


Relational Databases Get Easier To Handle
A DATABASE is a collection of information, like a telephone book or a catalogue of the products a company sells.
An electronic database is far easier to use than a printed one, however.
For one thing, information can be looked for in fractions of a second rather than at the speeds at which pages can be turned.
For another, information can be looked for in a variety of categories.
With an ordinary telephone book, you must know the name of a person to find his address and phone number.
With an electronic database, you can look up the address to find the name and phone number, or the phone number to get the name and address.


Robert H. Levi, 79, A Former President Of the Hecht Stores
Robert H. Levi, the former chairman and president of the Hecht chain of department stores in the Washington-Baltimore area, died on Friday at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
Mr.
Levi, who lived in Lutherville, Md., was 79.
The cause of death was heart failure, his son Richard said.


No Headline
"It would be a travesty to just board this place up and walk away. That would be like saying the Statue of Liberty has no value." -- ROBERT CHANDLER, general manager of the Presidio.  [ A1:3. ]


Self-Portrait Of Informer: An Innocent
In the days since he was identified as the informer who turned in the man accused of masterminding the World Trade Center bombing and became a candidate for a $2 million reward, Istiayaak Parker has been different things to different people: lucky Boy Scout, mercenary turncoat, American spy, or perhaps an America-hating accomplice who turned on his mentor to escape prison himself.
The image that emerges from Mr.
Parker's own account is none of these.
As he has recounted his story to family, friends and a journalist here in the Indian Muslim community where he grew up, he is a hapless innocent who stumbled into a ring of professional terrorists.


Texas Appears Deep In a Very Shallow Field
The Texas Rangers are so deep in replacements that, if needed, they even have a replacement for General Manager Doug Melvin.
The Rangers have signed Eric Mangham as a potential replacement outfielder; earlier this winter, he served as the general manager of a team in the Mexican League.
Melvin, however, won't need a substitute if the replacement players he and his staff have assembled are as good as others say they are.


Attack on Austrian Gypsies Deepens Fear of Neo-Nazis
There is nothing much beyond the smudge of the wood smoke and the mud of the by-ways to distinguish the Gypsy settlement here, where 117 people live in 19 boxy homes, set apart across the meadows from a small town in Austria.
For two weeks, since a pipe bomb concealed in a placard reading "Gypsies go back to India" killed four of its people in Austria's worst racial terrorism in 50 years, the settlement has come to mean many things across this land -- not the least the fear that a neo-Nazi underground cell has embarked on a deathly campaign that the police are unable, or even unwilling, to halt.


Sports of The Times; Will Tyson Walk Free Tomorrow?
MIKE TYSON will be waiting tomorrow for the word that he's finally free to walk out of the Indiana Youth Center.
"That's a possibility, a very good one," Don King was saying yesterday from his Florida home.
"Everything is in order. Mike has signed his release papers. Something might happen Wednesday."


Don't Block the Box


Q&amp;A
Teflon and Parrots
Q.  Are nonstick pans dangerous to parrots?


U.S. Eases Pressure on China To Release Data on Prisoners
Many people who were at Tiananmen Square during the student-led democracy protests of May and June 1989 remember Yang Lianzi, a troubadour who wore a headband inscribed "Wild Man of China" and who mocked Chinese leaders with his poetry and songs about democracy.
But no one is quite sure what became of him after the military crackdown that smashed the demonstrations.


Town Is Undivided, For Now
Teterboro (population 22) is in mortal danger at the hands of its own elected representative.
The borough's State Assemblywoman, Rose Heck, is preparing a bill that would dissolve Teterboro and divide it up between neighboring South Hackensack and Hasbrouck Heights.
Ms.
Heck also happens to be the Mayor of Hasbrouck Heights.


In Tough Neighborhood, Students Show Courage
The walk to school is not easy for any of the children at Junior High School 263 in Brownsville, Brooklyn.
For some, the difficulty begins with the first step from bed, as 12-year-olds pick their way through decrepit apartments, hallways littered with crack vials and buildings riddled with bullet holes.
For the children who live in the nearby homeless shelter, the walk is one more trip through one more neighborhood, the latest steps in their odyssey of displacement.


Finding Help to Regain Self-Sufficiency
She had a baby girl last summer, but J. Sellers felt no joy.
She was just 22, recovering from an anguished childhood and finding that maturity brought its own misery.
"I didn't want to see her or hold her," she said of the infant.
"I was all wrapped up in my problems, and I couldn't think about anything else."


Yank Lawson, 84, Trumpeter With Prominent Jazz Bands
Yank Lawson, a jazz trumpeter who was an important member of several popular bands in a career that spanned six decades, died on Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Indianapolis.
He was 84 and lived in Indianapolis.
The cause was a heart attack, said Bill York, a friend.


These Days, The Mark Keeps Rising
This would seem to be a script for investors to sell the German mark:
Metalworkers in Germany may go on strike Friday, halting much of the nation's automobile and machine-tool industries.
Or, there may be relatively generous wage settlements that the financial markets would consider inflationary.
Government reports have shown recent levels of economic growth as stronger than previously expected.


Accounts
*
Gregory &amp; Clyburne, Stamford, Conn., was awarded three integrated marketing accounts with combined billings estimated at $1.6 million: Kurron Inc., New York, as the first agency to handle the health care management company's account; the Hospital Center at Orange, N.J., to handle its account, previously at Turchette Advertising, Fairfield, N.J., and Colarossi Associates, Stamford, as the first agency to handle the Landmark Athletic Club account.


An Intersectional Air Dispute
Some people in northern New Jersey do not like it when jets rumble overhead on their way to Newark International Airport.
The Federal Aviation Administration has been looking at different routes, including some over the Jersey Shore.
But (surprise!) Congressmen from downstate are not sure they like that idea.
Representatives Jim Saxton of Vincentown, Christopher Smith of Robbinsville and Frank LoBiondo of Vineland, all Republicans, and Frank Pallone of Long Branch, a Democrat, are expected to meet tomorrow with F.A.A. officials.


Plymouth Journal; In Town of the Pilgrims, New Migration Is Afoot
First there was the Rock, then there was the Mayflower.
Now in this town of the Pilgrims there is the criminal justice complex, an 80-acre tract less than two miles from downtown.
It is the site of a prison and a police headquarters that is under construction, and, ultimately, is to include the county courthouse and a second prison.
Well, maybe.


Corrections
A brief report in the sports section yesterday about the creation of a New York City Track and Field Hall of Fame referred incorrectly in some editions to the distance of the world record held by Bob Beamon from 1968 to 1991 in the long jump.
It was 29 feet 2 1/2 inches, not 19-2 1/2.


Keeping a Count on the Contract


UConn Rallies Against Boston College
Connecticut, the Big East's first-place team, was in deep trouble tonight against Boston College, the league's last-place team.
In the sixth minute of the second half, UConn was behind by 9 points, and was clearly being outplayed.
Then came one of those dramatic bursts that have often been a mark of these Huskies.
When a 19-2 scoring run was over, Connecticut had command of the contest and went on to win, 88-75, for its 15th consecutive victory over the Eagles.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  AGREEMENT ON MEXICAN AID  The United States and Mexico agreed on a $20 billion rescue plan for Mexico.
While the plan allows the use of United States funds to bail out Mexican banks, it also imposes austerity measures on Mexico.
A1  POLITICAL COST TO ACCORD  News Analysis: In the rescue plan, Mexico has surrendered an almost unprecedented degree of control over its economy to the United States.
The plan is certain to cause political damage in Mexico.
A1


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING -- Addenda; Accounts
Fiat Do Brazil, Rio de Janeiro, to Leo Burnett/Sao Paulo, to handle its account in Brazil, previously at MPM/Lintas, Sao Paulo.
Leo Burnett already handles the car maker's account in eight other markets.
Billings were estimated at $24 million. *
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, San Francisco, was awarded two California accounts with combined billings estimated at less than $2 million: Visible Interactive Corp., San Francisco, as the first agency to handle the computer company's Eye-Q account, and Winston's Authentic British/Irish Style Pubs, Napa, to introduce the pub restaurant chain in Northern California.


No Headline
"I have not fallen in love with her to win her vote." SENATOR ALFONSE M. D'AMATO, announcing that he loves a Democrat.  [ B4:6. ]


Corrections
An entry in the listing of new equity issues in Business Day on Monday misstated the size of an initial public offering by Toy Biz Inc.
It is three million shares, not two million.


THEATER
Wisdom's Sad, Empty Promise In Matters of the Heart  'The Tropical Breeze Hotel' Ubu Repertory Theater
There is a sad message in "The Tropical Breeze Hotel," by Maryse Conde: in matters of the heart, age confers wisdom, but wisdom brings pain and gives no consolation.
And it is her examination of that message that gives the play power in spite of very messy plotting.
Ms.
Conde, who is from Guadeloupe, has written a play that is more novelistic than dramatic.
But what happens in it is so engaging that when and why seem peripheral questions.


As U.S. Aid Ends, Need of Afghan War Victims Persists
For some Americans who played a part in their country's long and expensive involvement in Afghanistan, the clamor of the war widows and the one-legged boys and the weakened old men who gathered on a rocky hillside above this shattered capital today seemed like a requiem for broken hopes.
"Amerika khub!" -- meaning "America is good!" -- the crowd cried in a bittersweet chorus in Dari, the Afghan dialect of Persian.


Green Is Waiting for Dolphins' Offer
ERIC GREEN, a free-agent tight end, paid the Miami Dolphins a visit yesterday, and chances appear good that he'll be signed to supplant KEITH JACKSON.
"Eric indicated a desire to pursue his opportunity to play there," said Drew Rosenhaus, Green's agent.
"The ball is in their court."


Personal Health; Another clue that short cuts don't work.
AS more and more questions are raised about beta carotene, until recently considered a wonder nutrient that all on its own could protect against the scourges of disease like cancer and heart disease, another short cut to good health is falling on hard times.
Like many another easy alternative, the lesson with beta carotene seems to be that popping a pill is not enough.
You have to eat those carrots and broccoli and dark leafy greens, just as you have to exercise to lose weight and make yourself relax to reduce stress.


House Votes to Kill Program for Minorities
In a vote that reflected the Republican majority's dislike of affirmative-action programs, the House of Representatives tonight overhwhelming approved a bill that would abolish a tax break intended to help minority businesses buy television and radio stations.
The bill, approved 381 to 44, would use the savings from ending the tax break to offset the loss of revenues from allowing self-employed people to deduct part of their health insurance costs from their taxes.


Another Syracuse Coach Is Leaving
ERIK CAMPBELL, an assistant coach at Syracuse, has become the university's seventh coach to leave the football program in the past 14 months and the fourth since the end of the 1994 season.
Campbell, who joined the Syracuse staff last summer as running backs coach, accepted a job Monday from his alma mater, Michigan, as the wide receivers coach.


CHRONICLE
BIDU SAYAO, the Brazilian lyric soprano, may have retired from the stage in 1959 and she may be nudging 93, but she is certainly not forgotten in Rio de Janeiro.
So it was with high excitement that she took off for Rio yesterday from her home near Camden, Me.
Miss Sayao, who refuses to state her age and erases any evidence from documents, is to ride on the Beija Flor samba club's float in a parade during Carnival.
In fact, she will be the central figure on the float, which she said would be a replica of Lincoln Center.


Sports of The Times; Anthony's Attitude Big-League
YOU never know with the Knicks.
That's what makes them so fascinating.
You can't afford to turn away, even for a game.
In the last few years you never knew when their ferocious style would produce a brawl on the court, or one of the players might be in conflict with Pat Riley.
They came within one game of the championship, but nowadays you don't even know if the coach might come out after the game and lambaste his players.
You just never know.


America Online Adds Clients
America Online Inc. said yesterday that it had surpassed two million subscribers, and it asserted that it had overtaken both Compuserve and Prodigy to become the largest consumer information service in the United States.
America Online, based in Vienna, Va., said it had added 500,000 members since December.
But the growth has come at the cost of deteriorating service, many subscribers have complained.
Busy signals, slow connections and electronic mail delays of several hours, or in some cases days, are increasingly common.


'Suffragette' Has a History of Its Own
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 15 television review of "The American Experience: One Woman, One Vote" reports incorrectly that suffragists were "known as suffragettes before neutrality of language was mandated."


Sense of Dollar Duress; With Deeper Pain Ahead, Many Mexicans Accuse President of Yielding Sovereignty
Almost before the ink dried on today's agreement to provide Mexico with $20 billion in emergency help from the United States, President Ernesto Zedillo has found himself accused in Mexico of trading his nation's sovereignty for a sack full of American dollars.
The severe economic restrictions that United States officials placed on the $20 billion in loans and loan guarantees mean that Mexico has surrendered an almost unprecedented degree of control over the management of its economy to its big neighbor at a critical time.
Mr.
Zedillo's presidency is already weakened less than three months into his six-year term, and social unrest is simmering through this country.


Several Worries Push Bonds Down
Prices of Treasury securities sagged yesterday, weighed down by concerns about the weak dollar, the auctions of new government securities and this week's semiannual report from the Federal Reserve to Congress on the conduct of monetary policy and the state of the economy.
Donald E. Maude, chief United States fixed-income strategist at the Scotia McLeod brokerage firm, said that not many traders were showing a willingness to make a big bet on the direction of interest rates ahead of the testimony of the Fed chairman, Alan Greenspan, scheduled for today and tomorrow.


CABINETS APPROVE ANGLO-IRISH PLAN FOR ULSTER TALKS
The British and Irish Governments approved a common approach today toward reaching a settlement in Northern Ireland, providing a framework that could bring together Protestant and Roman Catholic leaders in an effort to end 25 years of violence.
The joint position, approved separately by the British and Irish Cabinets, came after 14 months of talks between the Governments.
It is intended to walk a line between reassuring the Protestant majority in Northern Ireland, which generally favors continued British rule, and making concessions to the Catholic minority, most of whom favor eventual unification with the Irish Republic.


It's a Good Time for Devils' Fetisov to Ease Injury Woes
After Bruce Driver's shoulder injury during the Devils' 2-0 victory over Washington on Monday, the availability of Slava Fetisov could not have come at a better time.
Driver's injury to his left shoulder came on the heels of Jaroslav Modry's injury to his left ankle.
The injuries to Driver and Modry, along with Jason Smith's reconstructive knee surgery two months ago, have made Fetisov the Devils' sixth defenseman.


Food Notes
Italian Flavor
Espresso Madison, 33 East 68th Street, is a new, elegant stand-up coffee bar like the kind found in Italy, with only a couple of seats.
No flavored coffees are served, but beer and wine are available, as are sandwiches, pastries and ice cream.
Italian is heard spoken because the consulate is around the corner.
The only concession to American taste is the tunafish sandwich.
Thick and Tart
Passion fruit is the latest flavor in the line of mellow vinegar-based sauces called Vignettes.
It was created by Michael Chiarello of Tra Vigna restaurant in St.
Helena, Calif., for his Consorzio line of condiments.
Though suitably tart, the thick, pink-gold passion fruit sauce is still sweet enough to splash on a fruit salad.
It is excellent as a fat-free sauce for grilled fish or for marinating pork or chicken.
The sauce, $8 for 12.5 ounces, is available at Williams-Sonoma stores.
Go Fish
Linda Blankenhorn, an owner of La Boulangere, 49 East 21st Street, has started working on Catch 21, a fish and produce market a few doors away at 31 East 21st Street.
She is scheduled to open it by the end of March.
Tony Castenazzi, a former manager of the fish department at Balducci's, will run the fish counter.
"Half the store will be a big crisper room where people can select organic and specialty produce," Ms.
Blankenhorn said.
Food Translation
The first American edition of Gambero Rosso, a popular Italian food magazine, has just been published.
The name, which means "red shrimp," is a common term for restaurants and pizzerias in Italy.
The first issue, 99 pages, provides information about buying and preparing cabbage in a variety of dishes, instructions for cooking pasta, profiles of restaurateurs and chefs in Italy and the United States, and wine ratings.
The magazine, $4.95 a copy, will be published quarterly.
Subscriptions, $15.85 for one year, can be ordered by calling (800) 969-1258.
Off the Menu Moving an Elephant
An Elephant and Castle has gone from SoHo to NoHo.
The original Elephant and Castle on Greenwich Avenue is still going strong after 20 years, but a downtown version, which opened on Prince Street in 1979, closed last summer.
The sibling is expected to reopen this week at 6 Bond Street, near Broadway.
It occupies the main floor of a town house.
It has an informal elegance, with polished woods, muted tones and a whimsical mural of elephants wandering in a neighborhood cityscape.
In the rear is a bar.
The menu includes the restaurant's popular burgers, omelets and sandwiches but also offers a list of substantial main courses, mostly at $11 to $15.
The owner, George Schwarz, says he plans to turn the garden-level floor into a takeout shop and cafe.
New French Bistros
In a manner of speaking, it's like keeping it in the family.
A couple of established French bistros have closed and given way to two new French bistros.
Ricochet, which opened at the end of January at 43 East 20th Street, replaced L'Escale, with a French-Mediterranean menu devised by the chef-owner, Bruno Hamon.
Further downtown, Zut! opened earlier this month at 139 Duane Street (near Church Street), with whimsical decor -- including straw-hatted chandeliers, a round bar and wallpaper with prancing animals -- and French cooking by Herb Wilson.
Zut! replaced Zinc.
Retro Servings
Henry Lambert, who started the Pasta and Cheese chain, has opened Lex, at 133 East 65th Street, once occupied by Old Denmark.
Lex is serving what Mr.
Lambert calls American comfort food.
Expect no blueberry sauce on the fish or black pepper in the ice cream.
Instead, classics like sole meuniere, chicken pot pie and that dinner-party staple of the 1960's, cold lemon souffle, dominate the menu.
Main dishes are $17.50 to $24.
Lunch features the kinds of salads and sandwiches, $9.50 to $13, that were served at the Cafe on Five that Mr.
Lambert used to run at Bergdorf Goodman.
The chef is Jeanne Ramos, who worked in the cafe.
Circa Second Avenue
Circa, 103 Second Avenue (at Sixth Street), is due to open next month in the space once occupied by Jerry's 103.
The designers, Peter Sibilia and Damien Vizuete, say the space will be "retro postmodern." The food, however, will be new American, not retro anything, with brick-oven pizza and low-fat dishes.
The chef, Bruce Barnes, was previously at the Harvest, a former Greenwich Village restaurant.
B.Y.O.
Book
"Bring Your Own" by Henry Nunez (Phoenix Communications, 1994), a guide to restaurants without liquor licenses, is a revised version of the 1992 guide; 165 restaurants have been added.
Most of the restaurants in the guide are in New Jersey, but there are listings for New York, as well as Westchester, Rockland and Nassau counties.
The guide, $9.95 plus $1.95 for shipping, can be ordered by calling (800) 296-8451.
New Jersey residents are charged an additional 60 cents for sales tax.


M.T.A. Cuts And Layoffs Are Proposed
The Transit Authority plans to lay off workers, close a subway station in Brooklyn, eliminate express buses to three boroughs and shut down two shuttle lines late at night, among other service cuts, to make up for a loss of $112 million in support from the city, a transit official said yesterday.
The changes, to be presented today to a committee of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, are meant to make up for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's cancellation of city payment for schoolchildren's subway and bus fares.
The move will cost the Transit Authority, an arm of the M.T.A., $112 million this school year and $128 million next year.


Welfare Ban Punishes Young Unwed Mothers; Looking at Statistics
To the Editor:
Re "An Intimate Look at Welfare: Women Who've Been There" (front page, Feb. 17):


First-Day Review: No Field, No Hit
There were 65 fans sitting silently in Fort Lauderdale Stadium when the replacement Yankees ambled onto the sunny field on a windy morning.
No one clapped, cheered or booed.
The onlookers appeared mostly curious about observing the first full-scale workout featuring the entire roster of players, some of whom shared uniform numbers.
What they noticed was a batch of players that occasionally struggled with fundamental drills and were thrilled when they hammered a baseball over the fence every once in a while.
As the three-hour workout unfolded, so did some noise from the fans -- both derisive and encouraging.


Drawing Parallels Between Man and Beast
The Czech film maker Karel Kachyna's dour allegorical film "The Cow" brings to mind one of the more discouraging adages to be found on buttons worn by people flaunting their pessimism: "Life is hard and then you die." For Adam (Radek Holub), the film's symbolically named Everyman, life is indeed no picnic.
A gaunt, saucer-eyed peasant who is slightly retarded, he lives with his mother, an ailing prostitute, in a log cabin on the side of a mountain.
The time is near the turn of the century, the place somewhere in Eastern Europe.
In an early scene of the film, which opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, Adam sadly leads a cow, the family's only valuable possession, down the mountain to be sold to a butcher to buy medicine for his mother.
By the time he returns, she has died of what appears to be a venereal disease.
Sepia-toned flashbacks reveal that Adam was a neglected child who was seriously injured from a fall into a quarry when he ran away from home.
Now he works in a stone pit carting rocks to a railroad depot.
At the end of each workday, he fills a bucket with soil, straps it onto his back and trudges up the hill, exhausted, to deposit the dirt on a pile outside the cabin.
Someday he hopes to turn that pile into a cornfield that will feed another cow.


U.S. to Push Alternative Fuel Program
The Clinton Administration, declaring that rising oil imports threaten national security, intends to force a sharp increase in the number of cars and trucks that run on fuels besides gasoline, a senior Energy Department official said tonight.
Under a plan that it will formally announce on Wednesday, state governments, energy companies and utilities will be required to buy hundreds of thousands more cars, vans and light trucks that use alternative fuels.


Overprotecting Corporations
The House Commerce Committee has approved legislation to discourage frivolous suits by shareholders against corporate executives.
The bill would fix a problem that is real.
But it would also close the courthouse door to small investors who have bought stock based on fraudulent information.
The legislation, an amended version of a bill included in the G.O.P.'s Contract With America, goes too far -- threatening legal rights of ordinary citizens.
The bill's sponsors complain that some lawyers maintain a stable of "professional plaintiffs" who own small amounts of stock in many companies.
The minute the stock in a given company takes a nosedive, the lawyers file suit -- claiming that the price drop indicates the company had misled investors with fraudulent statements.
Shareholders have sued executives, for example, for innocuous predictions during company celebrations that the company's profits would rise.
When they did not, and share prices sagged, the lawyers pounced.


Ottawa Journal; Envoy Defends Eskimos' World (It's Her World)
She speaks of the despair that leads some of her people to alcoholism, drug abuse and suicide and of their pessimism over the lack of job opportunities.
Yet to Mary Simon, an Eskimo who recently became Canada's first Circumpolar Ambassador, the news is not all bad.
"Not everybody is out drinking and living a life of despair," she said.
"Part of our culture is thriving, and there's a strong determination to pull through all of this. So I say we can make the changes that are necessary to bring back the pride and the self-esteem."


Casino Employee Is Slain
An employee at the Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino was shot to death late Monday as she left work.
Georgia T. Mills, 28, was shot by a man who grabbed her by the throat, then fled on foot toward the boardwalk, investigators said.
She was pronounced dead at Atlantic City Medical Center.


Union Heads Debate Kirkland's Future
Frustrated by labor's constant losses, the leaders of the nation's most powerful unions debated today whether to remove Lane Kirkland as president of their federation, the A.F.L.-C.I.O., and replace him with someone they consider more aggressive and effective.
The gathering of 33 union presidents, in a rare executive session, took place at the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s winter meeting, and there was a note of urgency.
Republican control of Congress promises anti-labor legislation.
Major strikes drag on unsettled.
Wage increases in union contracts grow smaller each year.
And the Clinton Administration pushed through two trade agreements, despite labor's opposition.
All this has focused attention on reversing the decline.
And Mr.
Kirkland has become the first item on that agenda.


On Drugs, Off Welfare
Unrepentant drug dealers or users who rely on welfare to supplement their incomes or feed their habits are the targets of a bill that goes before the Assembly's Social Services Committee tomorrow.
The measure, sponsored by Rudy Garcia, Democrat of Union City, would cut off benefits for anyone convicted of a second drug offense.
"We're trying to save welfare for the truly needy," Mr.
Garcia said yesterday.


Changing Times in Nursing; A Strike Shows How Nurses Have Lost Leverage at Work
Julia Rivera, a registered nurse, left a job at a New York City hospital several years ago to work for a smaller one in this suburban village, even though she lost 13 years of seniority and took an $8,000 pay cut in the switch.
The smaller hospital offered Ms.
Rivera an imaginative enticement that many hospitals adopted to cope with the severe nursing shortages of the 1980's: offering nurses flexible work schedules.


Travel Agents' Group Plans to Sue Airlines
Ending a low profile that angered many of its members, the American Society of Travel Agents announced yesterday that it would soon file an antitrust suit and pursue other legal and legislative action to force the airlines to restore the 10 percent commissions that they once paid agents for ticket sales.
To put further pressure on the domestic airlines, the society said at a news conference in Washington that it would seek legislation to allow foreign airlines to carry passengers from one city in the United States to another.
It said that opening the domestic air-travel market to foreign carriers would keep airline ticket prices low "and assure that the airlines act like the competitors they claim to be."


The Neediest Cases; Building a New Life After a 20-Year Nightmare of Drug Use
Celestine B. is a 37-year-old woman haunted by memories of sexual abuse and homelessness.
She recalls the nearly 20 years of her life lost to drug addiction with anguish, and wonders what she might have accomplished during those years.
Ms.
B.'s drug use culminated in the loss of custody of her two older children.
When the Bureau of Child Welfare threatened to take custody of her youngest child, Ms.
B. sought the help of the Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service, one of the seven charities supported each year by The New York Times Neediest Cases fund.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING -- Addenda; Shoney's Account Placed in Review
Shoney's Restaurants in Nashville said yesterday that it had ended its relationship with Martin/Williams in Minneapolis after two and a half years.
As a result, the account, with billings estimated at $15 million, has been placed in review.


Hunter to Face York in Final
Last night at Lehman College's Apex Center in the Bronx, Staten Island became the latest casualty in Hunter's quest for its fourth straight City University of New York Athletic Conference championship as the Hawks triumphed, 95-76.
"They're trying to pluck the feathers off the Hawks," Hunter Coach Ray Amalbert had said before the tournament.
"But in the end, they'll see we'll be flying high."


Neal Is Superb in Sprints, but an Also-Ran in Cash
At 5 feet 7 inches and 177 pounds, with an explosive running style, Henry Neal is a sprinter in the mold of Bob Hayes, the Olympic 100-meter gold medalist in 1964.
Like Hayes, who went on to star as a wide receiver for the Dallas Cowboys, Neal is extremely powerful -- he bench-presses 380 pounds -- and like Hayes in his era, Neal has been the season's dominant sprint force.
Yet Neal, of Greenville, Tex., works full time as a teacher's aide earning the minimum wage and exists precariously in the margins of the sport.
He has no track shoe sponsor and collected a mere $500 on Feb. 10 in a 50-meter victory at the nationally televised Reno Air Games.


Fear and Flight in Mexico as Army Presses Its Offensive


Second Childhood Ends: Fantasy Leaguers Suddenly Find They Have to Get a Life
Dave Pearlstein, a real-estate broker for a company outside Boston, has been playing fantasy baseball for six years and spends 30 hours a week on the game.
Because his league will not play with replacement players this season, Pearlstein will fill the void by exercising and attending replacement games to scout for next year.
"Without my Rotisserie fix, I may have to go back to smoking," the 26-year-old Pearlstein said.


Woman Charged in Beating Death of Daughter, 6
A 22-year-old woman was charged with murder yesterday in the beating death of her 6-year-old daughter at a Staten Island motel that is being used as a shelter for the homeless.
The woman, Vanessa White, had called the police Monday afternoon, demanding urgent medical help for her child, Tynisha, who she said was "unresponsive" after taking a bath.


ATP Players Start Program for Children
The ATP Tour yesterday enlisted the world's top two players, PETE SAMPRAS and ANDRE AGASSI, to unveil its $1.5 million Kids' Fund, a 1995 program intended to attract more children to the sport of tennis.
Funds for the program were donated by the players out of the $60 million in 1995 prize money provided by the tour's 85-event circuit.
Each tournament will stage a Kids' Day, when players among the top 50 will appear at clinics and autograph sessions, and participate in Smash Tennis, an action-oriented competition played on a minicourt.


DANCE
With All-Embracing Humor, Dark as Well as Sunny  Hilary Easton Clark Studio Theater
Hilary Easton's generous, inclusive sense of humor was one of the most likable things about a program of four new and recent works that she presented on Friday night at the Clark Studio Theater.
Hers is not an unfailingly sunny humor.
Ms.
Easton seems fully aware of the darker side of human nature and presents that, too, in dances filled with choreo


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
5.93
3.33
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.74
5.68
3.33
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.01
6.98
3.43
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.43
7.41
6.04
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.61
7.58
6.60
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.48
8.46
7.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.49
6.49
5.65
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Peso Rescue Sets New Limits on Mexico
The United States and Mexico reached agreement today on a broader-than-expected rescue plan that will include the use of American funds to keep Mexico's private banks from collapsing, while effectively giving Washington veto power over much of Mexico's economic policy for the next decade.
The $20 billion aid program, the centerpiece of an international loan package for Mexico worth about $50 billion, is intended to restore the confidence of international investors in the Mexican economy and gradually pull the country out of its financial crisis.
The accord was signed this afternoon by Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin and Mexico's Finance Minister, Guillermo Ortiz.


New York's Woodlands Also Facing Threats
To the Editor:
Re your article on disappearing forests (Science Times, Feb. 14): How many New Yorkers are aware of the native woodlands in their own backyard, namely Central Park and Inwood Park?


Book Notes
Politics and Bedfellows
The rival colophons, or publishing logos, of Simon &amp; Schuster and Random House will appear together for the second time ever on a new book by James Carville.
The unlikely reunion of publishing giants follows the success of their first joint venture, "All's Fair," the best seller by Mr.
Carville, the Democratic consultant, and his Republican wife and consultant to President Bush, Mary Matalin.
The new Carville book, to be published in January in time for the New Hampshire primaries, is being billed as a Democratic response to the Republicans' Contract With America.


METRO DIGEST
DEATH PENALTY CARRIES STEEP COSTS
When a preliminary agreement was reached last week on restoring the death penalty in New York State, Governor Pataki rejected proposals for a study of the measure's costs because, he insisted, the law would deter crime and save tax dollars.
But the experience of California and many other states offers a cautionary example of both the legal burdens and daunting expense of capital punishment.
A1.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 12 about attacks on the Food and Drug Administration by conservative advocacy groups and their allies misstated the relationship between the Competitive Enterprise Institute and the American Enterprise Institute.
They get funds from some of the same sources, but the C.E.I. is not an offshoot of the A.E.I.


DANCE
From and to the Earth In a Ritual of Celebration  Lakota Sioux Indian Dance Theater Symphony Space
The stage became a symbol of the earth itself on Saturday night when the Lakota Sioux Indian Dance Theater appeared in a program that made dancing a ceremonial act.
The troupe, directed by Henry Smith, was founded in 1978 on the Rosebud Reservation in South Dakota.
Its dancers clearly seek to honor the ground upon which they, and all people, tread.


Knicks Rally, but 37-Point First Half Says It All
The Knicks made a mess in the first half last night and they ran out of time trying to clean it up.
Unable to overcome a 27-point deficit in the third quarter, the Knicks dropped a 99-91 decision to the short-handed but resourceful Cleveland Cavaliers at Madison Square Garden.


Yeltsin Move Has Delighted The Doctors
With the publication of a decree by President Boris N. Yeltsin in the official press, possibly on Wednesday, all advertisements for tobacco and alcohol products will be banned in Russia.
Public health specialists have expressed delight in what they say is a long overdue attempt to address the alarming surge in illness and death rates here.


Mars Ends Its Relationship With Saatchi
The Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company suffered the sharpest blow yet since the ouster of its former chairman when Mars Inc. said yesterday that it would dismiss the company's two main agencies and reassign the accounts they handled among three other shops.
Mars said it would reassign an estimated $400 million in advertising accounts currently handled by the agencies, Bates Worldwide and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide, to two of Mars's other ad agencies and would also hire a new agency, BBDO Worldwide.


Nassau, Reining In Deficit, Just Misses Breaking Even
A drop in sales tax revenue at the end of the year and higher social service costs left Nassau County with a deficit of $3.9 million in 1994, county officials said today.
But the deficit was down sharply for the second consecutive year, after peaking at $120 million in 1992.


Clinton Says G.O.P. Rule Cutting Would Cost Lives
President Clinton today attacked Republican proposals for limits on new Federal regulations as an extreme idea that "would cost lives and dollars." But in an effort to show his own commitment to cutting red tape, he ordered Federal agencies to weed out unnecessary rules and report the results to him by June 1.
Mr.
Clinton did not specifically vow to veto a bill on regulations that is due for a vote in the House this week.
The legislation would suspend Federal regulations imposed since the November elections until the new Republican majority in Congress could pass new laws governing future rule-making.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on the Media Business page on Monday about rising paper prices in the book publishing industry misstated the surname of a senior securities analyst at S. G. Warburg.
He was Bruce Kirk, not King.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ARM FINANCIAL GROUP INC., a provider of financial services for the long-term savings and retirement markets, said it planned to acquire the assets and business operations of SBM Co. for $38.6 million.
COASTAL HEALTHCARE GROUP INC., Durham, N.C., a physicians' contract management service, agreed to acquire Better Health Plan Inc.
Buffalo, which provides health care to Medicaid recipients in New York state, for about $20 million in cash and stock.


Rangers Weary, but Find Their Rhythm
Never mind that the Rangers were operating on rubber legs toward the end of the game, because of weariness from their fifth game in seven days.
Fatigue aside, the Rangers tonight tenaciously held on for a 5-3 victory over the Florida Panthers before 14,703 at Miami Arena.


Bank Challenges I.R.S. on Refunds for Borrowers
The nation's leading maker of loans secured by expected income-tax refunds sought a court order yesterday to force the Internal Revenue Service to continue to be its collection agent, a job the Government handles so efficiently that the delinquency rate on such loans is less than 1 percent.
The Beneficial National Bank, an arm of the Beneficial Corporation of Wilmington, Del., said it had extended 1.2 million loans this year to taxpayers who pledged their refunds as security and signed papers directing that the refunds be sent directly to the bank, which would then retire their loans.
The bank said it would make an additional two million refund anticipation loans but for the I.R.S. plan to send refunds directly to taxpayers.


Insurance Brokers Speak Out
A public hearing attended by insurance brokers?
It doesn't sound exciting, but dozens showed up here last night, and they were angry.
Since New Jersey folded its state-run auto insurance pool in 1990 and left insuring up to private carriers, more than a hundred brokers in Hudson County have gone out of business because, they say, carriers are reluctant to underwrite policies in high-crime areas.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY,
The New Niceness?
Consider: Getting out of a cab the other evening, I dropped my wallet onto the pavement of Madison Avenue.
Four days later, when a large manila envelope with the return address "Mr. Nice Guy" arrived in the mail, I knew immediately I was being reunited with my lost wallet.
What I didn't expect was the accompanying letter.
It said:


D'Amato Says He's in Love. He Must Be: She's a Democrat.
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato called a news conference yesterday to announce that he is in love.
It was a first even for Mr.
D'Amato, whose hunger for headlines is such that he has done everything from going undercover on a Federal buy-and-bust operation to singing "Old MacDonald had some pork (ee-eye-ee-eye-o)" on the Senate floor.
And the tabloids, which have been in saturation-coverage mode since rumors started flying last week, had it right: Mr.
D'Amato, 57, confirmed that he intends to marry Claudia Cohen, a former gossip columnist who is an entertainment reporter on the midmorning television talk show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."


Old Man With a Horn: Still Swinging
FOUR years ago, Benny Waters finally came home from Paris, where he had been a jazzman for 40 years, to resume his career in New York.
"I was 89 years old and the Medicare wouldn't pay for my eye operation over there," he said in the parlor of the house in Hollis, Queens, where he rents the upstairs.


New Chief Counsel Is Named
Margaret M. Foti of Demarest, a lawyer with the Newark firm of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene and MacRae, has been named Governor Whitman's new chief counsel.
Ms.
Foti, 41, will succeed Peter Verniero, who has been named the Governor's chief of staff.
Judy Shaw, who has served as chief of staff since the Governor took office in January 1994, has resigned, effective Friday.


Examining a Jump in Police Brutality Complaints
Last year, 557 people came forward to lodge complaints against police officers in four Bronx precincts.
The cases filed with the Civilian Complaint Review Board ranged from accusations of police brutality to claims that officers used foul language.
The complaints involving the four precincts, which cover a largely poor swath of the central Bronx, represented a 50 percent increase in the number of cases from the year before.
While the number of complaints citywide rose 37.4 percent last year, the even greater increase in the four Bronx precincts is particularly troubling to the review board.


Playful Puppetry, for Adults Only
The well-named Feebles are a raunchy troupe of show-biz puppets able to ooze, drool, sniff, retch and copulate in ways that would make the Muppets blush.
Sprung from the febrile imagination of Peter Jackson, they run seriously amok in "Meet the Feebles," a 1989 film padded out to feature length and destined to stand as an unfortunate footnote to Mr.
Jackson's career.
Mr.
Jackson is best known as the director of "Heavenly Creatures," which has bizarre, elaborate fantasy sequences animated by the same overwrought playfulness that is seen here.
But in "Heavenly Creatures," with its tale of a murder committed by two love-struck, delusional teen-agers, Mr.
Jackson found the ballast to give his wildly fanciful outbursts a somber tinge.
"Meet the Feebles," which opens today at the Film Forum, has an overload of aimless giddiness without anything to keep it in check.
Had Mr.
Jackson not already used up the title "Bad Taste" on an earlier film, it would have fit "Meet the Feebles" well.


Carl Tolman, 97, University Official
Carl Tolman, who in 35 years with Washington University in St.
Louis rose from an assistant geology professor to become chancellor, died on Feb. 13 at his home in Kirkwood, Mo.
He was 97 and had lived for many years in University City, Mo.
The cause was complications from a stroke, said his wife, Irene Robertson Tolman.


Abolish the Board of Regents
It is the oldest continuous education policy body in the nation, and such distinguished citizens as Alexander Hamilton, DeWitt Clinton and Dr.
Kenneth Clark have served as members.
But advanced age and past distinction do not justify perpetuating New York State's Board of Regents.
Gov.
George Pataki is right to want to abolish it.
The Regents, established in 1784, decree standards and broad policies for public and private education at all levels, and select the Commissioner of Education, who carries out their directives.
The 16-member board also licenses and disciplines 38 professions, from psychologists and accountants to masseurs, and oversees libraries, museums, public broadcasting and services to the disabled (including a school for the deaf and one for the blind).


From Canada With a Mission: Make It New
Ballet Jorgen of Toronto slipped in and out of New York City for a single performance over the weekend, without attracting much attention.
And that was a pity, because the company is a rare and exhilarating find.
The nine-member troupe -- which appeared on Saturday night at the Pace Downtown Theater, in its New York City debut -- was founded in 1987 by Bengt Jorgen, a former soloist with the National Ballet of Canada.
Arnold Spohr, director emeritus of the Royal Winnipeg Ballet, is its associate director.
The company's mission is creating new ballets, and freshness, authority and intelligence, as well as first-rate though simple production values, are hallmarks of its work.


In France, A Citizen Turns 120
She was 13 when an artist named Vincent van Gogh first came to her native Arles to paint.
She stopped riding a bicycle through the streets of that ancient French city only 20 years ago, when she turned 100.
Today, Jeanne Calment, the oldest person alive whose age has been verified with official documents, celebrated her 120th birthday, and France celebrated with her.


Welfare Ban Punishes Young Unwed Mothers
To the Editor:
"House Panel Votes to Ban Welfare Benefits for Unmarried Mothers Under 18" and "Republicans Keep Overhaul Intact" (news articles, Feb. 14 and 15) perpetuate a misunderstanding regarding the scope of the provision approved by the House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Human Resources to deny cash assistance to children born outside of marriage to mothers under 18.


Iverson and Lopez Vying For Big East Rookie Honors
The Big East Rookie of the Year award may not have the prestige of the Player of the Year award, but trying to forecast who will win it is producing just as much anticipation and debate.
It will be either Georgetown's Allen Iverson or Felipe Lopez of St.
John's, the two freshmen heralded for the resurgence of the Big East Conference.
All season, the two players have been compared and contrasted, and as the regular season winds down, both seem to have shed their early growing pains and displayed some of their best skills.
Iverson poured in 26 points in leading Georgetown to a surprisingly easy 77-52 victory over Villanova Monday night at USAir Arena.
Lopez gets his chance to respond tonight when St.
John's plays Providence at Madison Square Garden.


For Dell, a Tripling of Earnings
The Dell Computer Corporation reported yesterday that its profits tripled for the fourth quarter, helped by the revival of its notebook computer business.
The strong performance by Dell also underlines the success of its decision last spring to abandon an earlier effort to sell its personal computers through big retailers, like Wal-Mart, and to return to its roots as a mail-order PC marketer.
Today, Dell ships its machines directly from its factories to buyers instead of through retail middlemen.


A World Opens Behind Bars
On the bitter-cold evening of March 13, 1991, 17-year-old Larry Elting and his 19-year-old brother, William, went out to settle a score with a man Larry said had threatened him at a party just days before.
On the corner of Main and North White Streets in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., the three men met face to face.
Each carried a gun.
Angry words were exchanged, and, soon after, gunshots.
William was shot in the neck, and as Larry dropped to his knees to help his brother, the other man fled.


Across the U.S., Executions Are Neither Swift Nor Cheap
Eighteen years ago, California reinstated capital punishment and with it the long and costly legal process involved in executing a criminal.
Fifteen years passed before the first man was gassed to death at San Quentin.
One other man has since been executed, while 397 men and 6 women await their fates on death row.


Nature's Wakeup Call
Was it a plane crash, a gas explosion or the end of the world?
People across central New Jersey were startled awake at 5:30 A.M. yesterday, and hundreds of them called the police here and in neighboring communities.
First there was a bright blue flash, said Capt.
Kenneth Devuyst of the borough police.
Then came the ear-splitting noise, he said, and "as it rolled on and on for seconds on end, I realized it was just thunder." Just thunder?
DAVID STOUT


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING -- Addenda; People
Ellen Miller was named president at a new health care division of Kobs &amp; Draft Worldwide, Chicago.
She was previously executive director for marketing at the Upjohn Co., Kalamazoo, Mich. *
Allan L. Mager was named senior partner and management director at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Chicago, succeeding Bruce Jasurda, who left to become chief operating officer at David Cravit CME, Chicago.
Mr.
Mager was previously executive vice president and managing director at DFM/Tatham Advertising, Chicago.


Security Is Lost in Cyberspace
The arrest last week of the fugitive computer programmer Kevin D. Mitnick ended one man's spree of breaking into computer and telephone networks to steal information and services, Federal investigators say.
But Mr.
Mitnick was, despite his considerable technical skills, just one of thousands of shadowy figures who have been traversing public and private computer networks with relative impunity.
Since Mr.
Mitnick was jailed a week ago in North Carolina, there have been nearly 30 Internet break-ins serious enough to have been reported to the Computer Emergency Response Team, a government-financed security organization.
The team declines to release any details for fear of further damaging the privacy and security of the corporations, universities and government agencies whose computers were attacked.


Foreign Affairs; Don't Mess With Moody's
In the 1960's the most important visitor a developing country could have was from the head of AID, the U.S. agency that doled out foreign aid.
In the 1970's and 80's the most important visitor a developing country could have was from the I.M.F., to help restructure its economy.
In the 1990's the most important visitor a developing country can have is from Moody's Investors Service Inc.
Because we now live in an age when governments are basically broke, the only way for most countries to raise cash for development is either to enforce savings at home or attract investors from the world's major bond markets.
Moody's is the credit rating agency that signals the electronic herd of global investors where to plunk down their money, by telling them which countries' bonds are blue-chip and which are junk.


Fleet Financial Offers $3.7 Billion for Shawmut
In a deal that would create the largest bank in New England, the Fleet Financial Group of Providence, R.I., agreed yesterday to acquire the Shawmut National Corporation of Hartford and Boston for $3.7 billion in stock.
After completion of the deal, Fleet would be the country's ninth-largest bank, with more than $80 billion in assets.
The headquarters of the new bank, which plans to use the Fleet name, would be in Boston, where both banks have large operations.


Beyond the 100 Days
Believing that a campaign promise is one thing but a signed contract is quite another, House Republican candidates signed the Contract With America last September.
Today, we reach day 50 of that historic commitment to change this country.
This midway point is a time to reflect on our progress.
As promised, on a memorable first day the House passed legislation that brought Congress under the same regulatory laws as other businesses.
To control runaway Federal spending, we have passed the balanced budget amendment and a Presidential line-item veto.
To curb Congress's habit of creating a program but leaving the payments to the states, we have enacted reform of "unfunded mandates." To restore credibility to the criminal justice system, we have revised the exclusionary rule, which would end legal technicalities that freed many criminals, and we have established an effective death penalty.
And to insure that our military forces are not needlessly put in harm's way, we have voted restrictions on how our troops are deployed overseas.


Route 92 Project to Proceed
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman had until yesterday to block construction of a 6.7-mile toll road between Interchange 8-A on the Turnpike and Route 1.
She did not, so the Route 92 project will go forward unless the courts intervene.


G.A.O. Depicts The District As Insolvent
The General Accounting Office has concluded that the District of Columbia is insolvent and that it has money on hand only because it has not paid many millions of dollars in bills.
In testimony scheduled to be given on Wednesday morning before a joint hearing of two House subcommittees that oversee the District, John Hill, a chief G.A.O. accountant, will describe the bleak fiscal conditions of a city that could have a budget deficit of $464 million by the end of the fiscal year in September, one central lawmaker said tonight.


Man Held in Death of Boy, 2
A man killed a 2-year-old boy by bashing his head against a bed post after sexually assaulting him, the police said yesterday.
The man, Larry Jerome White, 43, was being held without bail on murder charges.
The boy's mother, Annette Baker, 35, was charged with endangering the welfare of a child for leaving her son in what the police said were squalid conditions at Mr.
White's apartment.


State Universities Reshaped In the Era of Budget Cutting
With the nation's new emphasis on cutting taxes and curbing government spending, governors and legislatures are reducing the budgets of state university systems and, in the process, forcing the most radical reshaping of public higher education since its rapid growth in the 1960's.
Universities are raising tuition and cutting staff, as they did in 1992 and 1993 because of deep, recession-driven budget cuts, but this time they are also reducing the requirements for a degree, closing entire departments and adding financial penalties for students taking courses beyond those needed for graduation.


INSIDE
Chevron Settles Sex Suit
The Chevron Corporation has paid $2.2 million to four women who sued it, charging that they were sexually harassed as employees at a computer unit in California.
Page A16.
Changing Times for Nurses
Nyack Hospital in Nyack, N.Y., wants to end a flexible-schedule option for nurses, illustrating a drastic change in the workplace climate for the profession.
Page B1.
Eye Operation Questioned
A study finds that surgery to correct a common eye problem is so ineffective, and possibly harmful, that Federal officials are recommending it not be done.
Page C10.


Honey, Lime and Jalapeno: Perfect for Salmon
A TIP of the hat to Dean Fearing, the executive chef of the Mansion on Turtle Creek in Dallas, for the idea behind this salmon recipe.
His version, served with a roasted green chili sauce, is far more elaborate than the one here.
But this quick recipe -- flavored with honey, lime, shallots, garlic and jalapeno -- is also perfect for salmon.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Kentucky Routs Alabama  No. 6 Kentucky (19-4, 11-2) moved a step closer to its first Southeastern Conference title in nine years, stifling 20th-ranked Alabama (18-7, 8-5) for a 72-52 victory on the road last night.
The 52 points were Alabama's worst offensive showing of the season.
Rodrick Rhodes led the Wildcats with 16 points and Jason Caffey had 13 for Alabama. (AP)


What Has 5 Sides and Is Turning Green?
The way things are going at the Pentagon, the military brass will soon be treading on carpets made of natural fibers, with nontoxic backing.
Energy-efficient lights will brighten the dim halls.
And trees and green spaces will be carved out of the vast parking lots to help filter the water running off into creeks and streams.
Engineers are beginning a $ 1.25 billion reconstruction of the Pentagon -- military spending that the editors of the Whole Earth Catalog might well approve of.


Quiet Virtues of a Longtime Pianist
Grant Johannesen, the distinguished American pianist who first played in New York City 50 years ago, began the second half of his Carnegie Hall recital on Saturday night with Franck's "Prelude, Chorale and Fugue." It was the second occasion this once ubiquitous, now fairly uncommon Franck piece had been heard in Carnegie this year; Yevgeny Kissin played it a few weeks ago.
These two pianists make an interesting pair: the one a young musician eager to make an old tradition his own; the other a figure with a direct link to the late-19th-century world through his studies with Egon Petri, the star pupil of Busoni.
In technical terms, Mr.
Johannesen could not compete with his younger colleague.
He has trouble producing a full sound, and his technique is no longer flawless.
His rendition of the Franck sounded muted and fragile in comparison with Mr.
Kissin's gorgeous surge of tone.


Argentina's Pressured Press
Argentina has only recently emerged from a long spell of abusive government that left its economy in ruins and democratic political culture paralyzed by fear and cynicism.
President Carlos Menem, seeking re-election this year, deserves much of the credit for Argentina's economic recovery, particularly steps that have tamed inflation and attracted foreign investment.
But he has been less consistent in his commitment to democratic recovery.
Now he is sponsoring new libel laws that threaten press freedom.
In the past few years a revitalized judiciary and press have helped expose the kind of government corruption that used to go unchecked.
Such public scrutiny is essential to establishing democratic accountability and discouraging abuses of public trust.
But Mr.
Menem has not appreciated the role played by the judiciary and press and has repeatedly tried to compromise their independence.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International The United States and Mexico agreed on the conditions for a $20 billion plan to rescue the Mexican economy.
While the plan allows the use of American funds to prevent Mexico's private banks from collapsing, it also imposes harsh austerity measures on Mexico, which could force the country into deep recession.  [ Page A1. ]


Bounces and Bruises Go Against the Islanders
The Islanders came out of Monday night's game at Montreal with little doubt that the bounces are not going their way.
After losing to the Canadiens, 3-2, in overtime on a fluke goal stemming from a freak deflection, the Islanders arrived here for Wednesday night's game against the Sabres with three defensemen as question marks.


IN THE STUDIO WITH: Michael Reagan; On the Inside, Looking Surprised
MICHAEL REAGAN has read his eight newspapers and gone through the day's stack of faxes.
Now, five minutes from air time, sitting in the radio studio above Hollywood, he is painstakingly arranging three dozen articles and reports in stacks around the microphone.
It's far too much material to get through during an ordinary three-hour talk show, but he prepares for the worst.
"I want to be ready to talk for three straight hours if I have to," he explains.
"I operate on the assumption that nobody is going to call me."


Postwar Camps Don't Make Nazis of Jews
To the Editor:
"German Publisher Drops Book on Postwar Camps for Nazis" (news article, Feb. 16) is accurate, but the headline isn't.
As I report in "An Eye for an Eye," the camps in Poland in 1945 weren't for Nazis but for German civilians, of whom less than 1 percent were ever indicted as Nazis.
Many were children.
You refer to a review of "An Eye for an Eye" by the German critic Eike Geisel.
Mr.
Geisel wrote that I come from "the school of sadistic sensationalism," and to prove it he quoted parts of the German edition of "An Eye for an Eye." But neither I nor my German translator ever wrote what Mr.
Geisel quoted.
Incredibly, Mr.
Geisel himself rewrote a part of the German edition to convey a sadistic sensationalism that he then attributed to me.
Many camp commandants in Poland (and nearly all the directors in Warsaw) were Jews, and Mr.
Geisel wrote that my message is "Jews equal Nazis," is Jewish and Nazi criminals are "mirror images." That isn't my message at all.
I specifically write in "An Eye for an Eye" that the Jews and Nazis "of course . . . hadn't done the same things at all," and that I would never contend that the Jews and the Germans "were equivalent, even morally."
Instead, I write of Jews like Zlata, Moshe, Mania and Pola, who refused to look at, much less to work at, the Polish camps.
I write of Jews like Shlomo Singer, who at the risk of his life told people who tortured the Germans, "You must stop doing this," and of Jews like Lola Potok, a commandant, who at first took revenge on the Germans but then, at the risk of her life, protected them, even smuggled them food.
At the end of "An Eye for an Eye," I write, "I do believe it's a story of Jewish redemption."
Again incredibly, Mr.
Geisel isn't a right-wing but left-wing critic, though surely the German right wing is now parroting him and saying that Jews equal Nazis.
It is tragic that "An Eye for an Eye" is not being published in Germany now and that Germans have nowhere to learn the truth.
JOHN SACK  New York, Feb. 16, 1995


Merger Set In China's Auto Sector
In the first major step toward consolidating China's auto industry, the country's biggest vehicle producer is buying a majority stake in another leading Chinese auto maker that operates joint ventures with General Motors and Toyota.
The move -- which was announced today in a Chinese newspaper, Shanghai Securities News -- appears to be a critical plank in a platform that the Chinese Government made public last year: it wants to create four to six core auto companies that can increase vehicle production fivefold, to 6.5 million units in 15 years from from 1.3 million in 1994.


Player Charged With Assault in London
Manchester United star ERIC CANTONA was charged with common assault yesterday in London for attacking a spectator during a game at Crystal Palace last month.
Cantona, a 28-year-old Frenchman, was released on bail and ordered to appear before magistrates on March 23 to answer the charge, the lowest form of assault in English law.
It carries a maximum penalty of six months in prison and a $8,000 fine. (AP)


A 'Pseudo-Woman' Becomes a Mother
If ever a drag queen seemed meant for a weekly slot in prime time, it's the title character of Cheryl L. West's "Holiday Heart," which opened last night at the Manhattan Theater Club.
This churchgoing, self-described "pseudo-woman," who becomes the guardian of an inner-city girl abandoned by her mother, is a female impersonator whom even Jesse Helms might love.
Yes, Holiday may have, as he puts it, "a little too much twist in my walk and a little too much song in my talk," but his values aren't all that different from those of the matriarchs of television comedies in the 1960's.


New Zealanders Root For More Than the Boat
Strewn on the floor at the Black Magic 2 sail loft here is a 4,000-square-foot spinnaker that looks at first to be a de Kooning painting.
But on closer examination, those puddles of red and blue ink are swatches of good luck notes signed by more than 360,000 people in New Zealand.
In relative terms, that represents about one-tenth of the country's population.
"New Zealand tends to get wrapped up in its yachting events," said Peter Blake, Team New Zealand's syndicate founder and boss.
"There was a huge queue of people lining up to sign that sail. And then when it was finished, we started getting phone calls from small towns all over the countryside wondering why they didn't have a chance to sign it."


Kansas May Get a Cozy Spot in Tourney
More than two and a half weeks before its decisions are chiseled into brackets, the committee that oversees the national collegiate basketball tournament has already faced its first controversy.
The success of the University of Kansas, and the presence of a Midwest regional site at Kemper Arena in nearby Kansas City, have combined to create a scenario that could create an imposing obstacle for possible tournament opponents of the Jayhawks.


C.C.N.Y. Wasn't Alone in '51 Basketball Scandal
To the Editor:


Unbloodied Feet of Nicole Simpson Indicate That She Died First, Investigator Testifies
A police detective testified today that because the bottoms of Nicole Brown Simpson's bare feet were clean as she lay in a pool of blood in front of her condominium, she was probably the first of the two crime victims to die.
Previously, prosecutors had not articulated who they believed died first last June, when the bodies of Mrs.
Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were found outside Mrs.
Simpson's home.
But Tom Lange, one of two detectives leading the investigation into the killings, today constructed his own chronology, gleaned from observing one of the few parts of Mrs.
Simpson's body that had not been drenched in blood.


A Hospital Sees Gain For Blacks On Cancer
With equal access to the latest therapy, African-American children with cancer can recover and survive as long as white children with the disease, according to researchers at a major children's treatment center.
The investigators, at St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, said today that they drew that conclusion from a study of cancer patients treated there over a 30-year period.
The finding contrasts with national figures indicating that black survival statistics are generally poorer than those for whites.


U.N.L.V. Coach May Not Return This Year
Nevada-Las Vegas, which has been without Coach TIM GRGURICH since early January, may finish the season without him.
Grgurich visited his doctor in Southern California on Monday, and the team trainer, JERRY KOLOSKIE, said he was told to stay away from basketball completely.
In recent weeks, Grgurich had been coaching the team in practice but not going to games.
Koloskie said that Grgurich, who was hospitalized in January for symptoms relating to exhaustion, made a mistake by returning to practice before completing the six weeks of rest prescribed by his doctor.
Meanwhile, the Runnin' Rebels (9-13) have struggled.
U.N.L.V. officials said no decision had been made as to Grgurich's his status. (AP)


P.L.O. Confers in Cairo as Peace Effort Falters
Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, began a two-day meeting here tonight with several top advisers to discuss the faltering self-rule accord with Israel and mounting disenchantment among the P.L.O.'s rank and file.
Mr.
Arafat and eight other members of the 18-member P.L.O. executive committee began the meeting after a new round of talks with Israel in Cairo.
Those talks resolved some minor disputes but failed to reach agreement on the central issue of Israeli troop withdrawal from the West Bank.


Scion of the Foxes Makes His Broadway Debut
With his aristocratic bearing, James Fox is a natural to play lords and masters.
The same thing could be said about his brothers, Edward and Robert, although the last retired from acting to devote himself to theatrical producing.
The three Foxes are often mistaken for one another, even when they are in the same place at the same time.
Theatergoers at the opening of Edward Albee's "Three Tall Women" in London swiveled their heads to try to distinguish them.
In this case, Robert Fox was a co-producer of the play; his brothers were in the audience.
Directors may say, "Let's get a Fox," and not differentiate James from Edward.
"It's a little irksome, and damaging to the ego," said James Fox, while admitting that the closeness in looks and age can cause fraternal confusion.


Private School Curriculum Brings Public School Improvement
With their books open to a section on slavery, the fourth grade class at the Barclay School was told to read the material, then write a letter to a friend, explaining what it would be like to be a slave.
Kimberly Smith was eager to start.


24,000 Dead in Chechnya, Rights Group Tells Yeltsin
As Russian forces intensified attacks on rebel troops in Chechnya today, a startling preliminary report by the President's commission on human rights suggested that as many as 24,400 civilians have died since the bloody war in the separatist republic began on Dec. 11.
But the figure -- so high that the researcher who came up with it likened the Chechen conflict to the slaughter of Polish civilians during World War II -- was questioned even by the head of the human rights commission, Sergei A. Kovalyov.


Supreme Court Plans Gay Rights Decision
The Supreme Court will review a Colorado ruling that a voter-approved amendment to the state's constitution violated the rights of homosexuals "to participate equally in the political process."


W. W. Watkins, 83, Research Chemist
William Way Watkins, a chemist who did early research in the development of the synthetic fibers Orlon and Dacron, died on Wednesday in the White Horse Village retirement home in Newtown Square, Pa.
He was 83 and had been a resident of Swarthmore, Pa., for more than 40 years.
The cause was Parkinson's disease, said his daughter, Anne Watkins, of Cape May Court House, N.J.


Morris Schulzinger, 94, Ohio Physician
Dr.
Morris S. Schulzinger, a physician for 61 years who became an expert on accidents and their prevention, died on Wednesday at Christ Hospital in Cincinnati, where he lived.
He was 94.
The cause was kidney and heart failure, said a daughter, Penina Frankel of Cincinnati.


Corrections
A chart in Science Times yesterday showing the relationship between nutrients called carotenoids and the risk of heart disease reversed two labels.
People with the lowest level of carotenoids in the blood had the highest risk, not the lowest.


POP
Wonder-Provoking Contrasts From a Charanga Orchestra  Orquesta Broadway S.O.B.'s
Going to hear charanga, the Afro-Cuban music that uses strings, flute and a standard rhythm section, is a bit like going to see a rare ibex in a zoo: it's a wonder that it exists at all, and its existence can color one's perception of its value.
Orquesta Broadway, one of the last remaining charanga orchestras, played at S.O.B.'s on Monday night as part of the Vernon Boggs Memorial Series, and although the first set wasn't as precise as it might have been, it still evoked wonder.
The group, featuring two violinists and a flutist, along with the rhythm section, was both graceful and brutal, often at once.


William A. Moffett, 62, Is Dead; Opened Door to Dead Sea Scrolls
William A. Moffett, a historian and librarian who was instrumental in breaking the 40-year monopoly on scholarly access to the Dead Sea Scrolls, died on Monday night at his home in Pasadena, Calif.
He was 62.
The cause was cancer of the bladder, according to the Huntington Library in San Marino, where he had been the director since 1990.


U.S. Urged to Bar Frenchman for War Deeds
A former French Resistance fighter and a veteran Nazi hunter are urging that a wealthy French industrialist be barred from the United States because he wrote anti-Semitic propaganda during the Nazi occupation.
The Justice Department is reviewing the allegations against the industrialist, Andre Bettencourt, a French Senator and former Cabinet minister who recently resigned as deputy chairman of the cosmetics giant L'Oreal.


Changing an Inflation Gauge Is Tougher Than It Sounds
At first glance, Alan Greenspan appeared to offer Congress a relatively painless way to slash $150 billion from the Federal deficit over the next five years.
But when it comes to saving money in Washington, nothing is ever quite as simple as it seems.
Last month, Mr.
Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, told lawmakers that inflation might be overstated by as much as 1.5 percentage points in official Government figures.
He suggested that a simple fix in the Consumer Price Index could reap big savings.
How?
Trimming the inflation numbers would mean lower payouts to Social Security beneficiaries, other recipients of Federal benefit programs and retired Government workers.


Ex-Officer Tells Court Of Protection And Payoffs
A former police officer who is the Government's main witness in the 30th Precinct corruption scandal testified yesterday that he and his partner took gifts from drug dealers for protecting them, including a motorcycle, a Cadillac and a $3,000 automobile paint job.
In one instance, the two returned the favor, he testified; he said he and his partner bought a drug dealer a Christmas present -- a bulletproof vest.


Wine Talk
THERE are still some wine enthusiasts in New York who remember the old Ambassador Wine Shop on East 86th Street, in the heart of Yorkville.
Ambassador, as might be expected in that once-solidly Teutonic neighborhood, specialized in German wines and stocked hundreds of different labels.
The Ambassador shop has been gone since the late 1960's, and nothing has come along to take its place.
With good reason.
The interest simply isn't out there.


Founders Favored Strong Government
To the Editor:
As a self-described "founder of The Federalist Society," Senator Spence Abraham (letter, Feb. 20) should review the historical context for his selective quotation from "The Federalist" essays, intended to demonstrate that the Founding Fathers would have approved the balanced-budget amendment.
Their overwhelming concern was with the lack of "energy" in central government under the Articles of Confederation.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL REPORT
Haggerty Award
With the regular season winding down, local coaches met at Madison Square Garden yesterday and pitched their candidates for the Haggerty Award, which is given to the outstanding Division I player of the metropolitan area.


Mets Prospect Stuck on Long Honeymoon
For three straight winters, Edgardo Alfonzo returned to his native Venezuela and worried about whether it was the right time to marry Delia Campos, his childhood sweetheart.
Each time, he asked his agent, Peter Greenberg, for advice.
Each time, he decided to wait a bit longer, until his baseball career could provide more stability.


Terrorism Can Be Just Another Point of View
A DEATH IN JERUSALEM
By Kati Marton
Illustrated. 321 pages. Pantheon Books. $25.
If one person's terrorist is another's freedom fighter, then it is not surprising that one's peacemaker can be another's tormentor.


With Half a Brain
It is a script for a movie made sometime in the 1940's, in black and white, or in the 90's in glorious color.
Some tough-smart-hip-attractive woman, played by somebody like Lauren Bacall or Emma Thompson, falls in with a tough-smart-hip-attractive man, played by somebody like Humphrey Bogart or Sean Connery.
Fate throws them together in an extreme situation like a war or a jungle research project.
Inevitably she is younger and less experienced, but -- in the eyes of the crusty misogynist at her side -- her biggest handicap is that she is a woman.
She is plucky, smart, vulnerable yet competent.
At some point, in a moment of extreme duress when even Bogart-Connery has reached his limits -- the Nazis have them pinned down, the food has run out, the volcano is erupting, the ship is about to sink -- she comes up with an idea that pulls them through.
For this she wins the ultimate accolade: "You think like a man."


National Economic Council Head Is Named
After weighing the decision for more than two months, President Clinton today elevated Laura D'Andrea Tyson, the chairwoman of the Council of Economic Advisers, to fill a vacant post as coordinator of the Administration's economic policy.
In her new job as the new head of the National Economic Council, Dr.
Tyson will succeed Robert E. Rubin, who held the job until he was named Treasury Secretary in December.
She will move to the head of the table in Cabinet-level discussions on economic policy, with power tantamount to that of the national security adviser, from her current job, one that is usually filled by an academic economist.


For Aerobics Die-Hards, No Substitute Teachers
SOMETIMES when Enida Lopez needs a fitness fix, she develops "family problems." So devoted is she to her aerobics instructor, Natasha Kane, that she occasionally finds ways to duck out of work early to get to her classes at the World Gym.
"I've made excuses, it's true," said Ms.
Lopez, 25, an information specialist.
"Natasha is my personal trainer and my teacher, and sometimes I need to be here for three hours, six or seven days a week. Am I obsessed? Yes, I think I am."


Kukoc Hits Bull's-Eyes To Quickly Sink Hawks
Bulls 105, Hawks 88
Toni Kukoc has had a hot hand since the All-Star Game break, and the Atlanta Hawks did nothing to slow him down last night.
Kukoc hit his first 7 shots and scored 21 points as the visiting Chicago Bulls defeated the Hawks, 105-88.


Amtrak Is Ordered Not to Eject The Homeless From Penn Station
Saying she would not join in "labeling of the homeless as a criminal class," a Federal judge ordered Amtrak yesterday to stop ejecting people from Pennsylvania Station simply because they are homeless.
The advocates for the homeless who sued Amtrak said the judge's ruling, which called Penn Station a public place where loitering could not be prohibited, applied equally to any site, whether a train station or a shopping mall, that provided almost unlimited public access.


An Arsenal Under Fire
Is this the last stand for the Picatinny arsenal?
The Pentagon is not releasing the list of military installations it wants closed or consolidated until March 1, but a rumor has spread that the arsenal in Morris County, the Armaments Research Development and Engineering Center, will get the ax.
Several New Jersey Congressmen are to meet tomorrow with the Deputy Defense Secretary, John M. Deutch, to argue for keeping Picatinny open.


Agreement Reached On Gas to Balkans
The sanctions committee of the United Nations Security Council has reached an agreement that could allow a steady flow of Russian natural gas into both the capital of Bosnia and to Yugoslavia.
Providing the natural gas to heat homes, schools and hospitals is intended to forestall a crisis.
At the same time, the agreement, which was reached Friday, would maintain the trade embargo against Yugoslavia that has been in place since 1992 to put pressure on the Serbs in Yugoslavia to halt the aggression by Bosnian Serbs in Bosnia.
The agreement will extend through April 30.


Chevron Settles Sexual Harassment Charges
Chevron Corporation agreed yesterday to pay $2.2 million to settle sexual harassment charges that were brought by four female employees who said they had been the targets of a barrage of offensive jokes, E-mail messages and comments about their clothes and body parts, and, in one case, sadistic pornography sent through the company mail.
Lawyers for the four women, only one of whom still works for Chevron, said they believed that the settlement was probably the largest ever in a harassment case.
But since most pretrial settlements are never made public, it is impossible to say with any certainty that this settlement sets a record.


Anger Spreads Across Gaza As Life Moves Closer to Edge
Nasser Okal's timing could not have been worse.
On Jan. 22, his request for an Israeli work permit rose to the top of the applicants' pile, and he received a coveted document entitling him to travel daily to a construction job in Tel Aviv.


Talks Resume Amid Daily Disputes
The leaders of baseball's striking players and owners discussed their acrimonious labor history today as talks resumed in their seemingly ceaseless dispute.
At the same time, the two sides pondered the escalation of the skirmishes that break out almost daily and serve to intensify their differences.
Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, and Donald Fehr, the union head, led two small groups that met with Bill Usery Jr., the mediator, in Milwaukee to determine how to return to substantive negotiations.
Talks collapsed two weeks ago at the White House in the presence of President Clinton.


CHRONICLE
TOM STODDARD, the former executive director of the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund, wasn't sure how to react when he learned recently that the New York University School of Law would establish a fellowship in his honor to advance gay and lesbian rights.
"I grew up in the Midwest, in Glenview, Ill., but I have lived in New York for 25 years," Mr.
Stoddard said the other day.
"The Midwestern side of me is slightly embarrassed, the New York side of me is thrilled."


Man Is Accused Of Plot to Kill Shop Co-Owner
The son of the co-owner of a store on Orchard Street in Manhattan was arrested yesterday on a charge of plotting to kill his father's business partner of 50 years, the police said.
The son, Stephen Fine, 41, of Cliffside Park, N.J., who worked at the store on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, was charged with arranging for a hired gunman to kill Murray Klein.
The police said Mr.
Fine was tricked into believing that the plot had succeeded.
Officers said that his father, Julius Fine, was not involved in the plot.


In America; Whitman Steals the Future
Over the past 25 years the State of New Jersey has struggled, under a succession of Democratic and Republican governors, to reverse a social and economic decline that, by the 1960's, had hit many Northeastern industrial areas.
Difficult budget decisions were made, often at significant political cost.
But the benefits for New Jersey residents were many.
A vastly improved higher education system was developed and state aid to local public schools surged.
The environment was cleaned up.
Mass transit was improved.
The state's budget was balanced without gimmicks and its credit rating was triple-A.


Penalties Still Loom for Some Schools
Officials of the state's Education Department held fast to plans to impose $11 million in penalties on school districts that spend far above the average on non-classroom costs, despite testimony from school administrators today that the penalties amounted to a sneak attack.
The occasion was a special Senate Education Committee hearing called by Senate President Donald DiFrancesco of Scotch Plains.
Far from seeking to placate a room full of indignant district superintendents and school board members, Deputy Education Commisisoner Richard DiPatri bluntly acknowledged that the penalties were an element in a widening effort by the administration of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman to encourage small school districts to merge into larger ones and to press all of New Jersey's districts to cut back on overhead costs.


Edmund Adams, 60, N.F.L. Ad Executive
Edmund W. Adams, senior director of advertising for National Football League publications, died on Monday at New Rochelle (N.Y.) Hospital.
Mr.
Adams, who lived in Larchmont, N.Y., was 60.
He died from injuries suffered in a fall at his home, said his wife, the former Joan Pederson.


Rummaging for Thrift Clothes


Supreme Court to Rule on Anti-Gay Rights Law in Colorado
Setting the stage for its first ruling in a decade on gay rights, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether Colorado violated the constitutional guarantee of equal protection of the law by amending its Constitution to bar all measures protecting homosexuals against discrimination.
The Colorado Supreme Court ruled last October that the state provision violated the United States Constitution by restricting the rights of homosexuals "to participate equally in the political process." Several Colorado cities, including Denver, Boulder and Aspen, had passed ordinances barring discrimination against homosexuals by the time the state's voters adopted the provision, known as Amendment 2, in a referendum in November 1992.


Congressional Republicans Take Aim at an Extensive List of Environmental Statutes
Republicans plan to escalate their war on Federal regulations this week as House debate begins on a series of bills that, taken together, would fundamentally affect the enforcement of every existing environmental law.
The measures would temporarily freeze the Government's powers to make rules in virtually every area of Federal authority and strictly limit those powers in the future.
But nowhere would they have greater effect than in environmental regulation, where about 20 major laws generate a steady stream of rules intended to protect health, safety and natural resources.


Amtrak Can Be Sued on Poster, Court Rules
Handing at least a temporary victory to a New York City artist who wants to put up a huge political poster in Pennsylvania Station, the Supreme Court ruled today that Amtrak is an agency of the Federal Government and that as such, it is bound by the Constitution to respect individual rights like the right of free speech.
The 8-to-1 decision overturned a ruling in 1993 by the Federal appeals court in Manhattan that held that Amtrak, which owns Penn Station, is a private corporation to which the Constitution's limits do not apply.


Market Place; After a failed merger, investors have voted for E.D.S., not Sprint.
IF William T. Esrey, the Sprint Corporation's chief executive, were a Wall Street stock analyst, he might be looking for another job.
Last June, he sank a proposed merger with the Electronic Data Systems subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, saying that E.D.S. shares were worth so much less than market value, and his company's so much more, that Sprint deserved a premium of about a 20 percent.
At the time, the stock market valued each Sprint share as worth 1.1 E.D.S. shares.
But Mr.
Esrey wanted 1.3.


Supreme Court Eases the Way For Inmates to Get New Trials
The Supreme Court issued an important decision today on the obligation of Federal judges to safeguard the constitutional rights of state prison inmates.
In a 6-to-3 opinion notable for the absence of the Court's recent hostility toward Federal court review of state criminal proceedings, it ruled that a Federal judge who cannot decide whether a constitutional error affected the outcome of a state trial should assume that it did and should rule in the prisoner's favor by ordering a new trial.


Dr. Mary Scott, 87, Medical Researcher
Dr.
Mary Dwight B. McNair Scott, a biochemistry professor at the University of Pennsylvania who was a pioneer in the identification of the B complex of vitamins and their functions, died on Feb. 9 at the Hahnemann Hospital in Philadelphia, where she lived.
She was 87.
The cause was a heart attack, said her husband, Dr. Thomas F. McNair Scott.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the election of Myrlie Evers-Williams to head the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People misstated the business of Seligman &amp; Latz Inc., where she was vice president for advertising and publicity in the early 1970's.
The company operated jewelry and cosmetics departments and beauty parlors in New York City department stores; it was not an advertising firm.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Purcell's Gift for Poignancy With Also a Light Heart  The Grande Bande Cathedral of St.
John the Divine
Purcell fans may have harbored faint hopes that the tercentenary of the composer's death might yield a wholesale reappraisal of his work, but privately most realize that outside England a truly exhaustive survey is too much to expect.
Still, the anniversary has yielded some interesting recordings and performances that have raised the Purcell quotient modestly, and on Saturday evening Frederick Renz and his Grande Bande contributed a program of songs and instrumental works to the commemoration.


Cuts to Be Proposed On Buses and Subway
The Transit Authority plans to lay off workers, close a subway station in Brooklyn, eliminate express buses to three boroughs and shut down tow shuttle lines late at night, among other service cuts, to make up for a loss of $112 million in support from the city, a transit official said.


Vote Panel Cites Mayor Of Newark
Already under scrutiny by Federal prosecutors, Mayor Sharpe James today was accused of repeatedly violating state election laws by turning a storefront charity that he founded into an arm of his political machine that raised and spent hundreds of thousands of dollars.
Although the 27-count complaint carries no criminal penalties, it represents the first official action against Mr.
James since he and the municipal government were hit with a barrage of subpoenas in the summer.
The charges appear to provide a glimpse of the activities that the United States Attorney is also investigating.


Man Tied to Sedition Case Held in Gun-Running
A Queens carpenter with ties to defendants in the sedition trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 others was arrested early yesterday morning and charged with running guns to what officials have called a paramilitary training camp.
Federal agents surrounded the man, Yahya Abu Ubaidah Muhammad, at 7:15 A.M. yesterday at the corner of 89th Avenue and 186th Street in Hollis, Queens, as he walked from his home to a subway station.


Celtics to Retire Lewis's Number
During halftime of their game with Chicago on March 22, the Boston Celtics will retire No. 35 in memory of Reggie Lewis, who died of a heart problem in 1993 while shooting baskets.
Lewis played six seasons with the team, averaging 17.6 points a game.
His will be the 20th number retired, counting No. 18 twice for DAVE COWENS and JIM LOSCUTOFF. (AP)


No Headline
PARIS, Feb. 21 -- A series of spectacular slayings by Islamic militants in Algeria in recent weeks and growing attacks on vital targets in the capital are stirring concern that a showdown may be shaping between the Government and the militants.
Newspapers in France and in Britain reported today that a senior intelligence officer in the Algerian Army was shot to death with two bodyguards and his driver on Sunday in an Algiers suburb.
There was no official confirmation of the killing, but he would be the highest-ranking officer to be slain by militants since a military-backed coup set off an Islamic revolt there three years ago.
Islamic militants have also taken responsibility for blowing up three vital bridges in and around Algiers and killing at least 11 well-known figures in the arts and civil affairs in the last week.
Among them were the director of the national theater; a composer of rai, an Arab music with a fast beat; and a leader of the feminist movement.
So far the oil industry, crucial to the country's flagging economy, has been spared.
But diplomats and experts on Algerian affairs say the security situation seems to be spinning out of control, raising the prospect of an all-out guerrilla war involving big armed clashes across the country, including the capital.
European governments -- particularly that of France, which as Algeria's former colonial ruler has a large population of North Africans -- are expressing nervousness and confusion over the rapid deterioration in security.
France's President, Francois Mitterrand, urged the Government this month to negotiate with the help of European mediators, but the Algerian leadership rebuffed that notion as outside interference in its affairs.
Diplomats say the ouster of Algeria's military-dominated Government could profoundly undermine the Governments of neighboring Morocco and Tunisia, leaving Europe to face a phalanx of Islamic states just across the Mediterranean modeled politically after Iran.
Europeans also fear the possibility of an influx of frightened middle-class North African migrants averse to the idea of living under Islamic rule.
Underlining those worries, Algerian militants carried out a virtually unparalleled raid on a border post in neighboring Tunisia last week, killing seven guards.
The Armed Islamic Group, one of the most violent of the Algerian factions, took responsibility for that attack today.
In tracts distributed in Algiers, the group said the cross-border raid was a "warning" to Tunisia's staunchly secular Government to "stop helping the enemies of Islam."
The violent revolt in Algeria began in early 1992, after a military-backed Government seized power and canceled a final round of elections that the Islamic movement seemed sure of winning.
The new leadership banned the Islamic political movement and imposed severe limits on civil freedoms like public gatherings and writings critical of the Government.
Since then, clashes between secularists and Islamic militants have taken at least 30,000 lives, with security officers, Government officials, foreigners and, now, secular cultural figures among the main targets.
But the death toll last week, which began to surface in Algerian newspaper reports only today, represents a striking acceleration of the attacks.
French and Algerian analysts said the number killed last week exceeded 500 people, including militants, soldiers, urban civilians and Berbers in the mountainous Kabyl region in the north, where opposition to the fundamentalist campaign is strong.
The latest spate of large-scale attacks in the capital began with a suicide bombing on Jan. 30 near a police headquarters downtown that killed 42 people and wounded 256, mostly innocent civilians and pedestrians.
Often it takes several days to piece together events in Algeria.
Few foreign journalists operate there because of the threat to their safety, and the Algerian Government often withholds information on rebel attacks and military operations.
The senior military officer reported killed on Sunday was Col.
Mrawi Jilali, a ranking army intelligence officer responsible for issuing reports to the public and news organizations.
According to several Algerian officials, he was one of the closest aides to the intelligence division's chief, Gen.
Tewfik Madani, whose movements are a closely guarded secret.
The killing suggested that the fundamentalists are refining their sources of information and their infiltration of circles of the country's top leadership.
Opposition figures said Colonel Jilali was under surveillance for three days before the shooting in the Kouba district, on the edge of the capital.
In December, Islamic militants took their war to France, hijacking an Air France jetliner from Algiers to Marseilles and killing three passengers before French commandos stormed the plane and killed the hijackers.
For the French Government, the most alarming aspect of the hijacking may be that intelligence officials now suspect that Iran helped instigate it .
In an article this week in the French weekly Paris Match, a former journalist and novelist, Gerard de Villiers, reports that French intelligence officials are saying that Iran has linked up with Islamic militants in Algeria "on an operational level," lending advice and support.
Mr. de Villiers quotes French anti-terrorist intelligence officials as saying that early in December, weeks before the Christmas Eve hijacking began, Iran's minister of secret and intelligence services, Ali Fallahian, met with representatives of the Islamic Armed Group, the Palestinian organization Hamas and the Iranian-backed militia in Lebanon known as the Party of God.
All three groups are militantly Islamic in their orientation and receive advice and financial backing from Iran.
Mr. de Villiers wrote that French intelligence agents were tipped off about the meeting, which took place in Tripoli, Lebanon, by Syrian counterparts who watch Lebanon carefully.
Until recently, French intelligence believed that Algerian militants received some training in Iran and in the Sudan and some financial support.
But the meeting in Lebanon appears to have taken relations to a higher level.
Last month, France's confusion over what to do about Algeria was evident.
President Mitterrand's call for talks between militants and the army to end the conflict broke with a French policy of supporting the Algerian Government in its effort to eradicate militants.
Mr.
Mitterrand was immediately contradicted by Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, who said the war was an internal Algerian affair.
Nonetheless, the attacks on vital targets in Algiers have shaken confidence among French officials that the Algerian military can still control the situation in the country of 30 million, where unemployment runs close to 40 percent.
The economic misery helps the militants' drive to recruit volunteers to overthrow the Government.
Among the three vital bridges blown up in and around the capital in the last two days was one linking a neighborhood where the army headquarters and main armed forces hospital are located.
Any lingering hopes that the Government might renew a bid for negotiations with jailed leaders of the Islamic opposition have faded somewhat with reports in a London-based daily that the movement's leader, Abassi Madani, who was moved from house arrest to a military jail this month, has undergone an operation to remove a serious cancerous growth from his gums or jaw.
The Algerian Government has not confirmed the report, which appeared in the Arabic-language paper Asharq Al Awsat.
Mr.
Madani was moved from house arrest to a military jail earlier this month.
It is not clear under what conditions he has been held following the surgery.


New Faces in the Old Masters Trade
Just as contemporary-art galleries have a uniform look -- antiseptic, spare white spaces and highly polished floors -- so do galleries for Old Master paintings and drawings.
Theirs is a more hushed atmosphere where works by Rubens and Rembrandt, Van Dyck and Guardi, hang in a stately cavalcade on richly brocaded walls.
While London has traditionally been the center of the Old Master trade, with dozens of galleries clustered around Old Bond Street, New York has, until recently, had just a few big-name dealers like Colnaghi or the Newhouse Galleries, and business was, for the most part, private and by appointment only.
Except for the highly publicized auctions held twice a year at Sotheby's and Christie's, sales made by dealers were kept as quiet as the personalities of the collectors who bought.


The Talk Radio for FM
To the Editor:
"A San Francisco Talk Show Takes Right Wing Radio to a New Direction" (news article, Feb. 14) repeats two misconceptions.
KSFO's previous format (only four months on the air) was not one of failed "young, liberal talk hosts." With few exceptions, the format was void of any point of view at all.
The Fabulous Sports Babe and Dr.
Laura Schlesinger (both in the old lineup) are hardly the spiritual leaders of the American left wing.
While KSFO believes its listenership is up, it hasn't tapped into any new audience.
KSFO's owner, KGO (San Francisco's top-rated station), has been catering to the right-wing market for years.
They are simply shifting listeners from their more successful property to the lower-rated one.
My own experience as a "young liberal talk host" at KSFO indicates there is an untapped market for talk radio.
Target the millions who grew up listening to music on FM radio.
The mostly AM talk format accounts for roughly 20 percent of the radio audience.
Should we assume this means the other 80 percent have no opinions?
The FM listeners want talk radio that provides entertainment, information and a lot of laughter.
BARRY WEINTRAUB  San Francisco, Feb. 15, 1995


Aristide Forces Retirement of Haiti's Top Military Officers
In a show of strength that consolidates its control over the remnants of the Haitian Armed Forces, the Government of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide announced a purge of the military today that virtually wipes out the country's senior officer corps.
All four of the Haitian Army's generals, including the military Commander in Chief, Gen.
Bernardin Poisson, and 39 colonels and majors were affected by the order, according to a Haitian Government statement and local newspaper and radio reports.
Also removed from his post by the sudden Government action was Col.
Pierre Neptune, commander of the interim national police force.


Study Prompts Call to Halt a Routine Eye Operation
AN eye operation routinely done to correct the most common cause of sudden loss of vision in people 60 and older has been found to be so ineffective, and possibly harmful, that Federal health officials are warning eye surgeons to stop doing the procedure.
A national study of the operation, which quickly became the standard treatment after it was first reported in 1989, was halted last October, years ahead of schedule.


Giants to Make Daluiso One Wealthy Kicker
The Giants yesterday secured half of their kicking game for the next three years when Brad Daluiso agreed to a contract that will make him one of the highest-paid kickers in professional football.
Daluiso has agreed to a three-year deal worth between $1.5 million and $1.7 million.
The package also includes a signing bonus of about $350,000.
Daluiso made $298,000 last season.


CHRONICLE
The winners of the 1995 Matrix Award given by New York Women in Communications for exceptional accomplishment have been announced.
They are TONI MORRISON, the author; COKIE ROBERTS, a correspondent for ABC News and National Public Radio; ELIZABETH TILBERIS, editor in chief of Harper's Bazaar; SHELLY LAZARUS, president of the advertising agency Ogilvy &amp; Mather North America; PATRICIA J. MATSON, vice president for corporate communications at Capital Cities/ABC, and CAROLYN LEE, an assistant managing editor of The New York Times.


Shrinking Menus: G.O.P. Lunch Plan
CONGRESS has taken the first steps to repeal the National School Lunch Act, which has fed hundreds of millions of hungry children since 1946.
The changes being proposed could affect the lunch choices of every child in every public school, regardless of income.
Many schools may simply get out of the business of offering school lunches.
Or if they continue, they may raise prices for many students.
For the poorest children, the changes could mean an end to the free meals, including breakfast, that have been linked to improved academic performance.


Irving Kosloff, 82, Ex-Owner of 76ers
Irving S. Kosloff, who established the 76ers in Philadelphia in 1963 and owned the National Basketball Association franchise during its years of greatest success and most abysmal failure, died on Sunday at his home in Merion, Pa.
He was 82.
The cause of death was leukemia, his family said.


A Murder Plot and 2 Feuding Families
They were two young men starting out in business together after the war, childhood friends with plenty of dreams and not much money.
At first, their shelves were stocked with empty boxes -- to make customers think their tiny store was packed with inventory -- but over time Fine &amp; Klein Handbags moved and became an anchor of Orchard Street.
Still, realizing their ambitions on Manhattan's Lower East Side did not bring Murray Klein and Julius Fine closer together.
There was some bad blood in the long, narrow store -- between the longtime partners and among their children, according to relatives and employees.
This month, according to the police and prosecutors, the animosity almost turned into violence.


Gannett Doesn't Set Profit Goals for News
To the Editor:
In your Feb. 15 Business Day report on the resignations of two editors of The Des Moines Register, your flat assertion that the Gannett Company demands increasing profits each year from its properties is an outrageous lie.


Chinese Immigrant Flees an Asian Smuggling Gang a 2d Time
In the violent underworld of Chinese gangs and human smuggling, illegal immigrants who cannot pay their passage fees are often kidnapped, beaten, held hostage or even killed.
Guoguang Chen, a 46-year-old immigrant from Fujian, China, can tell the story.
Twice, in fact.


Essay; The Double Wedge
Every political operative dreams of finding the perfect "wedge issue" -- of placing the wedge in a crack in the opposition's traditional support, and then using a sledgehammer to split off a great segment of the other party's vote.
Here are the 1996 wedge issues:


If Negligence Bill Passes, Consumers Lose; Ill-Fitting Federalism
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 19 front-page article charges that Federal product liability reform would uproot common law "developed through centuries" and "run against one of the central themes of the Republican contract" by intruding on state power.


COMPANY BRIEFS
RYKOFF-SEXTON INC., Los Angeles, which manufactures and distributes food and related products, has completed the acquisition of Continential Foods Inc., Baltimore, a closely held food service distributor, for undisclosed terms.
U.S.
ROBOTICS INC., Skokie, Ill., a maker of computer modems, said its shareholders and those of Megahertz Corp., Salt Lake City, had approved a $325.2 million stock-swap merger.


CHRONICLE
A coup for American Ballet Theater: CAROLINE B. KENNEDY will serve as honorary chairwoman of the board for the 1995 season and will be honorary chairwoman of the company's spring gala on May 1 at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Her mother, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, who was a trustee of the company for 25 years, was honorary chairwoman at the time of her death.


Coleman Returns, But Nets Can't Stop Pacers and Miller
The trading deadline nears, and the Nets remain mum.
They say they have no plans to alter their roster and that they are comfortable with the 12 players representing their franchise.
The troubling thing is, so is the rest of the National Basketball Association.


Hanson Plans Spinoff Of 34 U.S. Companies
Lord Hanson, who as chairman of Hanson P.L.C. has built a reputation as one of the business world's great wheeler-dealers, said today that he would spin off 34 of the conglomerate's smaller American subsidiaries into a new, debt-laden company.
The plan raised questions about whether Lord Hanson was trying to shed the company's underperformers and their debt.
But Hanson executives insisted that the companies to be spun off included many that were growing strongly and could thrive under the added managerial attention and investment that the new structure could provide.


No Headline
"There are people still denying. They are crafting legislation that they actually think will pass. That's denial. But you can't go through a loss without going through these stages. REPRESENTATIVE JIM MCDERMOTT, a psychiatrist, on his fellow Democrats.  [ A1:6. ]


A Key Obsession
LORIAN TAMARA EBERT, 28, has been obsessed with keys ever since she played with the plastic kind as a baby.
Seven years ago she started advertising in a recycling magazine for unwanted keys and bought hundreds from locksmiths for 10 cents apiece.
She now has over 500 pounds of keys, which she uses to make jewelry ($20 to $35) or reproduces on pillows, lamps, lamp shades and chairs ($35 to $500).
"Sometimes I paint them, sometimes I glue them, sometimes I cover fabric with them," said Ms.
Ebert, who lives in west Los Angeles.
She can be reached at (213) 856-6282.
Two galleries in Santa Monica, Calif., are showing her work.
"You Hold the Key" is at the Art Store Gallery (where Ms. Ebert is shown at right), 11660 Santa Monica Boulevard, (310) 477-0451, through March 3, and "Key Paintings" is at Language of the Heart, 2905 Santa Monica Boulevard, (310) 829-6066, through March 31.


Highway Painters' Canvas


Robert Bolt Is Dead at 70; Oscar-Winning Screenwriter
Robert Bolt, the Academy Award-winning screenwriter and playwright whose works included the films "Lawrence of Arabia" and "Dr. Zhivago" and the play and film "A Man for All Seasons," died on Monday at his home near Petersfield, Hampshire, in southern England.
He was 70.
He had been suffering from heart trouble for some time, said his agent, Tom Erhardt.
Though he became one of the most successful British writers of his generation, Mr.
Bolt, who was born near Manchester in 1924, began his working life as a teacher in a pair of country schools.
It was there that he honed his passionate love of history and language and there that his first play was produced, for a Nativity pageant.
His next play, the comedy "Flowering Cherry," was performed at the Haymarket Theater in London in 1958 and came to Broadway the next year with Wendy Hiller and Eric Portman in the lead roles.
By that time, Mr.
Bolt was well into writing "A Man For All Seasons," the now-classic exploration of the fatal confrontation between Henry VIII and his Lord Chancellor, Sir Thomas More, over issues of religion, power and conscience.
The play, produced in 1961 at the Globe Theater in London, was an instant hit and established Mr.
Bolt as a major force in British theater.
In 1962, with Paul Scofield as More, it went on to win five Tony Awards on Broadway.
The 1966 film version, written by Mr.
Bolt and again starring Mr.
Scofield, won six Oscars, including the one for best screenplay.
Despite his success and his political activities, which included a monthlong spell in jail in 1961 after he participated in an antinuclear demonstration, Mr.
Bolt resisted attempts to label him one of Britain's Angry Young Men.
In truth, he said, he was "anxious rather than angry."
It was with the director David Lean, during what is now considered British cinema's golden age, that Mr.
Bolt collaborated to produce two famous epic films: "Lawrence of Arabia," in 1962, starring Peter O'Toole, and "Dr. Zhivago," two years later, starring Omar Sharif and Julie Christie.
"Lean relied very much on Bolt for the scripts for his films," Adrian Wootton, controller of the British Film Institute at South Bank in London, told the British Press Association.
"Without him, I don't believe 'Lawrence of Arabia' or 'Doctor Zhivago' would have been the great films they are." "Dr. Zhivago" brought Mr.
Bolt his second Academy Award.
He received an Oscar nomination for "Lawrence of Arabia."
The Bolt-Lean team also produced "Ryan's Daughter," a 1970 film that starred Mr.
Bolt's on-again, off-again wife, the actress Sarah Miles.
In 1978, he suffered a severe stroke that left him partly paralyzed and forced him to relearn many of the things essential to his work, like speaking and writing.
But he quit his old ways -- a taste for wine and whisky and a smoking habit that had reached 80 cigarettes a day -- saying later that "I decided I just couldn't face the wall and die." And he continued working.
Mr.
Bolt's last credited screenplay was for the 1986 film "The Mission," directed by Roland Joffe, which he also wrote as a novel; the film starred Jeremy Irons and Robert De Niro.
At the time of his death he was in the midst of adapting Jung Chang's novel "Wild Swans," a memoir about life in a changing China, for BBC television, and had also recently reworked "The Thwarting of Baron Bollingrew," a children's play he wrote in 1966, into a novel for children.
Mr.
Bolt was married to three women, including Miss Miles, whom he married twice.
In 1949, he married his first wife, Celia Roberts, a painter.
They divorced 18 years later, and he married Miss Miles.
He and Miss Miles separated in 1975, and he married the actress Anne Zane.
When that marriage collapsed, he secretly remarried Miss Miles, who had nursed him through much of his illness.
She was with him when he died.
In addition to his wife, he is survived by four children.


The Neediest Cases; Wall Street Donations Push Fund Total Ahead of '94 Pace
Six days before The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund ends its annual appeal for donations, it has raised more money than last year on this date.
Two major gifts bolstered the fund this week, but it will have to collect another $250,000 to match last year's total of $4.59 million.
Last year's appeal raised more than $400,000 in its final week, resulting in the second-highest total in the fund's history.


Oxygen in Atmosphere Puts Moon of Jupiter in Rare Club
Europa, one of the four large satellites of Jupiter discovered by Galileo in 1610, is the size of Earth's Moon and shines brilliantly in the Jovian sky, the light of the distant Sun reflecting off a surface completely covered by frozen water.
Now astronomers have discovered another striking effect of that icy landscape: Europa is enveloped by a thin atmosphere of oxygen.
The discovery makes Europa only the fourth moon in the solar system known to have an atmosphere and the first known to have one containing molecular oxygen, the same form of oxygen that supports life on Earth.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Man Charged in 1976 Killing
Nineteen years ago, Anthony Lee Foskey was a pallbearer at the funeral of Jon Mitchell, a 10-year-old who was raped and killed while running an errand for his mother on Jan. 29, 1976.
Pallbearer or not, Mr.
Foskey was a suspect almost from the start, and now he has been charged with murder.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Getting Seeds to Grow
Q.
Flower packets sometimes recommend "scarifying" the seeds.
While I get the gist of this, can you add more details? -- Kevin Perry, Riverdale, the Bronx.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Judge Amends 'Megan's Law'
A state judge backed "Megan's Law" yesterday but said that county prosecutors should not have the authority to decide which convicted sex offenders pose a risk that warrants a public warning.
Rather, Superior Court Judge Harold B. Wells ruled in a case involving an anonymous sex offender, weighing the risk and deciding whether to notify the community should be up to a judge.


Yugoslavia Rules Out Recognition of Croatia or Bosnia Soon
The Foreign Minister of the Serbian-dominated Yugoslav federation accused Croatia today of "disgraceful treatment" of Serbs and made clear that Yugoslav recognition of either Croatia or Bosnia and Herzegovina would not be possible in the near future.
The official, Vladislav Jovanovic, said in an interview that recognition of Bosnia made no sense because the country was in pieces.
He added that prospects for recognition of Croatia had been pushed back by the "highly undesirable, unfortunate, damaging and unconstructive decision" by the Croatian President, Franjo Tudjman, to end the United Nations mandate there.


Board Urges Updated Flight Data Recorders
Struggling unsuccessfully to explain two Boeing 737 crashes, the National Transportation Safety Board yesterday called for quick action to equip about 1,000 of the planes with better flight data recorders, or black boxes, and for extensive work in the next few years to improve the recorders on thousands of other planes of various types.
With modern flight data recorders, the board said, it would be better able to issue emergency recommendations to protect the public within days after a crash, as it did when it warned of the potential for ice building up on an American Eagle commuter plane, a twin-engine turboprop that crashed near Roselawn, Ind., last Oct. 31, killing 68 people.


Internet Warning Is Issued
Computer security officials issued a warning yesterday to hundreds of thousands of Internet network administrators, alerting them to a potentially serious flaw in a program used to handle electronic mail sent by millions of people each day on the global network.
If exploited by skilled programmers, the flaw in a program called Sendmail could be used to gain unauthorized access to computers, read electronic mail, erase or modify sensitive files and remotely set off rogue programs that would give the programmers control over the computers.


An Artist's Trajectory, Downward and Dark
Oh, to be young, gifted and seriously disturbed!
America's infatuation with the romance of self-destructing genius is in full, feverish glow these days.
There are the recent films about the stylishly unhappy Dorothy Parker and T. S. Eliot's brilliant, deranged first wife, as well as a television movie about the razor-edged marriage of Scott and Zelda, the patron saints of the phenomenon.
Now the Public Theater has brought us Stuart Greenman's first produced play, the callowly morbid "Silence, Cunning, Exile," which is, the ads say, "inspired by events in the life of Diane Arbus."


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day on Feb. 14 with an article about the effect of the peso's fall on American business strategies referred incorrectly to a locomotive made by the General Electric Company.
The picture showed a locomotive similar to those that have been exported, not one being prepared for shipment to Mexico.


Economic Scene; Understanding the running amok of regulation in America.
REGULATION is a dirty word these days.
Congressional Republicans are readying a slew of bills to cut Big Brother down to size.
And President Clinton, on the defensive despite his own well-publicized initiative to "reinvent government," apparently lacks the will or the way to stop the Congressional juggernaut.
Not so oddly, though -- perspective is not Washington's strong suit -- more effort is being invested in taming the regulators than in understanding why Americans became prisoners of regulation in the first place.


Music From Japan Celebrates Its 20th
Music From Japan's annual Festival New York is to take place this weekend at the Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street.
The 1995 festival, celebrating the 20th anniversary of Music From Japan, will feature lectures, performances and a symposium.
It begins tomorrow at 7 P.M. with a lecture and concert on the works of Toshi Ichiyanagi, and includes several premieres.
On Saturday at 5 P.M., "Highlights of Music From Japan Commissions" is to feature works commissioned by the organization over the years.


Bridge
Senior players, who are 55 or older, are often assumed to lack stamina.
But there are exceptions.
When Ruth Windwer and Gerald Levine of Brooklyn won the Regional Senior Pairs in Lancaster, Pa., last November, they were not satisfied.
They found some teammates, entered the Zip Swiss Teams, that midnight,and emerged winners for a second time at 3 A.M.
Their 11-hour playing day included the diagramed deal from the Senior Pairs.
In standard bidding, North's double of the one-spade overcall would be for penalties.
That contract would probably have failed by two tricks, and the partnership did better by reaching four hearts.
That contract would seem doomed by the bad trump split, but Windwer as South overcame it, helped by the information from East's penalty double.


Bucs and Cards Seek Deal
Tampa Bay and Arizona spent yesterday trying to work out compensation in a trade for the Buccaneer quarterback Craig Erickson.
Erickson was Tampa Bay's fourth-round draft pick in 1992 and was the starter in 1993.
But he became expendable when the Buccaneers drafted Trent Dilfer in the first round last year.
Erickson and Dilfer split the season as starters and Erickson was the starter when the Buccaneers won three straight games toward the end of the season.
Arizona put all three of its quarterbacks on the expansion draft list and lost Steve Beuerlein, who was the first player selected, by Jacksonville.
Jay Schroeder and Jim McMahon, both signed to one-year deals as free agents last year, are now unrestricted free agents.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about renovations under way at the Pentagon referred incorrectly in some editions to the material used in the building's original construction.
It was reinforced concrete -- not "unreinforced."


China Warns Of New Peril To U.S. Ties
China is threatening a new rupture in relations unless the United States backs away from a proposed United Nations resolution criticizing its human rights record.
The warning was delivered Tuesday by officials who summoned the United States Ambassador to discuss the resolution, which has been raised and defeated repeatedly, with the United States as co-sponsor, at the annual meeting of the United Nations Human Rights Commission.


Corrections
The Advertising column on Tuesday, about trends in advertising, marketing and media, misidentified the singer whose version of the song "At Last" is heard in commercials for the 1995 Jaguar.
She is Etta James, not Esther Phillips.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 17
Feb. 10
Feb. 18
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.1
6.9
Distillate production, daily
3.0
2.9
3.2
Gasoline stocks
221.1
219.6
228.1
Distillate stocks
125.8
130.6
110.2
Crude imports, daily
6.7
7.2
6.3
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.8
2.2
Crude stocks
325.9
318.5
333.5
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.7
Refinery utilization (%)
89.9
89.6
90.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Announcers Differ on Strike
The MSG Network's new Yankee announcers -- Dave Cohen, Jim Kaat and Steve Palermo -- diverge on the virtues of replacement baseball.
"My job is to be interested in what I see," said Cohen, in his first major league announcing job after 12 seasons as the TV voice of the Syracuse Chiefs.
Kaat, who last season worked on ESPN's "Baseball Tonight" after four years with CBS, was more blunt as the team was introduced yesterday.
"You can't call them replacement baseball players," said Kaat, who called Yankee games in 1986 for WPIX-TV.
"I call them opportunistic strikebreakers."


METRO DIGEST
WHO DECIDES WHO WILL DIE?
IT DEPENDS As New York prepares to restore the death penalty, just how it will work remains an open question -- both because some details of the legislation are not final and because, in practice, the use of the death penalty depends as much on prosecutors and juries as on the letter of the law.
A1.
The State Senate released its version of death-penalty legislation, detailing how New York would restore capital punishment.
B6.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Mourning Leads Hornets  Alonzo Mourning had 29 points and 17 rebounds as the Charlotte Hornets beat the visiting Sacramento Kings, 100-89, last night.
Muggsy Bogues and Larry Johnson each had 19 points for the Hornets, who went on a 10-3 run to lead by 72-58 with 3 minutes 6 seconds remaining in the third quarter. (AP) BUCKS 100, BULLETS 92: Todd Day scored 21 points and ignited a late 7-0 run to help Milwaukee beat visiting Washington. (AP) SPURS 105, SUNS 100: David Robinson scored 34 points as host San Antonio beat Phoenix for its 12th victory in 14 games.
Phoenix has lost 3 of 4 after starting the month 5-1.
Sean Elliott scored 19 points for the Spurs and Dennis Rodman had 24 rebounds.
Charles Barkley led Phoenix with 22 points. (AP) JAZZ 118, CLIPPERS 109: Karl Malone scored 29 points and Utah used a 9-0 fourth-quarter run to beat visiting Los Angeles.
Jeff Hornacek had 22 points for Utah, while Stockton finished with 20 points and 15 assists. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Virginia Steps Ahead  Harold Deane and Junior Burrough scored 19 points each as Virginia reeled off its seventh straight victory and took a half-game lead in the Atlantic Coast Conference race by routing Georgia Tech, 83-60, last night in Atlanta.
Curtis Staples added 17 points as he and Deane each made five 3-point baskets to help the Cavaliers lift their record to 19-6, 11-3 in the A.C.C. (AP) MARYLAND 84, N.C.
STATE 71: Joe Smith scored 20 points and grabbed 15 rebounds as No. 7 Maryland continued its home-court dominance over North Carolina State.
Duane Simpkins added 16 points for the Terrapins (21-5, 10-3 Atlantic Coast Conference). (AP) ARKANSAS 92, L.S.U. 90: Scotty Thurman stole the ball and passed it to Clint McDaniel, who sank the winning basket just before the buzzer sounded as No. 8 Arkansas rallied to beat Louisiana State in Baton Rouge, La.
Arkansas (22-5, 10-4 Southeastern Conference) had to come back repeatedly during the game. (AP) VILLANOVA 78, PENN 74: Eric Eberz scored 25 points and Jason Lawson 20 as No. 9 Villanova held off a late Penn rally to defeat the visiting Quakers.
Matt Maloney led Penn (17-5, 14-0 Ivy League) with 25 points.
Penn's Jerome Allen missed a 25-foot 3-point attempt with 5 seconds to play and Villanova (20-6, 12-3 Big East) was able to preserve the victory with foul shots in the final second by Eberz and Jonathan Haynes. (AP) N.H.L.
Whalers Win in Overtime  Darren Turcotte scored with 2:01 remaining in overtime to give the Whalers a 3-2 victory over the Boston Bruins last night in Hartford.
Skating four-on-four after offsetting roughing penalties, Turcotte picked up the puck after Robert Kron was hit by a defenseman in the slot and wristed a shot up past Blaine Lacher. (AP) RED WINGS 4, MAPLE LEAFS 1: In Detroit, Shawn Burr and Dino Ciccarelli scored goals early in the second period as the Red Wings increased their winning streak to four games. (AP) BLUES 4, SHARKS 3: Greg Gilbert's scored his second goal of the game with 1:24 remaining to give host St.
Louis the victory over San Jose.
Patrice Tardif assisted on all four St.
Louis goals. (AP)


Lappas Has Villanova Near the Top Again
A few hours before his team's game with the University of Pennsylvania, Steve Lappas, Villanova's third-year head coach, reviewed what has been a delightfully wild roller-coaster ride:
On Feb. 14, Villanova defeated Syracuse in overtime.
Four days later, the Wildcats stormed into Connecticut and routed the Huskies at Gampel Pavilion.
Last Monday, Villanova went to Georgetown and was routed by 25 points at USAir Arena.


The New Espionage Game?
In an odd way, the espionage contretemps between the United States and France that roared into view yesterday may be a sign of progress for the Central Intelligence Agency.
If the French accounts are correct, at least the agency was spying on something that matters, specifically French efforts in 1993 to block an international trade agreement and to thwart the marketing of American movies and television shows in France.
At a time when American national security is increasingly defined by economic interests, it is reassuring to see the lumbering intelligence apparatus in Washington turning away from the obsolete work of monitoring Russian military forces.
But the methods reportedly involved, including efforts to bribe French officials, were wrong.
While it was clearly acceptable during the cold war to pay Soviet informants for secret information about Moscow's nuclear forces, it is not appropriate to bribe French officials for political or economic information.


Emergency Bill for the Pentagon Gains
The House of Representatives today approved emergency Pentagon spending of $3.2 billion and decided to pay for it in part by raiding aid to the former Soviet republics and domestic programs dear to Congressional Democrats.
The legislation, the first spending bill taken up by the Republican-controlled Congress, won passage on a vote of 262 to 165.
It would provide not only some $2.5 billion that the Clinton Administration has requested to pay for recent or current overseas military operations but also $670 million, not requested, which would be earmarked for the training of troops and the purchase of basic military equipment.


Cowboys Sign Tolbert to 5-Year Pact
The Dallas Cowboys made the free agent TONY TOLBERT the team's highest-paid defensive player yesterday when they signed the end to a five-year, $15 million contract with a $4 million signing bonus.
The Cowboys needed to re-sign Tolbert "because there is not another defensive end in the N.F.L. like him available," said Coach BARRY SWITZER.


Labor Chiefs Get Glimpse of Casualties
They came by bus uninvited to the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s winter meeting, and they patrolled the hotel's lobby and hallways, unmistakable in their bright red T-shirts as they buttonholed union chiefs and asked for help.
The requests of these 70 middle-age men and women from Decatur, Ill., home to three bitter labor struggles, were unusual by the standards of the federation's executive council.
They wanted an audience before the council to describe the hardships of months on the picket lines -- a rank-and-file presentation rarely if ever permitted at a council meeting.
And they proposed that a "solidarity bank" be set up by the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations to pay strike benefits to people like them.


New Hurdle For Removal Of Fire Boxes
A judge issued a preliminary injunction yesterday blocking a plan by the Giuliani administration to remove New York City's 16,300 sidewalk fire alarm boxes, saying that the Fire Department's plan to dismantle the alarms was "arbitrary and capricious."
The decision by Justice Walter M. Schackman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan is the latest setback for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to remove the alarm boxes.
The City Council also passed a bill last month that would delay the plan for three months.
The Mayor vetoed that measure, but the Council is expected to override his veto next month.
But any hope by the administration to move ahead with the removal in the interim was dashed by yesterday's court ruling.


Big German Metal Union Plans to Strike on Wage Issues
The most powerful labor union in Germany announced today that its members in southern Germany would go on strike on Friday to press their demand for higher wages.
The threatened strike was announced by officials of IG Metall, the country's metal workers' union, after 165,000 members in 628 plants and businesses in Bavaria voted overwhelmingly to support the strike.
More than 88 percent of the workers supported the proposal by their union leaders to begin work stoppages in an effort to secure the first real wage increase for the union in three years.


95 Islamic Militants Killed as Algerians Crush a Prison Riot
At least 95 prisoners were killed today when Algerian security forces crushed a revolt by Islamic militants at a jail in the capital, Government officials said.
They said the inmates had killed four guards.
The Algerian Justice Minister, Mohammed Tequia, said the security forces intervened after the inmates took six hostages, slit the throats of four of them and wounded about a dozen other employees of the jail.
He said the inmates, many of them members of the Islamic factions seeking to overthrow the country's secular Government, were planning an escape of 1,000 prisoners.


What Steinem Didn't Say
To The Home Section:
I am very sorry that Gloria Steinem at 60 seems to have forgotten how the women's movement once strongly objected to a fundamental inequity between men and women, one in which women were inordinately valued for their physical attractiveness, rather than character, intellect and ability ("At Home With Gloria Steinem: Decades as Icon; Now, Freedom," Feb. 9).
The "woman as sex object" concept was generally deplored, and the National Organization for Women had an older women's group protesting ageism and the double standard of aging as well as sexism.


Ban on Taking Outside Fees Rankles New Jersey Judges
A judge in a New Jersey trial court here and his friend who sits on the Federal bench in Newark both teach constitutional law one night a week at Seton Hall Law School.
The Federal judge, Dickinson R. Debevoise, can accept Seton Hall's money: $1,000 a credit, or $3,000 for a semester.
The New Jersey judge, Andrew P. Napolitano, cannot touch it.


Can It Be True? Is Martha Stewart Really Going Modern?
WERE she writing today in her magazine, Living, Martha Stewart's monthly calendar column might read something like this:
Feb. 24: Inventory garden tools; order replacements.


Robert A. Wall, 85, 3d-Generation Judge
Judge Robert A. Wall, who continued the judicial tradition established by his grandfather and father in northwestern Connecticut, died on Sunday in the Litchfield Woods rest home in Torrington, Conn.
He was 85 and a resident of Harwinton, Conn.
The cause was respiratory failure, said a son, A. Robert Wall Jr. of Torrington.


C.I.A. Faces Issue of Economic Spying
It was so much easier during the cold war.
Once, the Central Intelligence Agency's station in Paris stole secrets about the French nuclear arsenal and the local Communist Party chief.
Now it is trying to steal the French position on trade talks with the United States.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Mayor Urges a Payroll Tax
Calling it a last resort, Mayor Bret Schundler says it's time for a payroll tax on businesses to relieve the load on property-tax payers.
The Republican Mayor will meet with business leaders to discuss the percentage.
The Democratic City Council already backs the idea.
And Hudson County Executive Robert Janiszewski says he will present a county budget of $306 million today, down about $11 million from the current budget.
His critics have previously accused him of using bonding power for expenses that should be treated as current spending.


Prudential Selects Fallon McElligott
The Prudential Insurance Company of America has selected Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis to handle its brand advertising account, which had been at Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York for the last five years.
Billings were estimated at $50 million.


Bob Stinson Is Dead; Rock Guitarist, 35
Bob Stinson, who played lead guitar in the influential 1980's rock band the Replacements, was found dead in his Minneapolis apartment on Saturday.
He was 35.
The cause was an unintentional overdose of a substance that has not yet been identified, said his mother, Anita Stinson Kurth.


Fed Chairman Hints at an End To Rise in Rates
The chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, said today there was evidence that the economy "may finally be slowing" and suggested that if it sank too fast the Federal Reserve would move quickly to cut interest rates.
Mr.
Greenspan's comments in Congressional testimony, taken along with remarks by the vice chairman of the Federal Reserve last week, is the strongest indication to date that the Federal Reserve may be finished raising interest rates for the time being.


Democrats Assail G.O.P. Bill to Change School Lunch System
With President Clinton in the vanguard, Democrats today began a campaign of guerrilla warfare against House Republican proposals to scrap the Federal school lunch program and give states a lump sum of Federal money to feed children.
"An old conservative adage used to be, 'If it ain't broke don't fix it,' " Mr.
Clinton said after a strategy session with Democrats in Congress.


Clinton Is Challenged Over a Plan for Labor
Congressional leaders and business groups today challenged the legality of a White House proposal to issue an executive order barring Federal contractors from hiring replacement workers, saying such a move would undermine decades of accepted labor law.
The proposed executive order, outlined by Vice President Al Gore at a meeting of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s executive council on Monday, would destroy the "careful balance" between labor and management, Senators Nancy Landon Kassebaum and Bob Dole warned today in a joint letter to President Clinton.


Long Hours of Medical Residents Improve Care
To the Editor:
As a second-year resident in internal medicine at Duke University Medical Center, I disagree with Janet Dubin's statement (letter, Feb. 14) that having interns and residents work shorter shifts with closer supervision necessarily improves care.


Jagr Making Penguin Fans Forget Lemieux
Luc Robitaille was taking off his equipment today after practice when Jaromir Jagr strolled by.
Jagr sat out the practice to nurse several cuts, bumps and bruises he earned the previous night during the Penguins' thrilling 5-4 victory over the Quebec Nordiques.


CHRONICLE
JARRY BAKER, who is 41 and was adopted by the legendary Josephine Baker when he was a month old, met his biological mother and sister for the first time last week.
Mr.
Baker, who was born in Finland, said his mother, who does not want her name divulged, placed him in a home for children in Helsinki.


Mexico Said to Promise Some Political Steps to Get U.S. Loans
Despite the insistence of Mexico that it would not accept any political conditions on $20 billion it is to receive in loans and loan guarantees from Washington, officials said today that it did agree to sweeten the deal with new measures to control undocumented immigration into the United States and drug trafficking.
Mindful of the sensitivity of Mexico to the notion that it acted under American pressure, United States officials noted that its commitments grew out of discussions begun before the loan talks and reflected longstanding concerns of President Ernesto Zedillo.


Who Decides Who Will Die? Even Within States, It Varies
Among the 37 states with the death penalty, Texas has been the undisputed leader in executions, putting 92 people to death since the United States Supreme Court allowed capital punishment to resume in 1976.
But within Texas, the odds of a convicted killer's being put to death depend largely on where the crime took place: of those executed so far, 37 are from the Houston area, where District Attorney Johnny B. Holmes Jr. is an aggressive and vocal proponent of the death penalty.
In Dallas, with a population two-thirds the size of Houston's and a District Attorney's office more cautious in its approach, only five people have been executed.


5 Americans Are Called Spies By France and Told to Leave


If Negligence Bill Passes, Consumers Lose
To the Editor:
Re "G.O.P. Preparing Bill to Overhaul Negligence Law" (front page, Feb. 19): Now that consumers' rights are getting the attention they deserve, manufacturers are seeking to nationalize state laws that are designed to protect consumers injured by defective products.


Another Format War Looms In Video Recording Industry
The consumer electronics industry edged a step closer to an all-out war over a new digital videodisk standard yesterday, as the Sony Corporation and Philips Electronics N.V. said they planned to move ahead with a new format that would compete with a technical standard proposed by Time Warner Inc. and the Toshiba Corporation.
In recent months, there has been widespread concern in Hollywood and Japan that the new digital video technology, which is intended to permit storage of full-length feature films on compact disks, would lead to a replay of the battle between the Beta and VHS videocassette formats in the 1980's.
Yesterday's announcement seemed to indicate that just such a battle could ensue.


Teacher Puts Pinstripes Before Three R's (for Now)
Tim Byron teaches physical education at Northern Valley Regional High School in Old Tappan, N.J., coaches baseball at Montclair High School and has a wife and two children waiting back home in Livingston, N.J.
Byron described Northern Valley in suburban Bergen County as the perfect place for a dedicated teacher.
His life reads like a storybook.


Cortines Offers Ideas to Save School Budget
When the new school year begins in September, New York City's school buses may well be doing double duty, carrying children to school and messages to the buying public.
Selling advertising on the sides of buses is just one idea floated yesterday by school officials, who are facing $690 million in budget cuts as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani tries to close a $2.7 billion city budget gap.


A Chance for Peace in Ireland
The Governments of Ireland and Britain have taken a bold step toward peace in Northern Ireland.
They released a joint document outlining a framework for resolving the bloody conflict of the last 25 years.
The framework is not binding, but is merely a set of suggestions any party to further discussions can accept or reject.
As a road map for the next steps toward peace, it is reasonable and fair to all sides.
The document's main purpose is to initiate a democratic process for deciding the fate of Northern Ireland.
It recognizes that both unionists and republicans will have to make difficult compromises.
It proposes steps to guarantee that no change will come about without the consent of the majority in Northern Ireland.
At the same time it would amend the Irish Constitution to forgo its historical claim to the six northern counties.


Amid Bickering, Senate Offers Death-Penalty Bill
On a day when negotiators traded barbs over who was to blame for delaying the death penalty bill, the Senate released its version of the legislation tonight, in a document that detailed for the first time how New York would restore capital punishment.
Despite the bickering, the Senate's 54-page version reflected the broad agreement reached last Wednesday among Gov.
George E. Pataki and leaders of the Senate and the Assembly.
Since then, negotiators have met in long sessions to discuss finer details -- for example, how to pay both for prosecution and defense costs -- that had not been ironed out tonight.


Mayor and Transit Officials Clash Over Service Cutbacks
A proposal by the Transit Authority for the first broad cuts in subway and bus service in two decades touched off a political struggle yesterday as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani accused the agency of trying to scare more money out of the city and state and as other officials blamed the Mayor for the cuts.
The cutbacks, which the agency formally proposed yesterday as a way of helping close a $113 million budget gap, would end late night-service on three subway shuttle lines, close one station in Brooklyn and eliminate more than a dozen bus routes, including the express lines used by many commuters in Brooklyn and Queens.


Britain and Ireland Issue a Plan for Full Talks on Ulster
After months of tenterhook negotiations, Britain and Ireland began campaigning in earnest today for peace in Northern Ireland by issuing proposals for talks between the province's Protestant majority and Roman Catholic minority.
The British Prime Minister, John Major, and the Irish Prime Minister, John Bruton, said repeatedly that the decision on the British province's future was up to the people and that no settlement would be imposed by the two governments, which would also take part in the talks.


Punta del Este Journal; Argentina Tightens Its Belt and Uruguay Wheezes
It is summer in the Southern Hemisphere, and once again this resort town on the Atlantic has been transformed into a playground for Latin America's jet-setters.
Punta del Este is South America's version of Palm Beach or the French Riviera, a place where luxury apartment towers line avenues along pristine beaches and where rows of million-dollar homes with manicured gardens sit in pine forests.
Up and down its miles of white beaches dotted with colorful umbrellas, sunbathers bask in the summer glow as windsurfers, jet skiers and speed boats vie for space on the open sea.


Executive Changes
NORTHERN TRUST CORP., Chicago, a bank holding company, said William A. Osborne, 47, its president and chief operating officer, would become chief executive on June 30 and chairman on Oct. 3, when David Fox, the current chairman and chief executive, retires.
Barry Hastings, 47, vice chairman, will become chief operating officer on June 30.


Simpson Team Focuses on Police Work
O.
J.
Simpson's flamboyant chief trial lawyer and the soft-spoken but hard-boiled detective who led the investigation into the killings with which Mr.
Simpson has been charged spent today micro-analyzing what the police and medical examiners did and did not do last June, when Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were found dead.
In a day typifying trials at their most tedious, the lawyer, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., questioned the detective, Tom Lange, on the defense's increasingly familiar litany of complaints about what it considers bungling by the Los Angeles Police Department and the coroner's office while investigating the two deaths.


Hugh Gregg Cleland, History Professor, 72
Hugh Gregg Cleland, a professor of history at the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., died on Feb. 14 in his home in Setauket, L.I.
He was 72.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Celia Cleland.


Sports of The Times; Davis Cup: Taxing Affair For Agassi
ANDRE AGASSI and Pete Sampras will not be playing Davis Cup late next month, it was announced the other day.
First goes the legend of O. J., then the World Series and now our two shining tennis stars desert us in our hour of vulnerability and need.
What is this country coming to, and when is Bill Usery Jr. going to do something about it?


Creative Labs Pressured by Success
For the last five years, Creative Labs Inc. has been doing more than just riding the multimedia wave that is sweeping the personal computer industry.
With its Sound Blaster equipment, many people say, Creative Labs helped invent the wave.
Beyond its sound cards, which are circuit boards that can be inserted inside a PC, the company has also become leading seller of multimedia upgrade kits, or all-in-one packages that turn a plain vanilla PC into one that can provide sound and video using a sound card, speakers and a CD-ROM drive.


Miller, a Free Agent, Is Attracting Interest
This is what linebacker Corey Miller wanted: to be on the free-agent market and have the opportunity to see what other teams think of him.
The reaction so far must make him quite happy since a number of teams have expressed interest.
One of the teams hottest on his trail is the New Orleans Saints who, according to people close to the situation, Miller is scheduled to visit today.
It is also possible, those people said, that Miller could get a contract offer from the Saints as early as this week.


F.D.A. Approves First Vaccine To Prevent Hepatitis A Infection
Federal health officials yesterday licensed the first vaccine in the United States to prevent hepatitis A, a serious and common viral liver infection.
The Food and Drug Administration said it gave SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. approval to sell the vaccine.
The company said it would begin distributing the vaccine, Havrix, in the next several weeks.


Court Loosens Muzzle on Federal Workers
The Supreme Court ruled today that an ethics law barring Federal civil servants from accepting pay for speeches and articles violated the workers' constitutional right of free speech.
The decision was an important ruling on the First Amendment rights of public employees as well as a victory for a union of Federal civil servants that had battled the Government over the constitutionality of the 1989 law.
After two lower Federal courts had struck down the law, the Clinton Administration appealed to the Supreme Court last year.


Judges May Overrule Juries in Capital Cases, Court Says
The Supreme Court today upheld the constitutionality of Alabama's death penalty law, under which a judge may impose a death sentence despite a jury's recommendation of life in prison without parole.
The Court voted 8 to 1 to uphold a death sentence for an Alabama woman who was convicted of hiring a man to kill her husband so that she and her lover could share the insurance proceeds.
The jury that convicted her recommended life in prison without parole.
Under the state law the judge was obliged to consider the recommendation but was left free to reject it.


Victorian Etchings
RICHARD AND CAROLE SMYTH, antiques dealers, first discovered pyrography, a Victorian decorating technique, at the Brimfield, Mass., antiques shows 20 years ago.
The couple, who are English, have collected more than 500 pieces decorated by early 20th-century hobbyists who burned designs into wood furniture, boxes, wall plaques and mirrors.
The Smyths have written a book about pyrography called "The Burning Passion," which is available for $22.95 including shipping (New York State residents must add 8.5 percent sales tax) from Carole Smyth Antiques, P.O.
Box 2068, Huntington, N.Y. 11743; (516) 673-8666.


A Big-Board Record for Uncovered Short Sales
The bears appear to have come out on Wall Street in recent weeks.
Shares sold short -- that is, betting that their prices would fall -- increased by 5 percent on the New York Stock Exchange in the latest month to record levels after declining slightly in the previous period.
The increases in short sales came as the Dow Jones industrial average surged to a record high, just shy of the 4,000 mark.


Lovely to Look At, but . . .
To The Home Section:
When I read about the newest toilet brush ("The Once and Future Brush," Feb. 16) I was both amused and puzzled.
Amused because there seems to be no end to new designs for this commonplace household device, and puzzled because though the newer versions may be esthetically pleasing, they are barely functional.


U.N. Names 4 Afghan Royalists as Mediators
A United Nations peace plan for Afghanistan was delayed today for at least a month while a group of Afghans close to the former King, Zahir Shah, try to mediate between the Government and the Taliban, a new army of Muslim militants.
A United Nations envoy, Mahmoud Mestiri, who arrived here over the weekend in the hope of putting the peace plan into effect, left Kabul for Pakistan after the two main forces confronting each other in the civil war, the Government of President Burnahuddin Rabbani and the Taliban, rejected the plan.


U.S. Aid Plan Is Hardly A Cure-All
The $20 billion in American aid announced yesterday goes a long way toward resolving Mexico's immediate debt crisis, but by all accounts here it stops well short of addressing other serious problems afflicting the battered Mexican economy, which many economists believe is slipping into a recession despite the rescue.
Over the next four months, Mexican finance officials say they plan to use roughly half the $20 billion loan package signed in Washington to retire most of the outstanding short-term Government bonds that nearly forced Mexico into default.


Islanders Play a Game of Roulette but Come Out Even
The Islanders' season is turning like a peculiar version of a broken record, one that goes something like this: Spot the opposing team a couple of goals.
Scrap your way back into it.
Come back to win some of them.
Tonight, faced with a dearth of defensemen, they were fortunate to get a point out of one of them.


Whitaker Expects to Fight and Have Fun
He is moving up in weight to seek his sixth title, and his opponent is a full six inches taller.
But if that suggests that PERNELL WHITAKER might have his work cut out for him when he takes on the World Boxing Association junior middleweight champion, JULIO CESAR VASQUEZ, at the Atlantic City Convention Center on March 4, Whitaker doesn't seem to see it that way.


U.S.-Led Force Is Off Somalia To Aid Pullout
Thousands of troops from seven countries, scores of aircraft and more than 20 ships are poised off the coast of Somalia, part of an American-led operation to help the United Nations pull out its peacekeepers during the first week of March.
Senior military officials here say the show of military might, minutely planned to avoid troop landings on religious holidays or on days when Somalis hold demonstrations, is meant as a limited mission with only peaceful objectives.


INSIDE
Anglo-Irish Plan for Ulster
Britain and Ireland released the details of a proposal for talks to find peace in Northern Ireland.
Page A3.
From China to Captivity
A 46-year-old illegal Chinese immigrant who could not pay the gang that smuggled him in was kidnapped and held hostage -- twice.
Page B1.
Top Diver Has AIDS
Greg Louganis, who won diving gold medals in two Olympics, says he is infected with AIDS.
Page B11.


Now, the Speaker Writes of a 'Lethal Pout'
As Newt Gingrich celebrated his first 50 days in power today, his pouting sex kitten wriggled back into circulation.
Two months after the capital was tickled by the news that the hero of the right had co-written a World War II thriller featuring some racy scenes between a philandering White House chief of staff and an inventive Nazi version of Mata Hari, Mr.
Gingrich's New York publisher has sent out a precis of the book.


Rights Protect Citizens, Not Prosecutors
To the Editor:
Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York asserts that the death penalty bill "will protect the rights of prosecutors and the district attorneys to vigorously prosecute capital cases" (front page, Feb. 15).


The Wrong Remedy for Schools
In his quest to gain more control over New York City's school system, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani now wants to dictate how much money should go to individual schools and programs.
Giving the Mayor more appointments to the central Board of Education as a way of enhancing accountability makes sense.
But allowing any mayor to micromanage school spending is bad long-term education policy.
In an appearance before the State Legislature last week, Mr.
Giuliani advanced legislation that would, essentially, turn the semi-independent board into a city agency.
He proposes to determine how much money would be spent at each school for instruction and administration.
Appropriations could be based on school performance or other undefined accountability measures.
Mr.
Giuliani's proposal would cover Buffalo, Syracuse, Rochester and Yonkers, as well as New York City.


The Hero Returns, Hoping to Conquer
He returns to the United States golf scene this week like a conquering hero, the highest-rated American player in the world and probably the most popular golfer on the PGA Tour.
Fred Couples hasn't played on this side of the Atlantic since the Mercedes Championships the first week in January, but he is back in the house now, back at his favorite golf course and feeling like this could once again be the start of something big.
"This is a great place to start back again," Couples, 35, said today on the eve of the Nissan Open (formerly the Los Angeles Open).
"I'm going to play five weeks in a row now, and this is where it can all start. I'm looking forward to a big year. I don't think that's going to backfire."


Income Gap Persists for Blacks and Whites
Despite public policies intended to forge a measure of economic equality between races, little progress has been made in recent years in narrowing the income gap between whites and blacks, according to two reports issued by the Census Bureau today.
The reports said that in 1993 the median income for black men employed full time was $23,020, about three-quarters of the $31,090 that white men, a proportional disparity that improved only slightly since 1979.


Bills Sign Jeffcoat to Help Pass Rush
Seeking a pass rusher to complement BRUCE SMITH, Buffalo yesterday signed JIM JEFFCOAT, who will be 34 when he plays his first game for the Bills.
Jeffcoat is the Cowboys' career sack leader with 94.5 in 12 seasons.
The Bills signed Jeffcoat to a three-year deal that will pay him just under $1 million a season. (AP)


Journal; Their Own Petard
Asked on "60 Minutes" last Sunday why he doesn't come across well on TV, Phil Gramm replied: "It's called being ugly." Mike Wallace pooh-poohed the answer, and rightly so.
Mr.
Gramm is at least as handsome as Al D'Amato.
But the exchange was highly revealing even so.
Only someone who suspects he may be ugly inside would unjokingly call himself ugly before a national audience.
And sure enough, the ugliness soon poured out.
When he reaffirmed his desire to roll back abortion rights for women from the poor to the raped, Mr.
Gramm's pleasant mien turned to stone.
There's no way for a man to look good when he talks about policing uteri.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.99
3.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.66
5.74
3.37
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.88
6.01
3.58
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.32
7.43
6.12
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.53
7.61
6.64
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.48
7.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.47
6.49
5.68
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  FRANCE ACCUSES U.S.
OF ESPIONAGE  France has charged five Americans, including the former C.I.A. station chief in Paris and his deputy, with political and economic espionage and asked them to leave the country immediately.
A1


Good Cop vs. Bad Cop: Which Image Is Real?
What really spooks the honest, hard-working, likable, routinely successful detectives on "N.Y.P.D. Blue" is the prospect of a suspect "lawyering up." The detectives cajole and threaten to keep the probable perp from exercising his right to counsel, because once a sharp lawyer appears the client will say nothing and the audience will be deprived of the confession that climaxes so many episodes.
Then, who knows what a trial will bring?
See what it has brought in Los Angeles: the highest-rated case of lawyering-up in television history.
Lawyer-police skirmishes have been occupying Court TV and CNN for several days, and the "N.Y.P.D. Blue" detectives' worst fears are being realized.
O.
J.
Simpson's lawyers, the home team in the courtroom, are treating the lawmen in ways that would drive Detective Andy Sipowicz back to drink.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about the naming of a president and chief operating officer of the Gillette Company misstated the affiliation of Constance M. Maneaty, a securities analyst who commented on it.
She is an analyst with Bear, Stearns, not Brown Brothers Harriman.


Arthur Stang Dies; Developer Was 85
Arthur Stang, a real estate developer whose projects included the Gulf and Western Building on Columbus Circle, died on Sunday at his home in Lake Worth, Fla.
He was 85.
The cause was liver cancer, said his son, Robert.


Strawberry's Label Of 'Team of Drunks' Is Rebutted by Sisk
Calling Dwight Gooden and Darryl Strawberry "bitter," Doug Sisk was one of several members of the Mets' organization today who rebutted published statements by the two former players alleging widespread drug and alcohol abuse on the Mets' 1986 World Series champion team.
"He went out on his own, he did it, he made his bed, and now he's lying in it -- both of them are," said Sisk, who played for the Mets from 1982 to 1987 and is in camp as a replacement player.
"Dwight and Darryl should be really irritated at themselves. Both of them were Hall of Fame guys, and they should be disgusted with themselves right now.


Network TV Group Will Shut Down
The Network Television Association, the trade organization in New York that was formed in 1990 by ABC, CBS and NBC, said yesterday that it would close, effective March 31.


New Dance and Jazz Music
Sally Silvers and the Bill Frisell Band will present new dance and jazz music tonight at 8 in "Face the Music and Dance" at Symphony Space, Broadway at 95th Street.
Ms.
Silvers, known for her knotty, humorous experimentalism, will also present a video piece.
Tickets are $14.
Reservations: (212) 864-5400.


Louganis, Olympic Champion, Says He Has AIDS
Greg Louganis, the 1984 and 1988 Olympic gold medal diver, who publicly acknowledged his homosexuality for the first time at last year's Gay Games in New York, has said he has AIDS.
In an interview with ABC's "20/20" that will be broadcast at 10 P.M. tomorrow, Louganis said he knew he was H.I.V.-positive before the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, and was greatly concerned when he hit his head on the board during a dive and shed blood in the pool.


ON THE ROAD WITH: Willie Nelson; Where the Cowboy Hangs His Hat
MOST men will tell you Willie Nelson is a hero.
With a copy of his 1982 hit "Always on My Mind" and the phone number of a good florist, they can get away with murder.
"Girl, I'm sorry I was blind," indeed.
They learn from a master.
Mr.
Nelson, who is married to wife No. 4, may be most recognizable for his Pocahontas braids, but it's those eyes that start the trouble.
Even now, at 62, they are perfectly almond shaped, deep brown and, well, just deep.
Look into them for too long and you may regret it.
As one of his early wives did, no doubt, that famous time she walked in on him in bed with another woman.
Mr.
Nelson focused those soulful, sexy eyes on her and asked: "Are you gonna believe what you see? Or what I tell you?"


After a Mars move, two Saatchi agencies try to wash the chocolate off their faces.
COMMERCIALS for M&amp;M's candies by Ted Bates Advertising once promised that "the milk chocolate melts in your mouth, not in your hand." Now the successor to the agency, Bates Worldwide, is scrambling to avoid its own meltdown as a result of the decision by the maker of M&amp;M's, Mars Inc., to dismiss Bates.
The dismissal on Tuesday was intended to punish Bates and its sibling agency, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide, after the ouster in mid-December of Maurice Saatchi as chairman of their parent, the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company P.L.C.
John Mars and Forrest Mars Jr., who lead the privately owned Mars confectionery, pet products and food company, are ardent supporters of Mr.
Saatchi.
A week after his deposal, they began a review on the Mars worldwide account, with billings estimated at $800 million to $1 billion, implying that Saatchi &amp; Saatchi would somehow feel their wrath.


Spinning Out Thoughts Of Art, Evil and the Self
THE TUNNEL  By William H. Gass  Illustrated. 653 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $30.
At the opening of "The Tunnel" -- William H. Gass's first novel since his much-praised "Omensetter's Luck" was published nearly 30 years ago -- William Frederick Kohler, a distinguished historian at a Midwestern university, sits at a desk in the cellar of his house and contemplates the manuscript of his all-but-completed masterwork, "Guilt and Innocence in Hitler's Germany."


A Paris Bistro That's Tucked in New York
THE client was an ardent Francophile in Manhattan.
The designers Ron Wagner and Timothy Van Dam wanted to provide him with exactly what he wanted: a dining room reminiscent of a Parisian bistro.
So they came up with what they called the "Josephine schemes": one was neo-classical, in the style of the Empress Josephine, and the other was a variation on an Art Deco interior where Josephine Baker might have stopped in for un cafe.


Kenneth M. Setton, 80, Scholar And Author on Medieval Europe
Dr.
Kenneth M. Setton, one of the foremost interpreters of medieval Europe and the Crusades, the papacy and the dawn of the Renaissance, died on Saturday at Princeton (N.J.) Medical Center.
He was 80.
The cause was complications from a stroke he suffered a few weeks ago, according to the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, of which Dr.
Setton was a former faculty member.


Elegance Across Centuries
Centuries met on Sunday afternoon when the New York City Ballet presented Robert LaFosse's "Danses de Cour" at the New York State Theater.
Mr.
LaFosse, a 20th-century dancer, choreographed his ballet to the Divertimento (Op. 86) of Richard Strauss, a German composer who was born in the 19th century and died in the 20th.
Strauss, in turn, based his score on themes by Francois Couperin, a French composer who was born in the 17th century and died in the 18th.
The music evokes the French Baroque court.
But the ballet steps Mr.
LaFosse uses are those developed in 19th-century Imperial Russian theaters.


Times to Raise Price Outside of New York
The New York Times announced plans yesterday for a series of price increases affecting copies sold outside the New York region.
The changes are effective on March 5.
Arthur Sulzberger Jr., publisher of The Times, said the increases resulted from paper costs, which have risen 30 percent in the last two months and are scheduled to go higher this year.
"Regretfully we are compelled to pass along some of these costs," he said.


What Steinem Didn't Say
To The Home Section:
I am very sorry that Gloria Steinem at 60 seems to have forgotten how the women's movement once strongly objected to a fundamental inequity between men and women, one in which women were inordinately valued for their physical attractiveness, rather than character, intellect and ability ("At Home With Gloria Steinem: Decades as Icon; Now, Freedom," Feb. 9).
The "woman as sex object" concept was generally deplored, and the National Organization for Women had an older women's group protesting ageism and the double standard of aging as well as sexism.


Executive to Start Powell Tate Office
Jonathan Rinehart, a longtime public relations executive, has joined Powell Tate, the public relations agency in Washington that specializes in public policy, and will open a New York office for the agency.
Mr.
Rinehart, 64, is a co-founder of Adams &amp; Rinehart, now known as Ogilvy Adams &amp; Rinehart; he served as chairman until the end of last year.
Mr.
Rinehart has been named a partner at Powell Tate and will serve as a senior consultant to the agency's clients in Washington and New York.


A Rights Movement With Song at Its Heart
A daughter of Richard Rodgers couldn't find the son of Hoagy Carmichael.
"Hoagy, where are you?" called out Mary Rodgers, searching the crowd.
Hoagy Bix Carmichael, who was seated at her left elbow, scarcely missed a beat.
"Too close for comfort," he said.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Ex-Boyfriend Sought in Killing
The authorities were searching yesterday for a casino worker's former boyfriend in her fatal shooting as she left work Monday night.
The suspect, James Black, 26, of Brooklyn, is accused of killing Georgia Mills, 28, of Atlantic City, a buffet-beverage server at Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino.
He is charged with murder and weapons possession.


Look Who's Caring For the Caretaker
JOHN SCHNALL easily remembers the hands that raised him -- that baked the cookies, wiped away the tears and showed him how to pray.
They were those, he said, of his "mother, father and best friend."
In fact, they belonged to none of those people, but rather to his nanny, Margaret Lauman, who lived nearly all of her adult life in service to his family.


James R. Cowan, 78, Health Official, Dies
James R. Cowan, a physician who served as Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health and Environmental Services in the Nixon Administration and in a variety of other high posts in health administration, died last Thursday at his home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 78.
His wife, Dolores, who said Dr.
Cowan suffered from heart and vascular ailments, attributed the death to natural causes.


Accounts
*
Alva-Amco Pharmacal Cos., Chicago, to Jack Levy Associates, Chicago, to handle the account of the distributor of nonprescription drugs and nutritional supplements, previously handled by Marx-Fairman, Milwaukee.
Billings were estimated at $3 million. *
Wm.
Wrigley Jr.
Co., Chicago, to Lou Beres &amp; Associates, Chicago, to handle the company's trade and dental professional advertising, which the agency has handled on a project basis for the last two years.
Billings were not disclosed.


Selig, Fehr Take Part In Civilized Exchange
Two days of "candid," "civilized" dialogue that culminated in a feast of corned beef, pastrami and tongue at Jake Levine's deli in Milwaukee today set the tone for the resumption of serious bargaining in the baseball strike next week.
It remains to be seen, though, if harsh charges leveled at the union by an owner who wasn't in Milwaukee undermine the positive tone Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, believes was established in his meetings with Donald Fehr, the union leader.


Roosevelt Memorial
To the Editor:
Re "Combing the Century for a President to Honor" (Week in Review, Feb. 19): You write that 50 years after Franklin D. Roosevelt's death, he has "no memorial larger than his desk." Construction has begun on a seven-acre site on the Tidal Basin, in a triangle connected at one point by the Jefferson Memorial and by the Washington Monument.


Ex-Interior Chief Is Indicted In Influence-Peddling Case
Former Interior Secretary James G. Watt was charged today with perjury and obstruction of Justice in a 25-count felony indictment returned by a Federal grand jury investigating fraud and influence peddling at the Department of Housing and Urban Development during Ronald Reagan's Presidency.
The charges center on Mr.
Watt's activities as a private housing consultant after he left the Reagan Cabinet in 1983.
Arlin M. Adams, the independent prosecutor investigating the housing agency, said Mr.
Watt was paid $500,000 by clients who won lucrative housing grants after he interceded with top officials at HUD from 1984 to 1986.


Frank Lloyd Wright's Newest Project


Storm Still In the Hunt For Berth In Tourney
It's still a long shot.
But St.
John's hopes for a berth in a post-season tournament are still alive after the Red Storm outlasted Providence, 79-72, last night before 11,387 fans at Madison Square Garden.
James Scott scored 16 points and Charles Minlend added 13 points and 15 rebounds as the Red Storm improved to 12-11 and 5-10 in the Big East.
Providence, which got 30 points from Eric Williams, dropped to 13-10 and 5-10 in the conference.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Co., New York, is selling $125 million of floating-rate notes due in 2000 through Dean Witter Reynolds.
The notes are noncallable and are priced at par.
They are rated A2 by Moody's Investors Service, A by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, A+ by Fitch Investors Service and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Cowboys' Washington on Jet Priority List
A couple of years ago, the Jets were spending more than $4 million on their secondary, which was one of the strongest parts of the defense.
Now, half of the unit is unsigned (cornerback James Hasty and safety Ronnie Lott are unrestricted free agents) and the strength of the defense has shifted to the linebackers.


Federal Ruling Backs Utilities on Contracts
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission issued a ruling yesterday that could help moderate electricity rates but could also inhibit the growth of the independent power industry.
The commission, the Federal agency that oversees the electric utility industry, ruled that the California Public Utilities Commission had violated Federal law by compelling two California utilities to sign long-term contracts to build new power plants with independent power producers.


U.S. Policies Undermine Nuclear Treaties
To the Editor:
Selig S. Harrison's "Zero Nuclear Weapons. Zero" (Op-Ed, Feb. 15) rightfully takes the Clinton Administration to task for not pursuing policies leading to the elimination of nuclear weapons, as it is obligated to do under the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
However, the situation is worse than he describes: the Ad- ministration is pursuing policies that will impede further reductions in the arsenals of nuclear-weapon states.
The United States and Russia are attempting to renegotiate the terms of the Antiballistic Missile Treaty to permit new generations of missile defenses forbidden by the treaty.
Under the United States proposal, such defenses, while nominally designed to counter theater missiles, could have significant capabilities against strategic missiles as well.


REPUBLICANS BEGIN DEEP BUDGET CUTS IN 5 HOUSE PANELS


Wright's Hometown Finally Sees Its Future
For more than half a century, this capital of the split-personality state that produced both the La Follette Progressive movement and Senator Joseph R. McCarthy has been passionately divided over Frank Lloyd Wright.
If many here in Wright's boyhood hometown recognized him as one of the century's great architects, there were plenty of others who reviled him as an autocrat, a womanizer and, perhaps worst of all, a habitual deadbeat whose real genius lay in bouncing checks and dodging bill collectors.


Sampras Battles Baseliner (and Flu) to Net Three-Set Victory
Pete Sampras allowed himself to be lulled into a baseline battle with Marcelo Filippini tonight at the Comcast United States Indoor, a strategy that nearly reaped a major reward for the 57th-ranked Uruguayan in the form of a major first-round upset of the world's top player.
Sampras hadn't faltered in an opening round match since he visited this same event last year.
Despite a flawed performance at the very site that five years ago brought him the first of his 30 career titles, Sampras squeaked out of trouble with a 4-6, 6-4, 7-5 comeback.


A Castl Rises From Ashes
AS a Foreign Service officer, Karla Reed endured wars, disruptive transcontinental moves and administrative red tape, all in the name of American diplomacy.
But her most challenging assignment is taking place stateside.
Here in this Putnam County town, about 10 miles east of West Point, Ms.
Reed is coaxing a burnt-out castle back to life.
Yes, a castle.
The eccentric Victorian house, where Ms.
Reed has lived since June, has looming stone walls and a spider-webbed basement that looks like a dungeon (it's just as dank, too).
Out front is an elevated slab of field stone that projects from the porch into the drive like a drawbridge.
"That's so people could step out directly from a carriage without putting their feet on the ground," Ms.
Reed said.


Market Place; Some analysts think now is the time to invest in Japanese stocks.
THESE are bleak days for the Tokyo stock market.
Following a big fall after last month's earthquake, the Nikkei index of 225 stocks has been hovering at a low level of around 18,000.
There are widespread fears that it may fall further in the coming weeks.
"Right now, sentiment is at it's very worst," said Jeff Bahrenburg, strategist in the Tokyo office of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
"Bearishness is at its extreme." A rally yesterday fizzled out at the end of the day as the Nikkei closed at 18,106.65, up 10.40 points.


Tools With Good Form
ARNOLD GOLDSTEIN, an interior designer, sculptor and jewelry maker, was driving to California in 1983 when he stopped at an antiques shop near Austin, Tex.
Half an hour later, he had filled his station wagon with $500 worth of old tools for woodworking, blacksmithing and shipbuilding.
Mr.
Goldstein, 55, said he became fascinated with the "unique shapes, patination and innovative qualities" of the hand-forged tools.


VIACOM INC. (VIA.B,A)
Viacom Inc. reported yesterday a loss for the fourth quarter and sharply lower earnings for all of 1994, as charges related to two big entertainment and publishing acquisitions depressed results.
Viacom, based in New York, said earnings from operations rose sharply for both the quarter and the year.


A Prize Pursues a Pianist, and There's a Debut
Piano competitions tend to create pianists who sound like competitors.
They approach the keyboard like warriors, with fierce, determined energy and finely honed technique.
The Irving S. Gilmore International Keyboard Festival may help produce another genre of pianist: one who is erudite, unorthodox and introverted.
The Gilmore Artist is chosen every four years by 15 members of an advisory committee who tour the world and, unannounced, listen to concerts by every major contender.
The winner does not pursue the prize.
Rather, a modest career must already be in progress, a musical maturity already in evidence, before the prize -- $115,000 and $400,000 in management services -- begins to pursue the pianist.
That new genre now includes Ralf Gothoni, who became a Gilmore Artist last February and made his New York debut in the Miller Theater on Tuesday night.
Like the first Gilmore winner, David Owen Norris, Mr.
Gothoni is in his 40's.
He has had a professional career for nearly 30 years, as a soloist, recitalist, chamber musician and conductor, and has made about 70 recordings.
He is also the composer of a new opera, "Dog," about the Russian mafia in Helsinki, Finland.


Eagerly Soaring, Plunging and Hurtling
Lila York was one of Paul Taylor's most exhilarating -- and charming -- whirligigs.
And so it was not surprising that her new piece for the Juilliard Dance Ensemble gave its 20 performers a chance to soar and plunge with frightening abandon through excerpts from two Prokofiev piano concertos.
Ms.
York's "Rapture," performed on Sunday afternoon at the Juilliard Theater, also allowed the dancers to be their eager young selves, and they looked as if they were having the time of their lives.
Set on an often dimly lighted stage with a field of stars behind, "Rapture" was ingeniously plotted, with moments of dreamlike stillness and melancholy punctuating the dancers' race across the stage.
The ways Ms.
York interspersed brief solos, many of them by corps dancers, were also interesting.
But overall, as it hurtled toward its end, "Rapture" came to seem like a one-note display of energy and oddity.


Corrections
A dance review on Saturday about a performance by Peggy Baker at the Kitchen last Thursday misidentified the creator of Ms.
Baker's costume for the dance titled "Brute." She is Jane Townsend, not Caroline O'Brien.


Rebates for Mini-Vans Are Increased by Chrysler
Providing further evidence that a critical segment of the auto market is weakening, the Chrysler Corporation increased the rebates on its mini-vans today for the second time in a month.
The new marketing incentives are as much as $2,500.


Riley Seems To Concede The Division To the Magic
Pat Riley finally mustered up the courage to admit today, "It's all or nothing this year."
Just what inspired the coach's candor was debatable.
Maybe it was watching his team suffer an embarrassing 99-91 loss to the undermanned Cleveland Cavaliers Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden, or maybe it was the presence of Charles Oakley back at practice today.
But Riley certainly sounded like a man in the fourth year of a five-year contract with no new agreement in place.


Doctor at Games Supports Louganis
The physician who stitched Greg Louganis's scalp wound at the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, said last night that he has tested negative for the H.I.V. virus and that he does not fault Louganis for not revealing at the time that he was infected.
Approximately nine to 12 months ago, Louganis told Dr.
James Puffer that he had been infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, in 1988 and now had AIDS, Puffer said last night in a telephone interview from Los Angeles, where he is a professor of family medicine at the U.C.L.A.
Medical Center.


Money-Back Guarantee if Conditions Are Poor
It may seem odd to think of snow in terms of a money-back guarantee.
But increasingly, ski resorts are marketing their slopes the way department stores deal in housewares.
At most retail outlets, you have at least 30 days to return an item.
At ski areas, you have about an hour.
A growing movement is afoot to give skiers their money back if snow conditions aren't right.
In a winter like this one, with its mercurial ups and downs, skiers may want a refund.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 16 about Krystyna Janda, a Polish actress who is performing in Warsaw in two plays about contemporary women, misidentified the director of a 1982 film in which she appeared and misstated her role in it.
"The Interrogation" was directed by Richard Bugajski, not by Andrzej Wajda; Ms.
Janda played a cabaret singer, not a journalist.


After the Strike: Fairness
President Clinton's plan to issue an executive order that would forbid the hiring of permanent replacement workers by Government contractors has the whiff of politics.
Mr.
Clinton needs to shore up his support with the A.F.L.-C.I.O., now meeting in Florida.
No surprise, then, that he flirts with intervening in the baseball strike and threatens to veto pro-management bills making their way through the Republican-controlled Congress.
There is logic, too, in using a Presidential order to get some movement on an economic issue that is important to both business and organized labor.
Last year, the House passed a blanket ban against allowing companies to hire permanent replacements for striking workers.
The measure died in the Senate, where Republicans and some Democrats rightly viewed it as too sweeping.
Businesses have the right to stay afloat during a strike, just as workers have the right to seek other jobs.
But that can be done in almost all strikes with temporary replacements.
No one's career is ended; the damage to both sides is short-term.


Bank Merger Is Challenged By Governor
Gov.
John G. Rowland today threatened to block the proposed merger of the state's two largest banks unless the banks took steps to soften the impact of the deal on Connecticut's economy.
The highly unusual move -- states traditionally rubber-stamp such mergers -- comes one day after Fleet Financial Group of Providence, R.I., agreed to purchase Shawmut National Corporation of Hartford and Boston.
The $3.7 billion deal would create the nation's ninth-largest bank.


Seahawks' Frier Regains Some Movement
The paralyzed Seattle Seahawk defensive tackle MIKE FRIER has regained some very slight movement in his hands and feet, doctors at the University of Washington Medical Center in Seattle said yesterday.
Doctors have also removed the neck brace Frier has worn since he was injured Dec. 1 in a car crash that also involved Seahawk running backs CHRIS WARREN and LAMAR SMITH.
Smith, a rookie, has pleaded not guilty to a charge of vehicular assault in the accident. (AP)


P.L.O. Seeks Support for an Israeli Withdrawal
In an attempt to press Israel to set a date for the withdrawal of its troops from most of the West Bank, Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, called today for an Arab summit meeting and asked for increased international support.
In a statement issued by the Palestine Liberation Organization executive committee after two days of talks, Mr.
Arafat and his senior advisers described the current peace talks with Israel as stuck in a vicious circle and difficult to continue.


The Media vs. the Message: City Hall Tries to Bully a Restive Press Corps
TALK of reinventing government. This is more like reinventing the political wheel.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is setting out on what might be his most difficult task yet: taming New York City's rough-and-tumble press corps.
By the testimony of the Mayor's own press secretary, that means more firmly controlling the news and the people who report it, denying certain reporters interview time with the Mayor and commissioners, and withholding information or making it harder to get.
Plus, the Mayor demonstrated two weeks ago, insuring loyalty by dismissing those press aides suspected of perfidy.


Congress Presses Russia, And Clinton, Over Iran Deal
The Administration is struggling to resolve differences with Russia while leading Republicans threaten to withhold aid unless Moscow cancels a nuclear energy deal with Iran.
In recent days, a number of Republicans in Congress have said that Russia's $1 billion deal to build four nuclear reactors would speed Iran's quest for nuclear weapons and that they were prepared to use aid as a weapon to stop it.


Jim Katcavage, 60, Giants Star Of '56 Championship Team, Dies
Jim Katcavage, the gritty defensive end for the New York Giants who began his career on the famous 1956 championship team and never let up for 13 grueling seasons, died yesterday at his home in Maple Glen, Pa., outside Philadelphia.
He was 60.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Project to Run Schools for Profit Is Focusing on Scaled-Back Plan
The Edison Project, the media entrepreneur Christopher Whittle's proposal to run public schools for a profit, plans to announce within a few weeks that it has raised the money to open its first schools next year, the group's president, Benno C. Schmidt Jr., said today.
The project, which has been buffeted by bad publicity surrounding Mr.
Whittle, its founder, will be far smaller than the large-scale network of schools originally proposed.
Dr.
Schmidt said that in the first year the project would include only three to five schools.


Bowing to Critics, Clinton Abandons Plan to Charge Border Fee
On the eve of a Presidential trip to Canada, the White House reversed course today and said President Clinton had abandoned a plan to impose a fee on people entering the United States across its land borders.
The decision was timed to prevent a dispute over the proposal from becoming the focus of a two-day meeting between Mr.
Clinton and Prime Minister Jean Chretien.
But it will leave the Administration without $400 million a year in projected revenue that it had said would be used to help finance the fight against illegal immigration.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy The Federal Reserve may be done raising interest rates.
Union members involved in three labor struggles in Decatur, Ill., pressed A.F.L.-C.I.O. leaders for help.  [ B8. ] Companies Hanson P.L.C. plans to spin off 34 American subsidiaries into a new company that would start with $1.4 billion in debt.  [ D1. ] A top multimedia company is finding itself squeezed by the industry it helped create.
More computers are sold with multimedia built in, so Creative Labs is trying to increase sales to computer makers and broaden into new areas.  [ D1. ] The battle over a videodisk standard has flared anew.
Sony and Phillips said they would move ahead with a new format that would compete with a standard proposed by Time Warner and Toshiba.
The announcement surprised many industry executives.  [ D1. ] Chrysler increased rebates on its mini-vans for the second time in a month in an effort to bolster sales.  [ D4. ] Three top executives of Kemper's money management unit quit.
The departures raised further questions about the future of the embattled insurance and investment company.  [ D4. ]
California violated Federal law by compelling two utilities to sign long-term contracts to build power plants with independent power producers, Federal regulators ruled.  [ D4. ] American Maize-Products agreed to be acquired by Eridania Beghin-Say S.A. of France for about $408 million.  [ D4. ] International What does the United States do when the next Mexico happens?
While Administration officials argue that Mexico is a special case, the rescue package raises difficult questions about whether the United States can afford to be the guarantor of financial security for other big trading partners.
News Analysis.  [ D1. ] The $20 billion rescue package falls short of addressing other serious problems afflicting the battered Mexican economy.  [ D5. ] Germany's most powerful labor union threatened a strike.  [ D20. ] Markets Treasury prices rallied after Alan Greenspan indicated that the Fed might be finished raising interest rates.  [ D1. ] Stocks advanced modestly.
The S.&amp; P. 500 rose 2.35 points.  [ D8. ] The dollar was little changed.  [ D18. ]  Gold prices surged.  [ D18. ] Today's Columns Cutting regulation is the cause of the moment in Washington, but the solutions will require some hard decisions.
One way or another, Americans must still decide what is worth regulating and how.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ] A slump in Japanese stocks may be an opportunity to buy, some analysts say.
They argue that the market is ignoring a recovery and improved corporate earnings.
Market Place.  [ D8. ] After losing Mars, two Saatchi &amp; Saatchi shops are scrambling to control the damage.
The blow inflicted by the Mars brothers will land far more harshly on one of the shops, Bates Worldwide, because Mars was its largest multinational client, accounting for 7 to 8 percent of its billings.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D19. ]


Five Inductees Enter Hall of Fame


District of Columbia Will Run Out of Money Soon, Audit Reports
Government auditors told two Congressional subcommittees today that the District of Columbia was insolvent after years of mismanagement and would be unable to pay its bills by summer without a Federal rescue plan.
Testifying before a joint meeting of the two House subcommittees involved with the District's affairs, officials from the General Accounting Office described a city that has routinely overspent, used muddled accounting practices and ignored obvious signs of trouble.
The city also ignored a Congressional mandate last year to cut $140 million from its $3.25 billion budget and to eliminate 2,000 public employees, the auditors said.


Democrats in Congress Seem Stuck in Denial Stage of Grief
When Presidents come calling on Capitol Hill, they are usually ushered into stately neo-classical suites, or, if they are meeting with lots of people, one of the larger ceremonial rooms.
But when Bill Clinton came today to talk with the 204 House Democrats, they found themselves shunted off into a utilitarian room in the labyrinthine basement of the Capitol, with gray walls and low ceilings and not much room for dignity.
Mr.
Clinton joked to those shoehorned in with him that at least they could all see each other.
A Congressional aide said the Democrats were grateful even for this.
"It's been so hard to get rooms for anything," she said.
"We feel lucky to have gotten a room at all."


Giving Till It Helps


A Struggle to Deal With a $20 Billion Precedent
As the United States and Mexico argued about the last details of a $20 billion rescue plan last week, one of the Clinton Administration's top economic officials fielded the same question time and again in his travels through Brazil and Argentina: If Mexico's ills spread, is the United States prepared to bail out its other big trading partners?
Much like other Administration officials, from Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin to Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Jeffrey E. Garten, the traveling Under Secretary of Commerce for international trade, hemmed and hawed a bit in response to the question.


House Panels Begin Work On Torts Law
Republicans in the House today began the process of dramatically reshaping the role of the nation's Federal and state courts in lawsuits involving consumers and manufacturers.
Making good on the House Republicans' 1994 political manifesto, the Contract With America, the Judiciary Committee and the Commerce Committee began writing legislation that would, for the first time, put under Federal law major elements of torts law -- that area of the law governing personal injuries and defective products.
They also moved to put caps on punitive damages in all civil lawsuits.


Russia Picks Leaders in Rebel Republic


Still Married to Christ, and Never Happier; As Fewer Women Become Nuns, Sisters Say the Calling's Rewards Have Expanded
Elaine Roulet smiled back in time at her own sense of girlish idealism as she recalled the white bridal gown of 46 years ago, when she followed the chapel aisle straight toward the perceived will of God.
"It was so exciting, so romantic, to walk down that aisle as a bride of Christ and come back as a nun," said the 63-year-old woman, a Sister of Saint Joseph, stylishly gray now in checked suit and earrings as she survives as one of the toughest and most adaptive in the modern Roman Catholic church's rapidly dwindling ranks of the sisterhood.


Where Mardi Gras Indians Come From
To the Editor:
The Mardi Gras Indians did not originate with a Eurocentric idea from Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show (front page, Feb. 19).
Blacks appeared in the streets of New Orleans during Carnival dressed in American Indian costumes long before Buffalo Bill came to town.


Streamers, Banners And Kisses At Finish
Holy Bull said farewell today to the racing world that he dominated for two years.
And the racing world replied in banners on his stall, streamers from an airplane that flew over his barn and a sign on the van that carried him to Kentucky: "Thanks for the memories."
The great gray superhorse, the 3-year-old champion and Horse of the Year for 1994, left stall 43 in Barn 3 at Gulfstream Park at 11:20 this morning, was led past stablemates about a hundred yards around the barn up a ramp and across a red carpet that had been rolled out for the ceremony.
And after balking at entering the horse van, he finally was sort of nudged inside, where he joined two mares from the Jimmy Croll racing stable.


House Moves to Kill A Penn Station Plan
The House voted today to take back $40 million that had been set aside to rebuild Penn Station in New York City, a cut that would effectively kill the $315 million project if it is not restored in the Senate.
The action was part of an effort to finance $3.2 billion in military programs by pulling back on money appropriated for other uses last year, taking $1.5 billion from within the military budget and $1.4 billion from other programs.


4 Die in Helicopter Crash in Cambridge


Big-City Mores and Big-Band Swing
The Ohio Ballet, directed by Heinz Poll in Akron, remains the engaging company it has always been.
Judging by the first of its two programs, anyone who ambles into the Joyce Theater this week stands a chance of having more than a good time.
The highlight of the troupe's opening on Tuesday night was a polished, lively revival of an important sociopolitical gem.
Kurt Jooss, best known for his 1932 antiwar masterpiece "The Green Table," choreographed "The Big City" the same year.
In a few cinematic strokes, the German choreographer painted a picture of human character engulfed by forces beyond any control.
On the surface, this short ballet was a vignette about a poor youth losing his girl to a swell, who deserts her.
But on the eve of Hitler's rise to power, Jooss's picture of class divisions and urban alienation in "The Big City" had a deeper meaning.


Ada Goldberg, 67, Advocate for Poor
Ada Lublin Goldberg, for many years an advocate for the poor and homeless on Long Island, died Sunday at Hospice-by-the Sea in Boca Raton, Fla.
A resident of North Bellmore, L.I., she was 67.
The cause was renal failure stemming from kidney cancer, said her son, Lawrence A. Goldberg.


People
*
Terry Taylor, vice president and associate creative director at Earle Palmer Brown, Bethesda, Md., was named creative director at the agency's Richmond office, succeeding Rob Shapiro, who resigned. *
Charles Mozur was named senior vice president for direct marketing at Doner Direct, Southfield, Mich., a new direct response office of W. B. Doner &amp; Co.
He was previously a marketing consultant.


GSD&amp;M Resigns A Casino Account
GSD&amp;M Advertising in Austin, Tex., has resigned its Luxor Hotel and Casino account after 10 months because of what the agency called changes in management and strategies at Luxor.
As a result, the account, with billings estimated at $6 million, has been placed in review.


The Cars Supply The Drive
BONNIE COLET, 27, felt the adrenalin bursting through her veins like high-octane gas exploding in a precision-engineered V-8 engine.
A car nut who says she has "gasoline for blood," Ms.
Colet, a transportation design student, was awaiting the green light in the first qualifying heat of her career: in only a minute she would present a hypothetical car of the future, a design tailored to the needs of Brazilian drivers, to be judged by the Chrysler Corporation's own design team.
The judges would weigh the car's personal appeal: it had to combine function with fun, romance, vision and wit.
Car design is one of the most competitive fields in design, which is why making the jump from college to full-time employment (where only about 100 jobs open up each year worldwide) sometimes seems as impossible a dream as gaining pole position at Indy.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Jury Has Carjacking Death Case
No one denies that Scott R. Johnson did something horrible.
But how responsible is he for the 1992 rape and killing of Gail Shollar during a carjacking?
The jury in the murder trial will begin deliberating today.


Bonds Surge On Remarks By Fed Chief
Prices of Treasury securities surged yesterday after Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, indicated that the central bank might be finished raising interest rates for the time being.
The yield on the closely watched 30-year bond, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, fell to a five-month low.
The bond rose 27/32 , to a price of 1014/32 for a yield of 7.53 percent, down from 7.61 percent on Tuesday.


The Pop Life
Replacing New Music
February is traditionally when the New Music Seminar, the 15-year-old music-business convention, starts preparing for its summer smorgasbord of live concerts and industry panels.
But last year's money-losing convention left its owner, Mark Josephson, in debt, many of his employees unpaid (there are three civil suits pending against the New Music Seminar) and its offices closed down.
It's highly unlikely that the seminar will occur this year.
Former seminar employees said Mr.
Josephson, who did not return several phone calls, was looking to sell the business.
Anticipating the end of the seminar, at least three different groups are trying to start music conventions to take its place.


3 Executives Resign From Kemper Unit
The Kemper Corporation said yesterday that three of the top executives of its money management unit had resigned, raising further questions about the future of the embattled insurance and investment company.
Last year Kemper, based in Long Grove, Ill., spurned a hostile takeover offer from the General Electric Company and accepted a higher bid from Conseco Inc., an insurance company based in Carmel, Ind.
But Conseco could not raise the money, and that deal fell apart.


Calendar: Workships And Talks
Urban Gardening  United Charities Building, 105 East 22d Street; (212) 677-7171.
The first of three workshops for gardeners tending spaces from window boxes to community plots will be held on Saturday, from 10 A.M. to 2 P.M.
Plant selection, soil, composting and diseases will be covered.


An Experiment Creates a Synthesis That May Have Abetted the Dawn of Life
It is very unlikely, scientists agree, that the precise chemical pathways from which life arose will ever be known.
But it may at least be possible to identify some of the chemical steps that might plausibly have played roles in the origin of life, and three biochemists believe they have found just such a step.
In a paper scheduled for publication today by the British journal Nature, those biochemists -- Dr.
Stanley L. Miller of the University of California at San Diego and two associates there -- describe a way they have discovered to synthesize pantetheine from a mixture of chemicals not derived from a living organism.


Dow, in a Surge, Pushes Past 4,000 Level
The Dow Jones industrial average closed above 4,000 for the first time yesterday, marking a milestone in a difficult year for stocks but a powerful one for the American economy.
For now, market analysts say, the surge in the Dow points to a reduced likelihood of an economic recession and an enhanced possibility of what economists call a "soft landing," or a slowing but still-growing economy with little inflation.


Celtics Find a Way to Shut Down O'Neal
Celtics 119, Magic 117
Dino Radja scored 27 points and Boston controlled Shaquille O'Neal for most of the second half as the Celtics edged Orlando, 119-117, last night in Hartford for their first victory over the Magic this season.


Noel Rockmore; Painter, 66
Noel Rockmore, a painter who specialized in pictures of New Orleans jazz musicians, died on Sunday at St.
Jude Medical Center in Kenner, La., a suburb of New Orleans.
He was 66 and lived in the French Quarter.
A spokesman for the hospital would not give the cause of death.


Audit Cites Mismanagement In Water Tunnel Project
State Comptroller H. Carl McCall said yesterday that the construction of New York City's third water tunnel, the largest capital project in the state, had been beset by mismanagement, citing a lack of competitive bidding on materials and millions of dollars spent on items not related to the project.
In an audit released yesterday, Mr.
McCall said mismanagement of the huge project -- which is to carry water to the city from a reservoir in Valhalla, N.Y., and is intended to supplement two existing water conduits -- would cost New York City taxpayers millions of dollars.
"This is the most expensive capital project the city has ever undertaken and is vital to the city," Mr.
McCall said.


Ex-Florio Aide Pleads Guilty in Kickback Scheme
Joseph C. Salema, a former top aide to Jim Florio when he was Governor of New Jersey, pleaded guilty yesterday to sharing in more than $200,000 in kickbacks from a bank seeking municipal bond business.
Two other men were charged in the same case.
The case was described by Federal prosecutors as the largest so far in the Government's campaign against influence peddling in the $1.5 trillion municipal bond market.
The effort has already resulted in criminal charges against two Florida men and is continuing in jurisdictions across the country.
The campaign began two years ago when questions were raised about Mr.
Salema's relationships with various Wall Street firms doing bond business in the state.


Kmart Denies Report on Search
The Kmart Corporation denied a report yesterday saying that it had called off a search for a No. 2 executive who would serve as a potential heir to the company's beleaguered president and chief executive, Joseph E. Antonini.
"We haven't been actively searching for a No. 2 and we aren't now," said Mary Lorencz, manager of media relations for Kmart, based in Troy, Mich.
"But we are actively searching for executives on a lower level."


COMPANY Briefs
BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY INC, Omaha, the holding company run by the investor Warren E. Buffett, will ask shareholders at its May 1 annual meeting to authorize issuance of one million shares of preferred stock.


Brown Expresses Confidence About Investigation
Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown predicted today that a Justice Department investigation of his business dealings would find no misconduct.
"I am absolutely confident that in the outcome, there has been no improper activity, impropriety on my part," Mr.
Brown told a House Appropriations Committee panel.


Michael V. Gazzo, 71, Is Dead; Playwright of 'Hatful of Rain'
Michael V. Gazzo, an actor and playwright whose 1955 drama, "A Hatful of Rain," broke theatrical ground in its candid and sympathetic portrayal of drug addiction, died on Feb. 14 at Vencor Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 71 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was complications after a stroke, said his daughter, Peppi.


Sanctions at Purdue
The Purdue women's basketball coach, LIN DUNN, and her assistant, MaCHELLE JOSEPH, are prohibited from recruiting until May 15 as part of sanctions placed on the program by the N.C.A.A.
The National Collegiate Athletic Association Committee on Infractions yesterday cited the program for secondary infractions of recruiting regulations.


Joffrey Ballet Denies That Merger Is Final
A spokeswoman for the Joffrey Ballet denied a report in a Chicago newspaper yesterday that the company had signed a merger agreement with Ballet Chicago.
In a statement, the Joffrey said: "We are continuing negotiations with Ballet Chicago, but we do not have anything to announce at this time. We continue to be hopeful that the negotiations will lead to a merger of the two companies."
The Chicago Sun-Times, quoting sources close to the discussions, said the merger would become final after the Chicago Ballet finishes its spring season.


For a Family, the War at Home
The tough, muscular characters in Lee Tamahori's ferocious "Once Were Warriors" are primed for fighting.
And they need no battlefield: their hostilities are played out in the bedroom, in front of the children or in crowded bars.
In his visceral first feature, Mr.
Tamahori offers social realism with a savage kick, depicting Maori New Zealanders whose ties to their own history have been destroyed.
Left floundering in an inhospitable urban world, they have lost touch with their tribal past to become part of a rootless global subculture.
The misery seen here would be familiar anywhere.
Having said he hoped to make a film that would stand viewers' hair on end, Mr.
Tamahori fully realizes that goal.
"Once Were Warriors," a tale of vicious brawls within the family of Beth Heke (Rena Owen) and her belligerent husband, Jake (Temuera Morrison), is a brutally effective family drama.
Rough around the edges and crudely obvious at times, it still presents a raw, disturbing story of domestic strife.
Only when he tries to look on the bright side does Mr.
Tamahori sound false notes.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about union members from Decatur, Ill., who petitioned the A.F.L.-C.I.O. for financial aid for strikers misidentified a speaker at their news conference.
Edith Marques is a member of the United Rubber Workers local in Decatur, not its president.


Israeli Police Arrest Orthodox Jews at Construction Site


Ex-Florio Aide Pleads Guilty
Joseph C. Salema, a close friend and former top aide to Jim Florio when he was Governor of New Jersey, pleaded guilty yesterday to sharing in more than $200,000 in kickbacks from a bank for municipal bond business in late 1989.
Mr.
Salema faces up to 10 years in prison and a fine of $250,000.
A1.


Abroad at Home; Back to McCarthy
One of the worst times for freedom in this country's turbulent history was the 1950's.
Senator Joe McCarthy, running wild, smeared Americans as guilty by association.
The Truman Administration, not to be outdone in Red-hunting, adopted a loyalty program in which people lost their jobs without knowing who had accused them of what.
Two weeks ago the Clinton Administration proposed a piece of legislation that in important respects would take us back to those bad times.
It has had no attention in the press: a sign of how inert we have become.


Salema, Ex-Aide, Known For His Political Instincts
It took a scandal, a Federal indictment and the threat of a prison term for Joseph C. Salema to emerge from the shadow of Jim Florio.
For nearly a quarter-century the two men had been nearly inseparable, but it was always Mr.
Florio who made headlines, the Democrat who clawed his way up the ranks to Congress and won election as Governor of New Jersey.


CHRONICLE
SHERRY DEAN, a correspondent for CNN's "Show Biz Today," has figured out what to do with a wedding ring after a divorce.
She was interviewing JUNE HAVOC, the star of the Off Broadway show "The Old Lady's Guide to Survival," last week when she noticed that the finger on which the actress was wearing a wedding ring was turning green.


Still the Right Deal for Mexico
The United States' pledge to provide $20 billion in loans and loan guarantees should solve Mexico's immediate financial crisis.
Yet the well-crafted agreement completed this week imposes harsh, though necessary, restrictions on Mexico's monetary and fiscal policies.
That carries risks for both countries.
The United States could lose money in the unlikely event that Mexico not only defaults on loans but also somehow reneges on its agreement to give Washington first rights to its oil revenues.
A bigger risk is political: Mexican politics could turn anti-American when policies promoted by the United States hammer hard at Mexico's already modest living standards.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets  The Dow Jones industrial average surged past the 4,000 mark, closing at 4,003.33, up 30.28 points for the day.
The rally may mean a reduced chance for an economic recession and an enhanced possibility of what economists call a soft landing, or a slowing but still-growing economy with little inflation.  [ D1. ]


10 Texas Psychiatrists Sue Ex-Patients Over Fraud Accusations
In a series of highly unusual legal actions, a group of 10 prominent Dallas psychiatrists is suing former patients, their lawyers and the health care company for whom the doctors worked under contract, charging that the doctors were defamed by patients who say they were kept in psychiatric hospitals for long periods solely to collect the insurance.
The psychiatrists, who are under Federal investigation in connection with one of the largest health-care-fraud cases in American medical history, are also threatening to sue a former patient for what they say was libelous testimony before Congress last summer.
The patient, John Deaton, testified that while hospitalized, he was restrained in a body net for 200 days, but that once his insurance was canceled, he was released from the hospital.


BIG EAST REPORT
St. John's and Seton Hall
Can St.
John's possibly be a candidate for the National Invitation Tournament, and does Seton Hall have a shot at a berth in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament?


Adults and Under-Age Drinkers
Adults now face arrest for allowing under-age drinking in private homes, even in clubs or motels.
A law signed Thursday by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman makes it a crime punishable by six months in jail and a $1,000 fine.


Great Dancer and Great Boor Aren't Incompatible
PERPETUAL MOTION  The Private and Public Lives of Rudolf Nureyev
By Otis Stuart
Illustrated. 317 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.
"Whatever they may claim about a right to privacy," Otis Stuart writes, "performers live to be looked at. Some, like Nureyev, carry their own personal proscenium around with them."


California Aims to Restore Civil Rights; What Color-Blindness?
To the Editor:
Re "Conservatives Forge New Strategy to Challenge Affirmative Action" (front page, Feb. 16):


It's Hit the Field or Hit the Road, Yankees Tell Minor Leaguers
Suddenly confronted with minor league players who refuse to play in replacement exhibition games, the Yankees responded decisively today by sending three of them home.
The latest development in an increasingly chaotic situation left the Yankees wondering if they will have enough players for the spring opener next Thursday and left at least a dozen unheralded minor leaguers wondering about their futures.
The confusion at Yankee camp is an outgrowth of the labor dispute that has turned unknown players into pawns in a debate over the definition of a replacement player.
Owners have said players will not be replacements until the regular season begins on April 3, but the union has contended that players will become strikebreakers if they play in spring games.
The Yankees injected a new wrinkle into the dispute today when they sent some players home and gave an ultimatum to the remaining minor leaguers to decide by Friday if they will play in games beginning next week.


As Deadline Passes, Nets Opt to Stand Pat
Derrick Coleman walked slowly through the parking lot today, stopping about 30 feet from of his customized white truck.
He tapped a button on his key chain to start the vehicle electronically.
His engine was purring.
He said he was going home for the day.
In the grand scheme, however, Derrick Coleman was staying. For the long haul.


Remembering 5 Little Ones
Twenty-five years can seem like an inconceivably long time or only yesterday.
Twenty-five years ago today this place was in the headlines.
The Kienast quintuplets were born on Feb. 24, 1970, and when their parents, Margaret and William, took them home, they were the toast of New Jersey.
Sara, Amy, Ted, Gordon and Abby Kienast have gone their separate ways.
Their mother now lives in Virginia.
Their father committed suicide a decade ago.
PETER S. YOUNG


For Children
The Blue Hill Troupe
Introduction to Gilbert and Sullivan  Metropolitan Museum of Art  Fifth Avenue and 82d Street  (212) 570-3949  Recommended ages: 7 and up  Tomorrow
Gilbert and Sullivan specialized in satirical operettas that shot arrows at the English upper crust.
Blue Hill Troupe, which started in Blue Hill, Me., in 1924 but is now based in New York, specializes in Gilbert and Sullivan.
And since pomposity never disappears, many of the operettas are relevant today.


Christopher Hospitalized for Ulcer
Secretary of State Warren Christopher was hospitalized tonight after falling ill with what doctors said was a small bleeding ulcer.
The doctors said Mr.
Christopher was otherwise healthy and would probably be released from the hospital on Friday.
The sudden illness forced the 69-year-old Secretary to miss a dinner given tonight by Prime Minister Jean Chretien.
The State Department said that Mr.
Christopher's appearances scheduled Friday as part of Mr.
Clinton's visit would also canceled.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a Supreme Court decision overturning a law restricting the outside earnings of Federal civil servants referred imprecisely to the position of Common Cause on the issue.
The organization supports the current ban on all outside earnings by high-level executive branch employees, as well as by Federal judges and members of Congress.
It favors legislation permitting lower-level civil servants to earn up to $2,000 for speeches and articles, as long as the outside activity does not conflict with the employee's Federal job.


Committee Approves Bill To Set Limits on Lawsuits
The House Judiciary Committee today approved landmark legislation that would for the first time set Federal standards in all product-injury lawsuits, impose strict limits on punitive damages in all civil cases and require the loser in many lawsuits to pay the legal costs of the winner.
The House Commerce Committee, meanwhile, moved toward final passage of a similar bill, paving the way for the legislation to be considered by the full House in two weeks.


'I'm Spending My Children's Inheritance'
To the Editor:
"Older Americans Cited in Studies of National Savings Rate Slump" (front page, Feb. 21) is absurd.
To indict the elderly for being big spenders and not saving, thereby setting a bad example for the baby boomers, makes no sense whatever.


California Aims to Restore Civil Rights
To the Editor:
"Conservatives Forge New Strategy to Challenge Affirmative Action" (front page, Feb. 16), your discussion of California's civil rights initiative, does not make clear to an ordinary reader whether or how this proposition is different from the Civil Rights Act of 1964 or, for that matter, from the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution.


A Unified Vision of the World's Varied Workers
To his supporters, Sebastiao Salgado is the greatest living photojournalist, a visionary who uses the camera to capture the moral drama behind the dry statistics of poverty and exploitation.
To his detractors, he is a talented purveyor of photographic kitsch, substituting sentimental cliches for genuine insight.
"Workers: An Archeology of the Industrial Age," an exhibition at the International Center of Photography Midtown based on the 1993 book of the same title, is likely to confirm the opinions of both sides.
In photograph after photograph, dark, handsome faces peer confidently from behind a veil of sweat and dust.
Strong arms reach out to grasp machetes or pickaxes, in paradises of sugar cane or infernos of sulfur.
Rembrandtesque beams of light descend from the roofs of shadowy factories, falling onto caldrons of molten metal.
Refurbished freighters slide into the water at a Polish shipyard, while old hulks wait for demolition on the mud flats of Bangladesh.


Panel Opposes School Lunch Program
A House committee voted today to scrap the national school lunch program and let states decide how to use Federal money to feed school children.
The program was created in 1946 and has become a fixture of American life, subsidizing meals served to more than 25 million children a day.


From Start To Finish, The Knicks Connect
Patrick Ewing was terrific from the start.
Hubert Davis was good at the finish.
And the Knicks, recovering from a disappointing home loss Tuesday night, gained ground in their pursuit of the Orlando Magic.
Led by Ewing's 38-point performance and Davis's timely 3-point shooting, the Knicks outlasted the Sacramento Kings, 103-90, last night at Madison Square Garden.
By winning, New York (34-18) moved to within five and one-half games of Orlando (40-13), which lost a road game to the Boston Celtics.


Art in Review
Raphael Soyer  '20 Great Paintings'
Forum Gallery  745 Fifth Avenue (near 57th Street)  Through March 4
The two paintings that open this mini-survey of Raphael Soyer's career -- one of tired waitresses in a restaurant, the other a portrait of his parents -- succinctly establish his main themes: on-the-spot social observation and personal history set forth in a deft figurative style.


Robert A. Wall, 85, 3d-Generation Judge
Judge Robert A. Wall, who continued the judicial tradition established by his grandfather and father in northwestern Connecticut, died on Sunday in the Litchfield Woods rest home in Torrington, Conn.
He was 85 and a resident of Harwinton, Conn.
The cause was respiratory failure, said a son, A. Robert Wall Jr. of Torrington.


Dispute Over Nuclear Treaty Is Souring Relations Between Israel and Egypt
Egypt, which in 1979 was the first Arab country to make peace with Israel, now sees an alarming deterioration of its relations with its neighbor, centered around a bitter dispute over Israel's refusal to sign the treaty to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.
The dispute, which has resulted in sharp exchanges between the two countries, is the most serious since Egypt's condemnation of the Israeli invasion of Lebanon in 1982.
Egypt's position has soured relations with the Clinton Administration, which has mounted a strong drive to renew the nuclear non-proliferation treaty indefinitely at a United Nations conference in April.
And it has stymied Israel's efforts to broaden diplomatic and economic ties with other Arab countries.


Greenspan Reassures the G.O.P. on Planned Budget Cuts
Continuing his campaign for deep cuts in the Federal budget, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, reassured Republicans in Congress today that he would try to protect the economy from any damage that might be caused by their proposed spending reductions.
Mr.
Greenspan also followed up on his suggestion last month that the Government's Consumer Price Index overstates inflation by recommending today that Congress appoint a special commission to pinpoint the upward bias in the inflation gauge.
That way, he said, rather than altering the index itself, the Government could hold down the increase in the future cost of Social Security benefits, Federal pensions and other costs pegged to inflation in line with the commission's estimates.


Executive Changes
ALAMO RENT-A-CAR INC., Fort Lauderdale, Fla., appointed D. Keith Cobb vice chairman and chief executive.
Michael Egan is relinquishing the post of chief executive but will continue as chairman.
CARR GOTTSTEIN FOODS CO., Anchorage, named Larry Hayward chief operating officer.


The Mayor's Censorship Office
It's loony tunes time at City Hall.
From our colleague Joyce Purnick comes an account of the Giuliani administration's new punitive press policy.
It seems Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and his press secretary, Cristyne Lategano, have been vetting articles to see who has been naughty and who has been nice.
Based on their new Giuliani-friendly rating scale, Ms.
Lategano will dispense interviews and information to reporters who are sufficiently uncritical.
City officials who want to follow American officeholders' two-century tradition of talking to reporters when it will serve the civic interest are being told to clam up.
This, of course, is an approach that will backfire on the Mayor and blight Ms.
Lategano's own budding career.
But that is their business.
The challenge for reporters and editors is to respond professionally to the administration's unprofessional behavior.
Mayor Giuliani is not the first politician to try to turn reporters into boosters, simply one of the more clumsy.
He is very likely under the sway of some of his more paranoid retainers.
Perhaps his thinking will clear up when he realizes that he will succeed only in diverting attention from his accomplishments.


Art in Review
Tom Otterness
Brooke Alexander Gallery  59 Wooster Street (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through March 25  Skoto Gallery  25 Prince Street  SoHo  Through March 25
Tom Otterness's rounded bronze figures only look whimsical: even in his playground sculptures for Hudson River Park in lower Manhattan, there's an ominous undercurrent, a hint of cruelty and mayhem.
This undercurrent often comes to the surface in his recent sculptures, drawings and paintings at Brooke Alexander.
In the center of the main gallery hangs a sculpture, in the form of a massive chain cast from carbon steel: the pluglike figure at its center is pulled remorselessly downward by a huge ball suspended from his feet.
Nearby, "Chained Foot and Leg" is cast in steel with a patina of rust, as if gangrene had set in.
Several canvases of chain figures echo the blood-red hue of rust, less successfully.


Drug Crackdown Planned Along the Mexican Border
Concerned about a sharp decline in cocaine seizures along the Mexican border, the Clinton Administration plans to shift as many as 80 additional Customs Service agents to Southwest crossing points and to back them up with new surveillance equipment, including helicopter patrols and cargo X-ray machines.
The Administration is also reviewing Customs Service inspection procedures, especially those originally intended to speed the importation of legal farm and industrial goods from Mexico.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.88
5.90
3.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.69
5.66
3.24
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.90
5.88
3.59
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.31
7.32
6.20
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.54
7.53
6.73
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.43
8.40
7.53
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.43
6.47
5.74
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sports of The Times; Tolerance, Not Blame, For Louganis
IT is not enough to ask if Greg Louganis did the right thing in concealing that he was H.I.V.-positive when he cut his head during the 1988 Summer Games.
The big question is whether government and health authorities worked hard enough in facing AIDS in the early years.
The stigma of AIDS -- the false and perhaps even biased assumption that it was confined to male homosexuals -- led to a long reign of hysteria that would have encouraged anybody, great Olympic athlete or not, to keep quiet.


Giuliani Seeks to Sell 3 Hospitals And Shrink Public Health System
The administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday that it would try to sell three of New York's 11 municipal hospitals and would soon eliminate 1,000 of the system's 8,000 beds as part of the most sweeping restructuring of the city's public health system in at least a generation.
Saying the city could no longer afford such a large public hospital system, Mayor Giuliani said he would seek offers from private hospitals or other nonprofit organizations to buy Coney Island Hospital in Brooklyn, Queens Hospital Center and Elmhurst Hospital Center in Queens.


Harriman Sends 3 Works to Christie's
Pamela Harriman, the Ambassador to France, who is enmeshed in two lawsuits brought by heirs of her late husband, W. Averell Harriman, has consigned three works with a value estimated as high as $20 million for auction.


On a Pathway Through a Plethora
The New York art gallery scene is a thing of considerable density under normal circumstances, but once a year it achieves critical mass: "The Art Show." For this event, organized by the Art Dealers Association of America, several dozen dealers from Manhattan and around the country take over the Seventh Regiment Armory on Park Avenue and do their best to fill its yawning interior with exciting things to look at.
Circumstances are definitely not normal, but that is part of the fun.
For the dealers, this event, now in its seventh year, must be a mixed blessing of breakneck installation and collegial contact, a cross between a school reunion, a trade show and a relay race.
Everyone eyes everyone else's displays with friendly, if competitive, interest, testing the market's waters together, all the while maintaining contact with home base, if the cellular phone count means anything.


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about Dr.
William A. Moffett, director of the Huntington Library of San Marino, Calif., who helped open the Dead Sea Scrolls to outside scholars, included an erroneous identification supplied by the library for a survivor and misstated his residence.
The survivor, one of Dr.
Moffett's sons, is Charles Henry Buckius Moffett; he lives in Brooklyn, not Manhattan.


Ethics Panel Needs Weeks On Gingrich
The House ethics committee is weeks away from deciding whether to hire an independent counsel to review the complaints filed against Speaker Newt Gingrich, the head of the committee said tonight.
Representative Nancy Johnson, the chairwoman of the committee, said the panel was being briefed by staff members on all the complaints against Mr.
Gingrich, including a new one filed today in which Mr.
Gingrich was accused of accepting up to $200,000 in free cable time to broadcast across the country a college course he teaches on Saturdays in Georgia.


CHRONICLE
Since TED TURNER owns the Atlanta Braves, the team that has the highest payroll in baseball and still makes a profit, his fellow owners' demand for a salary cap would not seem to be in his best interests.
Mr.
Turner admitted as much yesterday at a breakfast at Tiffany's to promote the 1998 New York Goodwill Games, which he will sponsor.


Dispute in Cape Town
A war of words erupted yesterday over who will control Cape Town's bid to play host to the 2004 Olympics.


Comedie-Francaise Grafts New Onto Tried-and-True
After 10 months of touring the provinces while its traditional home underwent a $12 million facelift, the Comedie-Francaise returned to the stage of the Salle Richelieu in Paris last month, eager to demonstrate that it could hold its own in the highly competitive world of French theater today.
But it is not proving easy.
In its search for a new identity, the 315-year-old troupe has opened its doors to outside directors as well as to works by contemporary playwrights.
Yet even if it wanted to, it would not dare turn its back on the French classical repertory that has long been its principal raison d'etre.


Chief of U.S. Geological Survey Pleads for Continued Funding
Dr.
Gordon Eaton, chief of the United States Geological Survey, pleaded before Congress today that the country could not afford to lose the 116-year-old agency.
The proposal to kill the geological survey, which is part of the Department of the Interior, is one of many proposals eliminating or curtailing Federal scientific and technical organizations detailed in the House Republican leaders' Contract with America.
Eliminating the agency would save $3.3 billion over five years.
The agency's budget request for fiscal year 1996 is $586 million.


Bob Stinson, Rock Guitarist, Is Dead at 35
Bob Stinson, who played lead guitar in the influential 1980's rock band the Replacements, was found dead in his Minneapolis apartment on Saturday.
He was 35.
The cause was an unintentional overdose of a substance that has not yet been identified, said his mother, Anita Stinson Kurth.


Lilco Chairman Declines a Much-Criticized Increase in His $580,000 Salary
Stung by criticism from the top elected officials of Nassau and Suffolk counties, the chairman of the Long Island Lighting Company announced today that he would not accept a $55,000 raise approved by the utility's board of directors.
The 9.5 percent raise would have increased the annual salary of the chairman, William J. Catacosinos, to $633,089.
When he first assumed the job in 1984, his salary was $220,000.


Studies Find Death Penalty Tied to Race Of the Victims
About half of all the people who are murdered each year in the United States are black.
Yet since 1977, when a firing squad in Utah initiated the modern era of capital punishment, the overwhelming majority of people who have been executed -- 85 percent -- had killed a white person.
Only 11 percent had killed a black person.


Rally in Bonds Falters On Renewed Rate Fears
The prices of Government securities rallied early yesterday, but then gave back almost all the day's gains after comments from the vice chairman of the Federal Reserve rattled some traders and investors.
The price of the 30-year bond fell 5/32 , to 10031/32 , for a yield of 7.54 percent, up from 7.53 percent on Wednesday.
The rates on shorter-maturity bills increased a couple of basis points, while the yields on intermediate notes declined slightly.


Phone Company's License Is Suspended for Fraud
Responding to what it called a growing problem of fraud in telephone service, the New York State Public Service Commission said yesterday that it had suspended the license of a Georgia company for unauthorized switching of long-distance services.
The company, Sonic Communications, has been the subject of investigations in several states and was barred last week from doing business in California.
It is one of several small companies in the fiercely competitive field of long-distance service that have been charged with illegal switching, which has become known as phone slamming.


CARTER RECEIVED COOLLY IN HAITI
Five months after he negotiated an agreement that averted an invasion and restored President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to power, Jimmy Carter returned today to the scene of one of his diplomatic feats.
But instead of receiving a hero's welcome, he was plunged into the turmoil of Haitian domestic politics.
Invited by Mr.
Aristide and scheduled to receive an honorary degree at the Groupe Olivier Collaborateur University, Mr.
Carter landed here to find the walls of the capital covered with graffiti denouncing him.


Time Warner Could Reap $1.6 Billion for Turner Stake
Time Warner Inc. appears to be close to a deal to sell its 19.4 percent stake in the Turner Broadcasting System to Turner and Tele-Communications Inc. for about $1.6 billion, several people with knowledge of the negotiations said yesterday.
At that price, Time Warner would reap an an impressive profit on its total investment of $500 million in Turner.


Hugo Munsterberg, An Art Scholar, 78
Hugo Munsterberg, an Oriental art scholar, writer and collector, died on Feb. 16 at his home in New Paltz, N.Y.
He was 78.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his wife, Marjorie Bowen Munsterberg.


INSIDE
A Top CBS Executive Quits
Howard Stringer said he was resigning as the president of CBS.
The move comes at a time of uncertainty about the network.
Page D1.
Race and the Death Penalty
Statistics suggest that racial factors may influence how the death penalty is imposed -- but not in the way some people had suspected.
Page B1.
Olympics Bar AIDS Tests
Despite an admission by Greg Louganis that he has AIDS, the International Olympic Committee will not test athletes for H.I.V.
Page B7.


Pamela Harriman to Sell 3 Masterworks at Auction
Pamela Harriman, the Ambassador to France, who is enmeshed in two lawsuits brought by heirs of her late husband, W. Averell Harriman, has consigned three masterworks with a value estimated as high as $20 million for auction at Christie's New York.
The impending sale of the paintings -- by Picasso, Renoir and Matisse -- has aroused speculation that Mrs.
Harriman, 74, is seeking money to settle the suits filed against her last year over the handling of a $30 million trust fund established by Mr.
Harriman for his heirs.


Devils Start Out Ahead, Wind Up Behind
The Devils became lackadaisical after scoring the first two goals of the game tonight and paid for their passiveness, losing, 3-2, to the Boston Bruins at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"There are some things that are hard to accept as a coach," Jacques Lemaire said after his team failed to put away the Bruins.
"To take a two-goal lead and then sit around till the end is hard to accept. Some guys have to look at themselves and ask whether they're doing the job. They're not here for the ride."


A Top CBS Executive Is Leaving
After several weeks of speculation about his future, Howard Stringer announced yesterday that he was leaving his position as president of CBS to accept a job as chairman of a new media venture created by a consortium of three large telephone companies.
The network immediately named Peter Lund, who had held the second-highest management position at CBS, to succeed Mr.
Stringer, who has been president since 1988.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
CP Limited Partnership, Clinton Township, Mich., is selling $75 million of senior notes due in 2000 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The notes are priced at 99.821 to yield 8.75 percent.
They are rated Baa3 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac, is selling $50 million of debentures due in 2005 through First Tennessee Bank.
The debentures, which are callable in three years, carry an interest rate of 8.15 percent and are priced at par.


Art in Review
Luciano Fabro
Barbara Gladstone Gallery  99 Greene Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Wednesday
A leading figure of the 1960's Arte Povera movement (the Italian equivalent of Post-Minimalism), Luciano Fabro is best known for his sculptural installations rendering the "boot" of the Italian peninsula in glass, lead, fur or gold.
The solitary sculpture in his show here consists of two chunks of marble.
One is a roughly octagonal column of mottled gray-brown stone, toppled on its side and held off the floor by glass marbles scattered beneath it.
At one end of the column, the faceting gives way to an oval cylinder.
The second piece of marble sits atop the other end: a slab of pink-white stone with semi-circular ridges carved into one side and the other side left unfinished.
The words "Il Giorno mi pesa sulla notte" ("The day weighs on me at night") are inscribed on the edge of the pink slab facing the head of the toppled column.
The piece as a whole is intentionally unprepossessing: neither a traditional composition nor a raw chunk of nature.
It can be read as an illustration of the inscription: the horizontal column would be the recumbent artist, and the semi-circles of pink marble would represent the dawn of day, literally weighing on him.
But once you start in with the metaphorical readings, it's hard to stop.
If you're not careful, the piece as a whole begins to look rather like a large snail: the brown column is its body, and the pink slab is its shell.
At this point, the piece begins to look silly.
This is presumably not the artist's intention, although with Mr.
Fabro, who once exhibited a pair of marble feet emerging from shantung silk trousers, you can never be too sure.
PEPE KARMEL


In Rare Accord, Leaders in Both Parties Say Public Employees' Salaries Are Rising Too Fast
Republicans and Democrats orbited into a rare philosophical alignment today, with leaders from both parties saying that the wages of public employees are rising too quickly in New Jersey.
The first to speak up was the Senate minority leader, John A. Lynch, at a news conference called to illustrate the Democrats' charge that Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman had failed to cut spending along with her tax cuts.
Pressed to say where he would make the cuts, Mr.
Lynch said he would begin by reining in public employee wages at all levels.


Irish Potato Famine Didn't Just Happen
To the Editor:
Those who would commemorate the Irish "potato famine" (news article, Feb. 20) must start by truthfully describing what happened.


'On Stage, and Off'
Donald G. McNeil Jr. is on vacation.
The "On Stage, and Off" column will resume next week.


A Misguided Attempt at Fatherhood
From its opening scenes in a modern Dickensian home for throwaway children to its agonizing final sequence on a deserted beach, Colin Gregg's fine and disturbing film "Lamb" conveys a sinking feeling of dread.
As this story of a man who recklessly sacrifices himself trying to save an emotionally damaged child unwinds, that dread steadily mounts.
"Lamb" focuses on the relationship between Brother Michael Lamb (Liam Neeson), a teacher in a Roman Catholic-run institution for troubled boys in Ireland, and 10-year-old Owen Kane (Hugh O'Conor), the school's most unruly pupil.
Dumped into the institution by his abusive mother, Owen is an incorrigible mess who smokes cigarettes, curses, wets his bed, picks fights and has epileptic seizures.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about four soldiers who died in Army Ranger training reversed the identities of two soldiers.
Second Lieut.
Curt G. Sancoucie was at the bottom left, and Sgt.
Norman Tillman at the bottom right.


Inside Art
A Thrift-Shop Dali
Here is an art-world fairy tale, the kind that everyone with a passion for antiquing dreams about, but one that almost never comes true.
One morning in December, Robert Loughlin, who is well known in the antiques world as a picker (someone who sells his finds to other dealers), was first in line waiting for the doors of a SoHo thrift shop to open.
Once inside, he spied something rolled up under a rack of men's pants.
"I grabbed it," Mr.
Loughlin said.


The Return of Ketchup
Everyone remembers the veto pen that President Clinton waved before Congress but has never used.
The Republicans this week gave him more than $14 billion worth of reasons to wield it.
House subcommittees voted to cut or eliminate spending this year for job training, education for homeless youths and other programs that provide essential services at a tiny fraction of Federal spending.
House Republicans are also preparing to strip poor children of their right to free or low-cost school meals.


No Dynamic Davis Cup Duo
Don't expect to see Pete Sampras and Andre Agassi volunteer for Davis Cup Dream Team duty any time soon.
The world's top two ranked players, in town to contest the Comcast United States Indoors tournament, took time from their early-round matches not only to defend their decision not to play Davis Cup next month in Sicily but also to attack the United States Tennis Association for exerting pressure on them to participate.
According to Agassi, the U.S.T.A. is culpable for everything from an exclusionist ticket policy (it prefers expensive three-day packages to single-session tickets) to its refusal to hire the players' choice, John McEnroe, as captain.


Corrections
An architectural rendering yesterday, showing a Frank Lloyd Wright design being adapted for a convention center in Madison, Wis., carried an incorrect credit.
The rendering was painted in 1994 by Jim Anderson for Taliesin Architects.


Kabul Journal; 'The Ox' in Asylum: Satellite TV and Paperbacks
He was once the most feared man in Afghanistan, head of the Communist secret police and later President of the Soviet-backed Government.
Today he is a virtual prisoner in a United Nations compound here, watching satellite television broadcasts and reading English-language novels from a library of dog-eared paperbacks.


A Fraud Perpetrated by Fax
File this between "Bank Examiner" and "Ponzi Schemes": For more than two years, official-looking faxes emanating from Lagos, Nigeria, flowed into businesses around the world.
Auto dealers received invitations to sell a thousand cars to the Nigerian Police Force.
Financiers were invited to handle a $38 million investment for the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation.
All that was needed to seal the deals was a "good faith" deposit -- say, half a million dollars.


Pissarro: The Outsider In Constant Search of the New
THE painter Camille Pissarro was pivotal to the avant-garde in late 19th-century France.
An avuncular, big-hearted man of immense curiosity, he absorbed ideas from older and even much younger artists, and passed them on.
He became patriarch and confidant to generations of painters, among them Cezanne, who called him "le bon Dieu," by which he meant a kind of genial god.
It's revealing that Pissarro served this function, as he was, in several senses, an outsider.
He was a Jew, and this was during the era of the Dreyfus Affair (a fact not lost on the anti-Semitic Degas, who slighted his former collaborator even while Pissarro continued to champion Degas's art).
Pissarro was also born and reared not in France, but on the Caribbean island of St.
Thomas.
And he was an anarchist.
What all this seems to have added up to is that he viewed everything from enough distance to avoid the apathy of the insider.


Anne Bingaman's Job
To the Editor:
Please allow me to correct an inaccuracy in "For Couples in Politics, Power (and Immunity)" (Washington Talk, Feb. 17).


Transactions
Baseball
USA BASEBALL -- Named New Mexico coach Rich Alday and Long Beach State coach Dave Snow auxiliary assistant coaches for the USA baseball team for the summers of 1995 and 1996.


Ada Goldberg, 67, Advocate for Poor
Ada Lublin Goldberg, for many years an advocate for the poor and homeless on Long Island, died Sunday at Hospice-by-the Sea in Boca Raton, Fla.
A resident of North Bellmore, L.I., she was 67.
The cause was renal failure stemming from kidney cancer, said her son, Lawrence A. Goldberg.


Smart and Smarter: Films That Tickle the Mind
Who else but the French film maker Eric Rohmer would think to make a movie in which the characters spend most of their time debating the pros and cons of building a cultural center in a picture-perfect rural village?
In Mr.
Rohmer's newest film, "The Tree, the Mayor and the Mediatheque," which has its first American screenings at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center today and tomorrow as part of the series Cahiers du Cinema Selects Recent French Film, the fate of the proposed center rests upon the subtle interaction between a Government official, a conservationist and a journalist.
The village's rich, well-meaning Mayor wants the center to be built, but he is fiercely opposed by a local schoolteacher who is incensed that its construction would necessitate destroying an ancient tree that is a natural landmark.
The Mayor and the teacher are interviewed by an ecologically sensitive journalist who understands all sides of the issue.
When her article is published, no one is pleased, including the journalist, who finds her piece severely cut and slanted around a provocative cover illustration.


Art in Review
Jutta Koether
Pat Hearn Gallery  530 West 22d Street  Chelsea  Through March 12
The young German painter Jutta Koether has pruned her densely layered images, improving their effect.
Lines, often in fluorescent colors, still overlap to a dizzying degree, challenging the viewer to extract individual motifs and words.
And the couldn't-care-less rendering is still pervasive, linking Ms.
Koether to such "bad girl" draftswomen as Sue Williams, Nicole Eisenman and Katie Merz.


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI SEEKS TO SELL 3 HOSPITALS
The administration of Mayor Giuliani announced that it would try to sell 3 of New York's 11 municipal hospitals and eliminate 1,000 of the system's 8,000 beds as part of the most sweeping restructuring of the city's public health system in at least a generation.
Mr.
Giuliani also announced the formation of an advisory panel to recommend changes to the Health and Hospitals Corporation, the independent agency that operates the public hospital system, in light of national trends in health care and the city's financial problems.
A1.


Hugh Gregg Cleland, History Professor, 72
Hugh Gregg Cleland, a professor of history at the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., died on Feb. 14 in his home in Setauket, L.I.
He was 72.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Celia Cleland.


Police Department Press Office Was Headstrong, Giuliani Says
Two weeks after the man in charge of public relations for the Police Department resigned under fire, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the department's press operation had been "out of control" for several months.
Speaking to reporters at City Hall, Mr.
Giuliani said that the Police Department press operation had not portrayed his law enforcement initiatives seriously enough.
"I think the Police Department has lost some control over the way in which police activities should take place," the Mayor said.


Boon for Managed Care
To the Editor:
The New York Medicaid cuts proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Gov.
George E. Pataki may well result in job loss in the state's home care, hospital, nursing home and mental health clinic industries (news article, Feb. 18).
However, there is one sector of New York's medical system that is certain to grow.
If Lieut.
Gov.
Betsy McCaughey's plan to enroll 85 percent of the state's welfare recipients in managed care plans is implemented, it could result in 1.2 million more managed care customers.
Providing medical assistance to the state's public assistance population costs in excess of $15 billion.
The move to managed care could provide better care for less, while creating thousands of job opportunities.
CATHERINE HAMILTON FITZGERALD  New York, Feb. 18, 1995 The writer is a New York City Office of Employment Services analyst.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B13-14.


French Official Demands Inquiry on Spy Leak
Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said today that he was shocked that France's accusations of economic espionage by the former C.I.A. station chief and four other Americans here had been leaked to the French press.
"I am scandalized that a delicate problem between us -- and this is not the first time that such a problem has arisen -- could be dragged out into the open this way," Mr.
Juppe said.
He called for a thorough public inquiry into how the daily newspaper Le Monde had obtained Government intelligence documents on the case.


Reports on Algerian Jail Toll Vary Widely
A day after troops stormed a prison to put down a mutiny by Muslim militant inmates in Algeria, estimates of the death toll varied widely today, with a representative of the militants asserting that as many as 200 were killed and some French officials saying the number might be closer to 40.
In a statement read on state-controlled television, the Algerian Government said 96 inmates were killed in the raid, and that all but 15 of them were prisoners charged with "terrorist" acts.
The authorities routinely describe Islamic militants involved in the three-year campaign to overthrow the Government as "terrorists."


Reports on Algerian Jail Toll Vary Widely
A day after troops stormed a prison to put down a mutiny by Muslim militant inmates in Algeria, estimates of the death toll varied widely today, with a representative of the militants asserting that as many as 200 were killed and some French officials saying the number might be closer to 40.
In a statement read on state-controlled television, the Algerian Government said 96 inmates were killed in the raid, and that all but 15 of them were prisoners charged with "terrorist" acts.
The authorities routinely describe Islamic militants involved in the three-year campaign to overthrow the Government as "terrorists."


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "NUNSENSE 2: THE SEQUEL," Douglas Fairbanks Theater, 432 West 42d Street, Clinton.
A musical comedy written and directed by Dan Goggin.
Through Sunday.
Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $35 and $37.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


Ten B.C. Players Suspended for a Game
Ten Boston College hockey players have been suspended for one game after their coach learned they attended an off-limits Boston bar after their 4-0 loss to Merrimack last Saturday.
The players -- two goalies, three forwards and five defensemen -- won't be allowed to play Sunday against Providence College.
REID OSLIN, B.C.'s sports information director, said the players were suspended by Coach JERRY YORK because they broke team rules.


Rabbi Takes Paid Leave
The Sabbath candles will be lighted tonight at Congregation M'kor Shalom, but without its founder and senior rabbi.
In a letter to the congregation, Sheila Goodman, the synagogue's president, said Rabbi Fred Neulander was granted paid leave to "seek counseling and be with his family." Prosecutor Edward F. Borden has refused to comment on press reports that Rabbi Neulander is a suspect in the beating death of his wife, Carol.
The rabbi said he came home on Nov. 1 and found his wife's body.


Simpson Prosecutor Incurs Ito's Wrath Over Tirade
A furious Judge Lance A. Ito held an assistant district attorney in the O. J. Simpson case in contempt today after an explosive colloquy at the bench in which prosecutors accused Mr.
Simpson's lawyers of feeding "slop" to the jury by asking improper questions.
The judge dropped the citation after the prosecutor reluctantly apologized.
After sending the jury out of the courtroom, Judge Ito gave the prosecutor, Christopher A. Darden, one chance to "take three deep breaths" and several chances to apologize, and Mr.
Darden initially spurned them all, insisting on a lawyer instead.
That lawyer turned out to be Marcia Clark, who also refused to back down.


Jets Drop Lott and Monk, Two Future Hall of Famers
The Jets offered another clear signal yesterday that they are headed in a new direction under Coach Rich Kotite when the team announced it would not try to re-sign a pair of future Hall of Famers, safety Ronnie Lott and receiver Art Monk, for the 1995 season.
Both players signed with the Jets as unrestricted free agents and have a combined 39 years of National Football League experience.
This past season, Lott was named to the N.F.L.'s 75th Anniversary team.


Tom Clancy's New Bad Guys and Good Ones
Tom Clancy stands four-square for God and country.
You'd better believe it.
But he is curiously ambiguous about truth in packaging.
It turns out that "Tom Clancy's 'Op Center,' " a four-hour movie on NBC on Sunday and Monday nights, has been "created by" Mr.
Clancy and Steve Pieczenik ("Maximum Vigilance").
The script was written by Steve Sohmer ("Favorite Son").
Further, the "Tom Clancy's 'Op Center' " novel topping paperback best-seller lists was also created, not written, by the Clancy-Pieczenik team, and its plot has little or nothing to do with this television movie.
In short, Mr.
Clancy has become a literary factory churning out support-the-military thrillers with the formulaic regularity of bodice-ripping romances.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A Modest Low-key Campaign Belies the Case of Buying and Owning a New Chevrolet Cavalier
"ANY car can be easy to buy," declares one of the mellow television commercials for General Motors' new compact, the Chevrolet Cavalier.
"The Cavalier is easy to own."
So far, however, the Cavalier is proving both statements false.
It has been easy neither to buy nor own, because G.M. has had problems producing the car at its plant in Lordstown, Ohio.


Actor's Accuser Is Questioned
With reporters staking out the courthouse for a glimpse, a girl who said she had sex with the television star Kelsey Grammer when she was 15 was called before a grand jury Thursday.
The girl, now 17, said the encounter occurred while she was baby-sitting his daughter in 1993.
Prosecutor Nicholas Bissell said the findings would be released today.


Vanishing Public Units
If New York City sells 3 of its 11 hospitals, as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani proposed, it will be following a trend that is gaining momentum across the country.
Detroit, Louisville, Ky., and Cuyahoga County, Ohio, -- which contains Cleveland -- have shed public hospitals in recent years.
Nassau and Westchester counties have also considered it.


These Barefoot Boys Put Best Toe Forward
They are about to be the most famous barefooted Olympians since Zola Budd.
A beach will be plopped down in the middle of Atlanta two summers from now -- it isn't hard; even Madison Square Garden is building one this weekend -- but a beach is never a beach until Karch Kiraly and Kent Steffes christen it with their toes.
They are perhaps the best athletic duo since Torvill and Dean, and now that beach volleyball is a medal sport and not just a halftime break for surfers, Kiraly and Steffes are due to become household names.





BALANCED BUDGET NEARS 67 VOTES NEEDED IN SENATE
Two more Democrats today joined the ranks of senators who support a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution, and even opponents conceded that proponents were within an ace of the 67 votes needed to adopt the measure and send it to the states for ratification.
But in Congress, close is still a synonym for trailing.
And even as it was clear that the amendment drive had gained new momentum, other senators widely viewed as supporters showed signs of having second, third and maybe fourth thoughts.


Threat of Smithsonian Fee
The secretary of the Smithsonian Institution said today that if Congress substantially cut the budget of the world's largest collection of museums, it might have to begin charging admission to sustain itself.
In the first round of budget cuts, a House panel on Wednesday proposed cutting $32 million from the Smithsonian's 1995 budget of $371 million.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows: AHARON GLUSKA, Robert Mann Gallery, 42 East 76th Street (through March 4).
Haunting images of Holocaust victims, taken by the Nazis as identification photographs, are rendered cheap and sentimental by being blown up and presented behind black veils and glass partially painted black.
Just in case anyone might miss the point, the lights in the gallery are turned low, too (Charles Hagen).
SUSAN DERGES, James Danziger Gallery, 130 Prince Street, SoHo (through tomorrow).
The life cycle of frogs, from cells to tadpoles to fully formed adults, recorded by an English artist who specializes in unusual depictions of natural phenomena.
In this case, the creatures' images were projected directly onto photographic paper, producing intricate, shadowy patterns (Hagen).


Frustration Continues to Mount for the Islanders
The frustration of the season was summed up concisely in an answer to a simple question.
Are you going to make a trade, Islander General Manager Don Maloney was repeatedly asked tonight.


Velvet Voice Finally Makes It to the Big Leagues
When the MSG Network sought to replace Tony Kubek and Dewayne Staats on Yankees games, Jim Kaat topped the list and Dave Cohen was a vaguely recognized baritone, known to some as the announcer on Bob Costas's syndicated radio show.
Cohen, who trained his voice to sound like velvet, is a versatile play-by-play announcer from Brooklyn who had spent the last 12 years calling 6 to 12 games a season for the Class AAA Syracuse Chiefs.
One line on his resume was unique: pay-toilet cashier at the Coney Island Wonder Wheel.


A Hearing for Holyfield
The former heavyweight champion EVANDER HOLYFIELD's comeback effort could hinge on the action today of Nevada boxing authorities.
The Nevada State Athletic Commission will vote on whether to relicense Holyfield, who has been under medical suspension in the state since losing his heavyweight titles to MICHAEL MOORER last April in Las Vegas, Nev.


Bargains at Expensive Restaurants
EVERYBODY wants to eat in expensive restaurants, but nobody wants to pay the price.
At least, that's the usual stumbling block for the sizable portion of the restaurantgoing public that is unwilling or unable to empty its wallet to fill its stomach in the most refined sort of way.
But in an unlikely fit of collective wisdom, New York restaurateurs in the last few years have come up with a novel way to overcome this resistance: charge less.


Restaurants
Ken Hom was happy.
The man who became famous for his eight books on Chinese food had just tasted the spicy pickled bean sprouts at Golden Monkey and he was beaming.
"Real soy beans!" he exclaimed.
He looked at the dish and added: "And for once there is enough oil. Americans might not like it, but Sichuan cooking requires a lot of oil to swish the chilies through the mouth."
For many years Mr.
Hom, who lives in Berkeley, Calif., and Paris, led groups on legendary food tours of Hong Kong and China.
He no longer does that, so on his last visit to New York City I asked him to attempt a food tour of Chinese Flushing in Queens.
He took up the challenge, focusing on restaurants of three distinct regions: the spicy food of Sichuan in the west, the simple food of coastal Fujian and the eclectic cooking of the island of Taiwan.
Golden Monkey, a modest basement restaurant, was our first stop.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on Wednesday about steps in Congress to repeal the National School Lunch Act misstated the given name of the pediatrician who commented on the responsibility of states for financing nutrition programs.
He is Dr.
T.
Berry Brazelton, not Barry.


On My Mind; Taking Over Mexico
When a government lies, its people must pay, and very soon do.
When a poor country borders on a rich country, people from the poor country often cross into the rich country to find work.
Sometimes they don't have entry visas.


Marshall Schalk, 87, Geologist Who Explored Arctic Alaska
Marshall Schalk, a geologist known for his studies of the Arctic shoreline of Alaska, died on Tuesday at Cooley Dickenson Hospital in Northampton, Mass.
Dr.
Schalk, who lived in Northampton, was 87.
The cause was a heart attack, said a spokeswoman for Smith College, where he was professor emeritus of geology.
He was hospitalized with pneumonia on Monday.


Art in Review
Narelle Jubelin  'Soft Shoulder'
Grey Art Gallery and Study Center  New York University  33 Washington Place  Greenwich Village  Through March 11
This Australian artist's installation takes the form of a single long concrete shelf, set at about shoulder height around the gallery, on which are arranged a number of seemingly random objects.
They are related, in fact, and the interest of Ms.
Jubelin's arrangement lies in tracing their possible associations.


Facing Cut, SUNY Lists Some Options
Declining to outline specific cuts or tuition increases, officials at the State University of New York drew a range of scenarios today for absorbing a massive $290 million cut in state money.
The options included tuition increases ranging from $1,000 to $2,300 a year, above the current $2,650, and as many as 7,250 layoffs.


CHRONICLE
London is abuzz with a mystery: where is STEPHEN FRY?
The 37-year-old actor and author walked out of "Cell Mates," a West End play in which he was starring, after only three performances.
And British newspapers have been filled with reports that he was despondent over the poor reviews of his portrayal of George Blake, a Russian spy, in the play.


The Hidden Question; Beyond the Northern Ireland Framework, What Do Ordinary People in Ulster Want?
Behind the bluster and the pages and pages of legalisms rained down on Belfast this week was a crucial question that has never before been posed to this divided island: do the people of Northern Ireland want to remain citizens of Britain or create a new united Ireland?
It was presented as a choice, but it was clear from the language of the document, and the words of Prime Ministers John Major of Britain and John Bruton of Ireland, that the leaders were pushing for changes that would bring Ireland and Northern Ireland economically and politically closer.


Crossroads of Life and Death, Racism and Justice
SKIPPING giddily around her mother, 5-year-old Kabila Johnson tripped over the sidewalk, knocked over two candles and nearly set the shrine on fire.
"Keep still, girl," Latishna Johnson warned gently, setting the cardboard altar straight.
"Kabila's never seen so much going on," she explained.
"No one's ever noticed this street before."


Life and Hard Times Of a Brooklyn Shuttle; No Respect for Franklin Avenue Line
Movie makers descended yesterday on the Franklin Avenue Shuttle line in Brooklyn.
They put fresh paint on the Franklin Avenue station and mounted new signs.
There were scenes to be shot, and the crumbling, decrepit place had to appear to be a functioning subway terminus.
The title of the work in progress: "The Money Train."
"Great joke, huh?" said a conductor.


Celtics Find a Way to Shut Down O'Neal
Celtics 119, Magic 117
Dino Radja scored 27 points and Boston controlled Shaquille O'Neal for most of the second half as the Celtics edged Orlando, 119-117, last night in Hartford for their first victory over the Magic this season.


Budget Axes Land on Items Big and Small
Taking aim at both big ticket items like public housing and obscure programs like a voter registration project in the Western Sahara, House Republicans today outlined billions of dollars more in budget cuts.
While House subcommittees continued their efforts to pare up to $15 billion from the current budget to help offset disaster relief spending, the full House took preliminary votes on measures aimed at putting a temporary freeze on most new Federal regulations.
The regulatory moratorium, part of a broad effort by Republicans to rein in the Government's rule-making powers, is likely to pass the House on Friday.


Clinton, in Talk to Canadians, Opposes Quebec Separation
With voters in Quebec expected to vote this year on a referendum on sovereignty, President Clinton eased away today from a policy of American neutrality and sent an unambiguous signal that the United States would prefer that Canada remain intact.
That the Administration would rather not contend with a separate Quebec was not a surprise.
But in an address to the Canadian Parliament, Mr.
Clinton injected a rare American appeal into the debate over whether Quebec should go its own way.


Flu-Ravaged Sampras Loses in Straight Sets
Rattled by a case of February flu, Pete Sampras, the world's No. 1 player, was ousted tonight at the Comcast United States Indoor tournament here by the world's No. 1 doubles player, Paul Haarhuis of the Netherlands, 6-4, 6-4.
"Upsets happen, and unfortunately this one happened to me," Sampras said.
"The tennis just wasn't there, and I played someone who was better than I was tonight. He's had some big upsets in the past, so I knew he was capable of it here."


Tropworld Bets on Expansion
Executives of Tropworld Casino and Entertainment Resort unveiled plans for a $75 million expansion that would make Tropworld the state's biggest hotel.
The 21-story, 628-room addition would give Tropworld 1,650 rooms; the Trump Taj Mahal is now the biggest with 1,250 rooms.
In a city skittish over the explosion of legalized gambling in many other states, leaders said the plan signals a commitment to offering more than craps tables.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  CLINTON PUSHES CANADIAN UNITY  With Quebecers likely to vote this year on a referendum on sovereignty, President Clinton sent an unambiguous signal that the U.S. prefers Canada to remain intact.
A1


A Little Cash Can Do Wonders
From the testimony, you can't say there wasn't enough to go around.
A businessman who said he paid councilmen $23,000 to grease a towing contract testified Thursday that he handed over an additional $12,000 for zoning board members.
The cash was supplied by the Federal Bureau of Investigation as part of a corruption sting.


U.S. and North Koreans Fail To Agree on Atomic Reactors
The United States has made no progress in persuading North Korea that it must allow South Korea to construct two new power reactors in the North as part of an agreement to freeze its nuclear program, a senior State Department official said today.
Robert C. Gallucci, the chief negotiator of the accord with North Korea last October, told a Congressional subcommittee today that unless the Communist country reversed its decision, the light-water reactors would not be built.


Olympians Won't Have to Take H.I.V. Test
The International Olympic Committee's top medical official said yesterday that, despite an admission by the champion diver Greg Louganis that he had AIDS, the I.O.C. had no intention of testing athletes for the virus that causes the deadly disease.
Prince Alexandre de Merode of Belgium, head of the I.O.C.'s medical commission, also said he thought Louganis was under no obligation to announce at the 1988 Summer Olympics that he carried H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, even after Louganis hit his head on the diving board and opened a wound that required stitches.
Louganis said he had AIDS in an interview with Barbara Walters that will be broadcast tonight on ABC's "20/20" program.


California Aims to Restore Civil Rights
To the Editor:
"Conservatives Forge New Strategy to Challenge Affirmative Action" (front page, Feb. 16), your discussion of California's civil rights initiative, does not make clear to an ordinary reader whether or how this proposition is different from the Civil Rights Act of 1964 or, for that matter, from the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution.


The Worst Can Happen, And Happen It Does
In a sedate London restaurant, two people meet to discuss their marital troubles.
They agree that they need more time, not realizing that there is no time left.
In the background, away from the main action, an unexplained argument has begun to brew, as a waiter is taunted by an increasingly wild-eyed stranger.
"Sir, I didn't do anything," the waiter insists to his boss.
He appears to be right.
It doesn't matter.
We will never know what the stranger's grievance was, only that it proved the point of Milcho Manchevski's devastating "Before the Rain": that violence escalates organically and mysteriously, in ways that mean there can be no innocent bystanders in an explosive, hair-trigger world.
In a film that unfolds unpredictably, with a Mobius-strip structure oddly like that of "Pulp Fiction," the one constant becomes an air of foreboding.
The birth of a lamb, a pregnant woman in a cemetery, the sight of a small boy toying with a machine gun: any of these things may signal sudden disaster.


Wadkins Is Back in Fast Lane With a 67
Lanny Wadkins went to the videotape.
He had lost his game, and needed to find it, needed some evidence that he was the same golfer who had won 21 times on the PGA Tour.
It was like stepping into a time machine.
There on the screen was the familiar swaggering figure, with a little more hair and a lot more game, and the 1995 vintage Wadkins watched closely as the 1985 model Wadkins ripped his drives into fairways, his irons on to greens and his putts into cups.
"Just seeing it reminded me of some things," said the 45-year-old Wadkins.
"I was making a lot of good swings back then."


Home Video
For the arts-video niche, nothing beats a tenor.
Twice in four years the arts category, which makes up a tiny percentage of the total video market, has jumped to the top of best-seller lists with a pair of tapes featuring Luciano Pavarotti, Jose Carreras and Placido Domingo performing together in concert.
Tenors don't carry all classical music videos, of course, but they do get attention.
Tenors like these usually don't come ensemble either, but solo is fine.
On March 15, Channel 13 is to broadcast "Placido Domingo: A Musical Life," a 90-minute documentary, which has numerous passages from his operatic roles.
The tape, which PBS plans to broadcast nationally on various dates, is also to be offered by Kultur, a leading distributor of arts videos.
The price is $29.95. (Information: 800-458-5887.)


'I'm Spending My Children's Inheritance'; Forced Retirement
To the Editor:
Your discovery that older Americans are saving less ignores what may be the principal reason for the decline (front page, Feb. 21).
The downsizing of corporate and public America has forced hundreds of thousands of people into early retirement, or into starting their own businesses.
Either way, this usually eliminates future savings for a long while and accelerates withdrawals from existing accounts.
Even the most generous severance packages force most people who are victims of mergers or other downsizing to live on less over an extended period of time.
While the retirement age is slowly being increased to 67 and there is talk in Congress of advancing it to 70, the boomers should be very cautious as they approach age 50.
They should be less concerned whether Social Security payments will be there for them and more concerned with saving enough to survive if they too become early victims of the bottom line.
BEN A. BOROWSKY  Boca Raton, Fla., Feb. 21, 1995


Art in Review
James Nares
Paul Kasmin Gallery  74 Grand Street  SoHo  Through March 4
James Nares understands that if you're going to be a one-note painter, the least you can do is develop perfect pitch.
He is becoming expert at his specialty: broad, calligraphic brush strokes, usually no more than three or four to a painting, in transparent tones of blue, red or yellow or a sharp white oil that suggest ink.
These strokes twist and turn, furl and unfurl their way across canvases palely tinted by wiped-out previous attempts, creating fat serpentine incidents of suspended liquidity and gesture.


Political Memo; Announcing for President: Old News, but Still News
Presidential candidates these days stage elaborately choreographed nonannouncements as they seek the maximum fanfare and publicity.
First, they coyly suggest that they might run.
Then they announce "exploratory committees." Then they hint even more strongly that they will run.
Then, when everyone knows what they have decided, they finally make it official.


Congress Is Right to Stop the Legal Fleecing of Shareholders
To the Editor:
Re "Letting Wall Street Off Easy" (Op-Ed, Feb. 15): Herbert Stein has earned his laurels in economics, but he is either misinformed or naive about class-action securities litigation and the ills Congress is attempting to remedy.


Unrest Follows a Police Shooting in Paterson
Police officers in riot gear threw up a protective phalanx around City Hall this afternoon after a brief spasm of street violence by youths angry over the shooting of an unarmed teen-ager during a police narcotics investigation Tuesday night.
Usually busy streets, including the major commercial district along Market Street, took on a ghost-town atmosphere after police cordons rerouted traffic away from City Hall, which was closed down, and most neighborhood merchants pulled iron gates over their storefronts.


Callers Are Eager for Data on Smoking Suit
By the end of the Washington's Birthday weekend, there were hundreds of phone calls, some of them anguished, and many of them angry.
By yesterday, more than 2,000 calls had been received.
Smokers and former smokers began phoning law offices, newspapers and television stations the day after Okla B. Jones 2d, a Federal judge in New Orleans, cleared the way last Friday for the first class action in a Federal court against the tobacco industry on behalf of four plaintiffs who, their lawyers hope, will represent all Americans who are addicted to cigarettes.


Arthur Stang Dies; Developer Was 85
Arthur Stang, a real estate developer whose projects included the Gulf and Western Building on Columbus Circle, died on Sunday at his home in Lake Worth, Fla.
He was 85.
The cause was liver cancer, said his son, Robert.


Seeking Center for Addicts, Pataki Looks to a Hospital
Seeking to solve two problems at once, Gov.
George E. Pataki today proposed converting an underused state psychiatric center in the Finger Lakes region into a low-security drug treatment center for thousands of nonviolent convicts whom he hopes to keep out of state prisons.
Mr.
Pataki said the plan would be central to his efforts to rewrite the drug sentencing laws enacted by former Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller, which require jail time for low-level, nonviolent drug offenders who are convicted of a second felony.


Art in Review
Alain Fleischer
Jayne H. Baum Gallery  588 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through March 18
A wall of 200 crude self-portraits, made of aluminum foil pressed over the artist's face, with holes torn for eyes and mouths, is the centerpiece of this ambitious show.
Alain Fleischer, a French artist who uses photography to record Conceptually based pieces, here offers witty explorations of the idea of the self.


Market Place; Wall St. Has a Big Party, But Eyes Are on the Exit
Wall Street got ready for a big party yesterday, and almost had to cancel it.
First the bond market's euphoria faded, and then the stock market slipped.
To be sure, the Dow Jones industrial average did close above 4,000 for the first time, and the 30-point gain for the day was impressive.
But the late weakness -- the bond market ended down for the day after rallying strongly -- may indicate that confidence in the new, rosy economic forecast is limited.


Leonard Ratner, 78, Constitutional Law Professor at U.S.C.
Leonard Gordon Ratner, a scholar of constitutional law who argued against efforts to limit the powers of the United States Supreme Court, died on Feb. 9 in the Driftwood Healthcare Center in Torrance, Calif.
He was 78 and a resident of Palos Verdes Estates, Calif.
The cause was complications from a stroke, said his wife, Catherine Ratner.


Officer Is Convicted In Assault on Driver
A police officer in the Bronx was convicted yesterday of assaulting a motorist after he stopped the man for a minor traffic violation in 1993, the Bronx District Attorney's office said.
The officer, Daniel Rivera, who was assigned to the 49th Precinct in Williamsbridge, stopped the driver, Anibal DeJesus, 24, at the corner of Allerton Avenue and White Plains Road for driving with a defective headlight.


Spring Migration of the Shad Fishermen


The Neediest Cases; A Hard-Luck Artist's Dark Days End
In 1986, as subtly as a mudslide, bad fortune swallowed Max Epstein.
Mr.
Epstein, a painter and print maker, was hit by a car in downtown Brooklyn and suffered a broken knee, leg and ribs, as well as head and spinal injuries that left him permanently disabled.
The medical bills left him penniless.


To Some Sioux, Costner Now Dances With Devil
Kevin Costner became a hero among American Indians five years ago for his movie "Dances With Wolves," a tribute to the Lakota Sioux culture before whites swarmed the Black Hills in the 1870's to snatch the land and search for gold.
In fact, the actor was presented by tribal leaders with a hand-woven quilt and honored with a ceremony in which a sacred eagle feather was tied in his hair, a gesture of appreciation for his sensitivity to Sioux traditions.


Some Commissions Are Rising for Travel Agents
Even as airlines are cutting their commissions to travel agents, some hotels, rental car companies and cruise lines are raising them.
These companies are hoping that agents scrambling to make up the income lost from selling airline tickets will steer more customers their way.
Almost 100 hotels managed by Richfield Hotel Management Inc. in Denver, including a sprinkling of Hiltons, Sheratons, and Radissons, recently raised commission rates to 15 percent from 10 percent.
The Hotel Reservations Network, a discount hotel booking service in Dallas that represents about 400 independent and chain hotels throughout the United States, doubled its commissions to as much as 10 percent.


James Herriot, 78, Writer, Dies; Animal Stories Charmed People
James Herriot, the author whose "All Creatures Great and Small" and 17 other books have drawn even the most urban of readers into a magical country world of animals and their veterinarians, died yesterday at his home near Thirsk, Yorkshire, in northern England.
He was 78 years old.
The cause was cancer, said Thomas McCormack, his editor at St. Martin's Press.


Truce Declared in Missouri Desegregation Battle
A six-month truce has been declared between officials of the Kansas City, Mo., public schools and the state in one of the nation's costliest and longest-running desegregation battles.
The action will save the state more than $20 million.
The agreement, signed last week and announced on Tuesday, was made under mounting pressure from the potential implications of a pending decision by the United States Supreme Court, which heard the 18-year-old case just last month, officials involved in the case said.


Diner's Journal
Bistro With Whimsy
It is hard to feel grumpy at Zut!, the luxuriously whimsical new restaurant on Duane Street.
Just inside the door is a round bar topped with marching animal sculptures that look as if they have escaped from the clock at the Central Park Zoo.
The walls are papered with colorful animals and the chandeliers hung with straw hats that seem to have been filched from the Mad Hatter.
Golden light fills the room; the banquettes are comfortable; the service is pleasant and the wine list wonderful.
On top of that the menu features the old-fashioned bistro dishes that are just the thing for the mid-winter blues.
Appetizers include roasted beets, plates of sausage with warm potato salad and goat-cheese topped vegetable terrines.
There is also ossetra caviar by the ounce; as the menu points out, "It's the middle one." Nice touch.


Corrections
An entry last Sunday in the calendar of cultural events in the New Jersey Weekly, about "Collecting African-American Art," an event today at 7:30 P.M. in Montclair, misstated the type of program, its sponsorship and its location.
It is a panel discussion, not a symposium; it is sponsored only by the Montclair Art Museum, not co-sponsored by the Montclair Historical Society.
It will be held at the museum, not the Blooming Grove Theater.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Becker Downs Krickstein  Top-seeded Boris Becker beat Aaron Krickstein, 6-3, 6-3, yesterday to reach the quarterfinals of the $2.25 million Eurocard Open in Stuttgart, Germany.
The German was cheered by about 7,100 fans as he beat Krickstein in 63 minutes.
Yevgeny Kafelnikov of Russia, the only player to have beaten Becker this year indoors, overcame 17 aces from David Wheaton and dizzy spells caused by a lingering cold to beat the American, 7-5, 4-6, 6-4.
Magnus Larsson of Sweden also reached the quarterfinals with a 7-5, 5-7, 6-4 victory over Thomas Muster, as did Michael Stich, the No. 5 seeded player from Germany, who beat Daniel Vacek of the Czech Republic, 6-3, 6-4. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Hofstra Star Ends With 999  Jim Shaffer scored 14 of his 25 points in the first half, but fell a point short of the 1,000 mark for his career while leading Hofstra to a season-ending 75-61 victory at Fordham last night.
Shaffer, a senior, made 8 of 10 shots.
One more point would have made him the 17th Hofstra player to score at least 1,000.
Jamil Greene added 14 points for Hofstra (9-17), which led by 35-26 at halftime.
Ryan Hunter led Fordham (9-16) with 18 points. (AP) OREGON 73, ARIZONA STATE 72: Zack Sellers grabbed an airball by teammate Kenya Wilkins and put it back for the winning basket as visiting Oregon ended a six-game losing streak at Arizona State by beating the No. 15-ranked Sun Devils.
Zellers's offensive rebound and shot capped a dramatic comeback by the Ducks (16-6, 8-5 Pac-10), who trailed by 63-49 with 10:19 to go.
Ron Riley scored 21 points and Mario Bennett had 19 and 11 rebounds for the Sun Devils (19-7, 9-5). (AP) ARIZONA 83, OREGON STATE 69: Damon Stoudamire scored 20 of his 28 points in the second half, and 13th-ranked Arizona broke the game open with a 23-4 run against visiting Oregon State.
The Beavers took a 48-46 lead early in the second half, but Stoudamire hit two 3-pointers in a 13-0 run to put Arizona (20-6, 10-4 Pac-10) ahead for good.
His 21-footer with 13:33 left ended the run and put Arizona ahead by 59-48. (AP) STANFORD 90, SOUTHERN CAL 78: Tim Young, a freshman center, scored 12 of his 18 points in the first 10 minutes of the second half to spark 19th-ranked Stanford over visiting U.S.C.
Young was limited to just eight minutes in the first half because of early foul trouble.
But his game came alive after halftime as Stanford (17-6, 8-6 Pac-10) pulled away from a 41-38 halftime advantage.
The loss was the 10th straight for Southern Cal (7-17, 2-12). (AP) N.H.L.
Roy Backup Wins One  The Montreal backup goaltender Ron Tugnutt made 26 saves to spark the Canadiens to a 5-2 victory last night in Miami, their first-ever victory over the Panthers.
The Panthers were 3-0-2 against Montreal last year and skated to a 1-1 tie earlier this season.
With Patrick Roy receiving a rare night off, Tugnutt kept the Panthers at bay for his first victory of the season and first since March 28, 1994. (AP) FLYERS 6, NORDIQUES 6: The rookie Adam Deadmarsh capped a three-goal third-period comeback by Quebec with his second goal of the game with 1 minutes 34 seconds to play, giving the Nordiques a tie with visiting Philadelphia.
The Kings ended a three-game losing streak with goals by Wayne Gretzky and defensemen Rob Cowie and Philippe Boucher. (AP) YACHT RACING  Young America Wins  A streaky northwest wind skittered across the race course off San Diego yesterday as Young America came from behind to defeat America  by 1 minute 19 seconds.
Struggling to hang onto its 12-second lead at the start, America
blocked Young America tack for tack up the first leg.
But a third of the way into the 18.5-mile match, Kevin Mahaney and his PACT 95 crew got the upper hand.
Coming from behind in the downwind leg, Young America engaged Leslie Egnot's crew on America  in a luffing duel.
Less than halfway into that run, Young America, which is known for its superior downwind speed, closed the gap.
As the two defense yachts approached the mark, Young America came in from the right side of the course to round 12 seconds ahead of America  .


A 'Vanya' Of Spite And Fury
"UNCLE VANYA," the second of Anton Chekhov's four great plays, was first produced by the Moscow Art Theater 96 years ago and, it's probably safe to say, hasn't remained long unproduced, in one form or another, any time since then.
Right now we're in a veritable siege of "Vanyas."
Still available at a local movie theater is the adventurous Louis Malle film adaptation of Andre Gregory's "Vanya on 42d Street," featuring Wallace Shawn's remarkable performance in the title role.
Coming soon are two more screen versions, Michael Blakemore's "Country Life," set in the Australian outback, and "August," directed by Anthony Hopkins, who also stars in it.


In Mexico, Both Army and Rebels Say They're in Control
When the brisk-mannered general rolled into this lonely hamlet last week in a convoy of armored personnel carriers, peasants here say, he told them right off that with the army in full control of Chiapas state, things were going to be different.
"He told us we should forget about our organizations," one leader of the community said, referring to the peasant groups that have been organizing and reorganizing in this area for two decades.
"He said that things were going to change."


Dow Finally Breaks The 4,000 Barrier
A stock market rally pushed the Dow Jones industrial average above the 4,000 mark for the first time, marking a milestone in a difficult year for stocks and providing a powerful sign for the American economy.
The Dow gained 30.28 points to close at 4,003.33.
Market analysts say the surge points to a reduced likelihood of a recession soon.
Business Day, page D1.


Turner on Strike's High Cost
Ted Turner was in New York yesterday, wound up and in full throat.
The focus of his visit was a breakfast at Tiffany's to promote the 1998 New York Goodwill Games, but as he gladhanded his way through a throng of potential sponsors, someone asked him about the baseball strike.
Turner, the Atlanta Braves' owner, who hasn't been much heard from on the subject since he urged President Clinton to intervene last July, seemed eager to make up for lost comment.
"I think the positions have hardened," he said, predicting that the strike will last "until one side brings the other to its knees."


AIDS Transmission Risk In Sports Is Virtually Nil
Imagine such infinitely long odds -- 1 in 85 million.
That's about the magnitude of the risk of a National Football League player's becoming infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, through spillage of contaminated blood, a new study has found.
Although it is not clear how this risk translates into competitive diving, the essential issue is the same in all the discussions about the disclosure from Greg Louganis, the 1984 and 1988 Olympic gold medal winner, that he was H.I.V.-infected when he hit the board during a dive and spilled blood in the chlorinated pool.


Making a Hall Vibrate
Kodo means both "heartbeat" and "children of the drum" in Japanese.
It is also the name of an unusual group of Japanese musicians who gathered their percussive equipment in Carnegie Hall on Wednesday night as part of a 24-city North American tour.
Kodo has had an auspicious career since its founding in 1981.
The group, primarily consisting of drummers, has written the score to the film "The Hunted," and has released a series of CD's that test the limits of digital technology.
Kodo has played with the Boston Symphony Orchestra and collaborated with the jazz drummer Max Roach.
It has drawn audiences interested in downtown Minimalist styles along with followers of world music.
Kodo even taps into New Age sympathies with its comforting calls for brotherhood under the sound of the drum.


Taking the Pulse of H.M.O. Care
The most comprehensive report yet on the quality of care provided by managed care health plans finds that their customers were generally satisfied but that wide variations exist among the plans in both patient satisfaction and in the percentage of patients receiving many recommended preventive treatments.
The report, which covered 21 care providers offering a total of 26 large health plans, is an early attempt at addressing one of the most glaring deficiencies of the health care system today: the inability to measure the performance of health plans.


No Headline
"In a world darkened by ethnic conflicts that tear nations apart, Canada stands as a model of how people of different cultures can live and work together in peace, prosperity and mutual respect." PRESIDENT CLINTON, in Ottawa.  [ A1:5. ]


A Brokerage Firm Closes; Stocks It Underwrote Dive
Hanover Sterling &amp; Company, a brokerage firm best known for bringing public a company begun by Lawrence Taylor, the former linebacker for the New York Giants, went out of business yesterday.
The collapse of the firm left stocks it had brought public without support, and they plunged in price, losing from 57 percent to 80 percent of their value.
Hanover officials could not be reached for comment yesterday, but in recent weeks the New York firm had been strained because it had been buying shares of companies that it brought public to support their prices.
The officials had complained to the Securities and Exchange Commission about activity by short-sellers, who had bet that the prices of the stocks would fall.


An 80-Year Hitting Streak
The invitation arrived in the middle of a baseball strike that has pitted greedy owners against grasping players, killed one World Series, stymied the President, polarized Congress, disgusted the country and threatened to shut down the national pastime as we know it.
Yet here was a reminder, courtesy of the Lotos Club of New York City, of an era when baseball made us happy.
Only the name on the parchment looked too formal: Joseph P. DiMaggio.
Joseph?
The only name I knew was Joe or Joe D. And with a P?
What does it stand for?
Paragon?


Muslims Are Minority Among Terrorists
To the Editor:
Re "Islamic Extremists Are Active in U.S.," Steven Emerson's Feb. 18 letter: Even Buck Revell, the former Federal Bureau of Investigation agent he quotes, admits there are no more than "two or three dozen" Islamic extremists in this country who might harbor violent tendencies.


Twelve Minor Leaguers Stay With Yanks
The defections and abstentions from spring training by Yankee minor leaguers have apparently ceased.
All but 1 of the 13 minor leaguers ordered to decide by today if they would play in exhibition games with replacement players elected to remain in camp.
Citing reasons that included their allegiance to the organization that pays them, the rare opportunity to impress the major league staff, the belief that spring games are not replacement games and the need to be selfish about their careers, most of the unheralded minor leaguers said their choice was a breeze.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CASTLE ENERGY CORP., Blue Bell, Pa., will close its Powerine refinery in Santa Fe Springs, Calif., and may close a refinery in Lawrenceville, Ill., after talks to sell its two plants failed.
Together, the plants employ about 750 workers.
COLUMBIA/HCA HEALTHCARE CORP., Nashville, signed a letter of intent to buy J.F.K.
Medical Center Inc., owner of a 369-bed hospital in Atlantis, Fla., for an undisclosed amount.


Let's Start Eating Right
To the Editor:
According to a panel of experts, dwindling water, land and oil combined with population growth will finally force Americans to adopt a healthy diet (news article, Feb. 18).
Unfortunately, it will take another 50 years to happen.


Fears About Jittery Witness Lead Ito to Shuffle Lineup
O.
J.
Simpson's lawyers scored a partial victory today when Judge Lance A. Ito allowed them to question out of schedule a potentially crucial alibi witness who threatened to leave the country.
But that interrogation will take place before the jury, rather than in the safer setting of prerecorded videotape, as the defense would have preferred.
The witness, Rosa Lopez, a maid at the home next to Mr.
Simpson's has told defense lawyers she saw Mr.
Simpson's Ford Bronco parked outside his home at the time prosecutors say he killed his wife and a friend.
But she has said she is so fearful for her safety that she planned to return to her native El Salvador on Saturday, and would adamantly refuse to come back to Los Angeles to testify.


Bridge
If you are in the mood to overbid, it helps to have a partner who can make tricks without straw.
Consider the diagramed deal from the Blue Ribbon Pair Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals in Seattle in 1993.
If South is playing in no-trump, one would expect him to make seven tricks: four spades, a heart, a diamond, and presumably a club.
But David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., found himself in three no-trump after opening with one club, strong and artificial.
When his partner doubled the one-spade overcall, showing 5 to 8 high-card points, he could have scored well by passing for penalties.
But he rebid one no-trump, showing a balanced hand with at least 17 high-card points.


Gridlocked Government Must Be Overhauled, Panel Says
Gridlock in New York State government has become so severe, a state commission has concluded, that Gov.
George E. Pataki and legislative leaders should go outside the normal legislative process to devise ways to reorganize the government fundamentally.
The bipartisan commission, which was created two years ago by former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to help prepare for a possible constitutional convention, proposed in a report to be released today that four advisory panels be created to recommend changes in a state government whose basic structures are as much as 100 years old.


Paul Bates, Head of Black Tank Unit, Dead at 86
Paul L. Bates, the white colonel who commanded the first black tank battalion to enter combat in World War II, died on Tuesday at his home in Dunedin, Fla.
He was 86.
The cause was cancer, said a daughter-in-law, Dorothy Bates, of Bloomfield, Mich., and Manhattan.


Tribute to Two Leaders


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about the resignation of three top executives of the money management unit of the Kemper Corporation misstated the company's relationship with the Kemper National Insurance Companies.
Kemper National is owned by its policyholders, and is not a former subsidiary of Kemper.
Kemper National and Kemper had joint management until 1989.


Balance Of Power Shifting in Nets' Favor
Derrick Coleman and Kenny Anderson remember the look.
They would be seated at midcourt, waiting to check back into a game gone terribly awry.
One would catch the other's eye.
They would both shake their heads.
"It was like we had to do it all by ourselves or we were in trouble," Anderson said.


In America; Inflicting Pain on Children
The Republican jihad against the poor, the young and the helpless rolls on.
So far no legislative assault has been too cruel, no budget cut too loathsome for the party that took control of Congress at the beginning of the year and has spent all its time since then stomping on the last dying embers of idealism and compassion in government.
This week Republicans in the House began approving measures that would take food off the trays of hungry schoolchildren and out of the mouths of needy infants.
With reckless disregard for the human toll that is sure to follow, they have also aimed their newly powerful budget-reducing weapons at programs that provide aid to handicapped youngsters, that support foster care and adoption, that fight drug abuse in schools and that provide summer jobs for needy youths.


INSIDE
Fighting Gridlock in Albany
Gridlock in New York State government is so bad that leaders should go outside normal legislative processes to fundamentally reorganize the government, a report says.
Page 25.
Affirmative Action Review
Saying that "we shouldn't be defending things that we can't defend," the President has ordered a review of all the Federal Government's affirmative action policies.
Page 9.
Budget Measure Questioned
Two Senate Democrats are giving their colleagues second thoughts over the probable role of the judiciary in any balanced-budget amendment.
Page 7.
Somalia's Uncertain Future
As the last peacekeepers pack their bags, the lines of Somali workers waiting to be paid off by the U.N. in Mogadishu offer a graphic picture of Somalia's uncertain future.
Page 3.


The Neediest Cases; A Struggle To Raise Daughter's 4 Children
When exhaustion and grief encroach, Helen Perry turns to gospel music.
The songs of praise are like a quieting hand, easing the strain of raising four grandchildren alone.
"It fills me up," she said, "and it lets me go."


Tokyo Journal; When Doctor Won't Tell Cancer Patient the Truth
When Emperor Hirohito began to vomit inexplicably and then lost weight and energy, his doctors never told him what just about everyone else in Japan eventually came to know: He was dying of cancer.
Hirohito may have been a virtual god in the early part of his reign, but he was also a patient -- and doctors in Japan mostly lie to cancer patients, even former divinities.
"I don't regret that I didn't tell him about his cancer," Akira Takagi, the Emperor's chief doctor, said at the time of Hirohito's death in 1989.


Sports of The Times; Turf War Or a Case Of Ethics?
Afew months ago in St.
Louis, I sat stunned and excited by what seemed to be a dramatic escalation of athleticism in women's basketball at the Olympic Sports Festival.
A coach from the winning South team said this was the wave of the future: women at increasing younger ages being pulled into an extensive network of camps, clinics, highly competitive summer leagues, touring teams, a generation of female athletes with awesome skills and unprecedented physical presence.


Major Rift Develops Over Minor Leaguers
The fight for the loyalty of minor league players intensified today when major league general managers formally rejected the union position that the players would be strikebreakers if they played in exhibition games.
The general managers, through a team of three spokesmen, accused the union of using the minor leaguers as tools in the striking players' labor dispute with the clubs.
The union, in turn, said it was the clubs that used the players as tools by bringing them to spring training early to "mask" the presence of replacement players.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.88
5.91
3.23
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.71
5.69
3.36
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.91
5.90
3.58
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.29
7.31
6.19
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.52
7.54
6.71
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.43
7.53
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.43
6.43
5.77
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Pataki and State Senate Press Assembly on Death Penalty
In the latest escalation of the legislative haggling over the death penalty, Gov.
George E. Pataki and State Senate leaders announced today that they had agreed on the details of a bill and that the Senate would pass it on Monday, with or without the assent of the Assembly.
Assembly leaders, meanwhile, said they would pass their own version of the bill on Wednesday if no agreement with the Governor and Senate is reached before then, and they declared that negotiations were at a standstill.
If the Senate and Assembly pass separate bills, it would be left to a conference committee of members from both houses to try to reconcile the differences.


2 Key Democrats Voice Doubt on Budget Amendment
The campaign to add a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution, a bare vote or two short of the 67 it needs to win in the Senate on Tuesday, seemed to stumble today on the concerns of two pivotal Democrats that the measure would shift power over Federal spending to the courts.
With five Democrats still undecided, at least publicly, the battle over the amendment is far from over.
But the proposal's prospects clearly were not helped when two who have been regarded as among the most likely recruits to its cause -- Senators Sam Nunn of Georgia and Wendell H. Ford of Kentucky -- expressed deep reservations about it in speeches and interviews.


France Accuses U.S. of Leaking Report on American Spies
The Interior Minister denied today that he was responsible for the disclosure of allegations that American diplomats had spied on the Government, and he blamed the United States Embassy and the Ambassador instead.
The assertion by the minister, Charles Pasqua, reported in Le Monde, seemed to startle the Ambassador, Pamela Harriman, and the embassy issued a withering statement rejecting the charge as "neither true nor credible." The statement also scolded Mr.
Pasqua for violating diplomatic confidentiality.


Even Without the Expense, Moving Oversea Is Daunting
Moving from one town to another can be trying even under ant circumstances.
But what if you have two young children and are taking them to a far away place?
David Gill and Rosemary Susa pulled it off, moving their family from Pensicola, Fla., to Taiwan this week.
Although Mr.
Gill's company paid most of the expenses, thge couple devoted time and some of their own money to easing the transition.


No Jail for Burglars, 7
The February bandits are 0 for 3, but they are not going to jail.
They are 7-year-old twins, and the police sent them home.
"They're too young for juvenile detention, and they're afraid that if they sent them to a foster home, they'd burn it down," said Officer Gary Griffin, who helped arrest them Thursday after their third break-in this month.


James R. Cowan, 78, Health Official, Dies
James R. Cowan, a physician who served as Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health and Environmental Services in the Nixon Administration and in a variety of other high posts in health administration, died Feb. 16 at his home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 78.
His wife, Dolores, who said Dr.
Cowan suffered from heart and vascular ailments, attributed the death to natural causes.


Revival of Old Theaters Energizes 42d Street
To the Editor:
Does it take great vision to conclude that erecting hotels in the most congested and overbuilt spot in New York City (news article, Feb. 17) would be a planning folly?
If the city is in need of more hotels, would it not be more sensible to select a more attractive and less congested area, so that our great architects and planners could properly express themselves?
MAX M. TAMIR  New York, Feb. 21, 1995 The writer is an urban planner.


A Whaler Falls on His Face and Still Beats Rangers
Fewer goals are being scored in the National Hockey League this season, and some of those that are being scored might make the All-Ugly highlight reel.
Earlier this week, Montreal's Donald Brashear beat the Islanders with a carom off the face of Scott Lachance.
Next, Pittsburgh's Tomas Sandstrom flipped one over Quebec's Stephane Fiset while Sandstrom was sliding along on his rear end.
The best -- or worst -- of them might have happened last night, when the Hartford Whalers beat the Rangers by 2-1 at Madison Square Garden.
While racing in on Mike Richter in the Ranger net, Paul Ranheim of Hartford simply fell on the ice, flat on his face, all by himself.


Biggest German Union Begins Strike
Thousands of German metal and engineering workers today plunged western Germany into its first major strike in more than a decade, as the country's largest trade union picked 22 companies and plants in the country's rich southern region of Bavaria for a shutdown.
The strikers, who are seeking a shorter workweek and a 6 percent increase in wages this year, set up picket lines outside plants of such giant companies as Siemens A.G. and AEG A.G.


It Just Looks Heavy


Bodies Pile Up Like Cordwood in a Ninja Fight
Of all the sake joints in all the towns in all the world, Paul Racine (Christopher Lambert), an American computer salesman, has to walk into the Whisky Bar in Nagoya, Japan.
His eyes, and soon his lips, lock onto Kirina (Joan Chen), a mystery woman in a scorching-hot red dress.
That night they achieve bliss in a hotel hot tub.
Minutes later, Racine witnesses her execution by a ninja hit squad.
Even worse, he sees the face of Kinjo, the leader of the Makato cult, an army of trained assassins.
For this he must die.
Racine has stepped right into the middle of a centuries-old feud between a samurai family, headed by the swordmaster Takeda (Yoshio Harada), and its ninja enemies.
For the remainder of the movie, under Takeda's protection, Racine tries to elude the ninja manhunt and in his spare time develops samurai-level abilities with a sword.


Money Does the Talking for Expansion Teams
With little to offer free agents -- no playoffs or Super Bowl in the near future -- the two National Football League expansion teams are going to have to ante up big dollars to attract big-name players.
That doesn't seem to be a problem.
The Carolina Panthers have given Giants defensive end Mike Fox a five-year deal worth $9 million, including a $2 million signing bonus, Seattle kicker John Kasay a five-year, $4.3 million contract and Chiefs offensive lineman Derrick Graham a four-year, $6 million contract.


Pregnant Budd to Run
ZOLA BUDD, the former South African world cross-country champion, is pregnant but still wants to run in the world championships next month in Durham, England.
Budd, 28, made her debut as a 17-year-old barefoot runner, breaking the world junior 5,000-meter record.
"My gynecologist has informed me that I do not have to withdraw from the South Africa cross-country team to go to Durham, but I will be chatting to the selectors within the next couple of days to see if I am mentally and physically in shape to run world championships," she said.
Budd said until she finds out, she will continue running in local races. (AP)


Western Lift for China's Air Plans
In an assembly hall here where the Chinese military builds its strategic nuclear bomber, the Boeing Company is teaching the work force how to build the aft section of a Boeing 737.
In southwestern Sichuan Province, in a factory where China has been developing its first supersonic jet fighter, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation is producing nose sections for MD-80 and MD-90 passenger jets.
In Shanghai, new agreements for the final assembly of 20 McDonnell Douglas passenger aircraft have been completed.


Alexander Woroniak, 76, an Economist
Alexander Woroniak, an expert on East European economic systems who was professor emeritus and former chairman of the Department of Economics and Business at The Catholic University of America, died on Tuesday in Georgetown University Hospital.
He was 76 and lived in Washington.
The cause was complications from a fall on Feb, 14, said his wife, Alyce Ann Bergkamp-Woroniak.


A Soviet Serial Murderer
From 1982 to 1990, about 500 miles south of Moscow, Andrei Chikatilo murdered more than 50 people, male and female, most under 17.
The riveting movie "Citizen X" follows the unflagging efforts of the detective Viktor Burakov (Stephen Rea) to capture the serial killer.
Working without any advanced tools of modern detection, Burakov also has to battle the entrenched bureaucracy of a Soviet Union still inching toward perestroika.
One official (Joss Ackland) on the supervising investigatory committee simply refuses to believe that serial killers could possibly exist in the country because they are "a decadent Western phenomenon."


Perry Is Suddenly a Tour Terror
Kenny Perry, who has spent much of the last three years building a golf course in his hometown of Franklin, Ky., has spent the last two weeks tearing up courses on the PGA Tour.
Last week, during his victory at the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic, he set a course record of 63 at Indian Ridge Country Club in Palm Desert, Calif.
Today he was at it again, this time on the storied layout at Riviera Country Club in the second round of the Nissan Open.
On a clear, crisp Southern California day, Perry went around Riviera in 62 strokes, tying the course record held jointly by Larry Mize and Fred Couples and vaulting into the lead at the halfway point of the tournament.


Transactions
Baseball  National League SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Signed Gary Sharko and Dan Henrikson, pitchers, to minor-league contracts.


Forgotten Handshake?
Impediments are rising to peace in the Mideast: Israel's talks with Syria are in hibernation, negotiations with the P.L.O. over the West Bank are dragging and relations with Egypt are deteriorating.
News analysis, page 4.


Mideast Peace Effort on Hold
Suddenly, there seem to be nothing but speed bumps on the road to Middle East peace.
Big speed bumps at that.
Israel's peace talks with Syria have been in hibernation for months, and by extension that means no progress is possible between the Israelis and the Syrians' client government in Lebanon.


Ex-Officer Sentenced in 30th Precinct Scandal
A 24-year-old former New York City police officer was sentenced to 15 months in prison yesterday in the corruption scandal at the 30th Precinct in west Harlem.
Wiping away tears as she left Federal District Court in Manhattan, the former officer, Justine Fazzini, said: "I miss my job and my colleagues; I'd do anything to get it back. I just want to serve my sentence and get on with my life."


Orders Rose For Durables Last Month
In a report that analysts said raised new questions about whether the economy was slowing as the Federal Reserve's chairman, Alan Greenspan, had suggested, the Government said yesterday that factory orders for durable goods rose for the third consecutive month in January.
According to data compiled by the Commerce Department, orders for durable goods increased six-tenths of 1 percent last month, led by stronger demand for industrial machinery and equipment.


Corrections
The stock tables in Business Day yesterday carried incorrect dividend and yield figures, supplied by Tribune Media Services, in some editions.
The actual figures were one-tenth of those shown.
Corrected versions of the tables are recognizable by the first listing in the New York Stock Exchange table, AAR; it should show a dividend of 48 cents, not $4.80, and a yield of 3.5 percent, not 35.2 percent.


Last Chance for Many Somalis as U.N. Phases Out
With the last peacekeeping troops packing their bags, today was the final payday for Somalis who worked for the United Nations at the port and airport of this uneasy capital.
In a devastated economy in which most salaried jobs were with the United Nations, the lines of Somalis waiting to be paid for the last time were among the more vivid reminders of the uncertain future for those who are left behind.


Man Slain by Police Is Found to Be Unarmed
Camden County prosecutors are investigating the death of a man who was killed by the police after he led them on a half-mile chase through the city, waving what they said they believed was a gun.
Maurice Potter, 33, of Camden, was killed early Thursday morning after police officers cornered him under a highway overpass.
Instead of giving up, as the police demanded, he grasped what appeared to be a gun, crouched and pointed it at them, the police said.


Officials Assess Local Impact if Military Operations Are Pared
Dismay, despair and defiance were mingled yesterday in reaction to the prospect of community upheaval and millions of dollars of economic losses growing out of plans to close or curtail operations at military installations in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
Said to be on the Pentagon's chopping block were familiar names like the New London submarine base in Connecticut; the Lakehurst Naval Air Engineering Station in New Jersey, where the German dirigible Hindenburg burned in 1937; Fort Hamilton in Brooklyn, and the Rome Laboratory in Rome, N.Y., the sole active element of Griffiss Air Force Base, which was a victim of a round of base closings two years ago.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  What's so great about a sluggish economy?
Wall Street has been celebrating an apparent slowdown, sending stocks to record highs.
While such a rally may seem perverse, there are sound reasons for welcoming a breather from a four-year-old economic expansion.
Analysts hope slower growth will buy time for companies to train more workers, smooth out the production pipeline and add the capability to turn out a greater supply of goods and services.
Economic Analysis.  [ Page 1. ] Factory orders for durable goods rose six-tenths of 1 percent in January, suggesting that the economy may not be slowing as the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, has suggested.
It was the third consecutive monthly gain.  [ 37. ]


A Grand Jury Refuses to Indict 'Frasier' Star on a Sex Charge
A Somerset County grand jury has refused to indict Kelsey Grammer, the star of the television series "Frasier," on sexual assault charges based on a teen-ager's complaint that he had sex with her at a local hotel in 1993, when she was 15.
The young woman's delay of more than a year in pressing charges against Mr.
Grammer made it difficult to support her claim, the County Prosecutor, Nicholas L. Bissell Jr., said today.


An Elite School's Reputation Cracks and Peels
To the Editor:
It was with great, but hollow vindication that I read Bob Herbert's "Where the Schools Come Last" (column, Feb. 18) about the dilapidated state of Brooklyn's Midwood High School.
I thought I was sending my daughter to a good school.


Religion Journal; Jews See Signs of Change In New Catholic Teachings
"Unbelievable" is how Rabbi Barry Friedman characterizes the new Catechism of the Catholic Church, a compendium he praises for eliminating the demeaning and prejudiced descriptions of Jews and Judaism found in the previous book used by generations of Catholics.
Disbelief would be an appropriate sentiment if his grandfather -- an Orthodox Jew who suffered during pogroms in Ukraine -- had heard Rabbi Friedman participating in a discussion of the catechism with John Cardinal O'Connor of New York.
But with Vatican recognition of Israel, strong pronouncements by Pope John Paul II against the Holocaust and anti-Semitism, and the best-selling catechism providing a focus for discussion, times have changed indeed.


Isn't It Time to Speak Openly of Hiroshima?; A Lesson on Disasters
To the Editor:
Since the quake struck Kobe, Japan, on Jan. 17, the world has come to perceive the Japanese Government as a negative, instransigent bureaucracy, unresponsive to the tragic needs of people.
I want your readers to know that this is not the entire story.


PENTAGON TO SEEK SCALED-BACK LIST OF BASE CLOSINGS
Scaling back its plans for shrinking the military, the Clinton Administration has prepared a list for its last scheduled round of military base closings that officials acknowledge will force the Pentagon to keep open more installations than it needs.
At Defense Secretary William J. Perry's direction, the armed services have recommended that about two dozen major bases be closed and more than 80 smaller installations nationwide be closed, reduced or, in a few cases, expanded slightly to accommodate troops from sites that are being closed, senior military officials said.
The list is scheduled to be announced on Tuesday.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  U.S.-CANADIAN AVIATION PACT
The U.S. and Canada agreed to a broad new aviation treaty that will allow their airlines to fly freely between the two countries.
The pact was the centerpiece of President Clinton's second day in Ottawa. 1


Throttling the Messenger
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's administration is fighting hard not to have to put a filtration system in the city water supply.
But another filtration system is becoming a regrettable centerpiece of his tenure: the filtering of information to the public.
In recent days, four spokesmen for major city agencies have been purged from the administration. (In the interest of full disclosure, I need to point out that I was one of them; I'll get to my case later.) The Mayor said that we -- and 300 other dismissed middle managers -- were "off agenda." His chief press aide, Cristyne Lategano, spoke of needing "more control" of information.


No Plans To Evict Holdouts
Bill Pulsipher was not in a pleasant mood after he looked into his locker this morning at the Mets' minor league complex.
Ripped from a recent newspaper was a small article about the Mets in which Manager Dallas Green was quoted as criticizing Pulsipher for his decision to attend a union meeting in Orlando last week despite the fact that the pitcher is not yet a member of the players' union.
Green's quotes were highlighted in yellow.


On a Bronx Wall, Faded Colors of an Era of Hope
AT a time when Government financing of the arts is under attack, when the Social Realism of the 1930's is out of vogue and when the Bronx is much maligned, what could be better than to visit the borough's Central Post Office on the Grand Concourse to look at the murals of muscular proletarians that Ben Shahn painted there in 1938 under Federal sponsorship?
Whatever the politics of fashion and whatever the fashions of politics, they are compelling, possibly the greatest publicly displayed art in the Bronx, which, to be honest, has never exactly been Florence.
They are also neglected and shabby, fading, peeling, obscured by showcases, defaced with electrical outlets and diminished by the clashing large posters promoting mail service to China or the Elvis Presley stamp.


Music Notes
Focus on the Contemporary
The New York City Opera will increase its quotient of 20th-century opera during its 1995-96 season, which opens on Sept. 7 with Hindemith's rarely performed "Mathis der Maler" and also includes the American premieres of Toshiro Mayazumi's "Kinkakuji" on Oct. 19 and Jost Meier's "Dreyfus Affair" on April 2, 1996.


Estonian Symphony Led by an Estonian
For better or worse, mostly for better, it was no ordinary evening at Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday.
Neeme Jarvi began his second week as a guest conductor of the New York Philharmonic with a brilliant, pliant account of Tchaikovsky's "Romeo and Juliet" Overture.
Awadagin Pratt, an intriguing eccentric among young piano virtuosos, made his New York concerto debut with a bruising assault on the Grieg Concerto in A minor.
To close, Mr.
Jarvi offered Eduard Tubin's Fifth Symphony, music essentially unknown outside the conductor's homeland of Estonia.
Anyone who has followed Mr.
Jarvi's spectacularly wide-ranging career will be at least dimly aware of his devotion to Tubin, manifest in various recordings for the Bis label.
This composer wrote in a generally conservative style, blending elements of Sibelius, Shostakovich and Stravinsky.
His 10 symphonies are marked by tremendous rhythmic energy, accumulating over long ostinatos.
They also possess a distinctive harmonic voice, generally Impressionist in character but also inclined toward tart bitonalities.


Hunter Beats York for Title
It was the same Bronx tale but with a bit of drama.
Hunter won its fourth consecutive City University of New York Athletic Conference basketball championship last night with a 75-67 victory over York before a boisterous crowd of 1,100 at Lehman's Apex Center.
Shawn McCartney, a 6-foot-2-inch senior guard, led Hunter with 34 points and 6 steals and was named the tournament's most valuable player.


Giants Keep Campbell
Safety JESSE CAMPBELL, an unrestricted free agent, has decided to remain with the Giants.
Campbell, who finished second on the team in tackles with 86, signed a new contract yesterday.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.


... And Welcome to the United States
Pledging their allegiance to the United States was not the joyous occasion that 150 immigrants expected when they arrived at the Federal District Court in Manhattan yesterday morning.
The would-be Americans finally got to take the oath of citizenship -- but not before they were reprimanded by a Federal judge, who threatened to throw them in jail because he disapproved of their behavior in the courthouse, several immigrants and their relatives said.


Dineen an Islander Again
The Islanders, who play the Pittsburgh Penguins tonight at Nassau Coliseum, recalled defenseman Gord Dineen yesterday.
Dineen, 32, last played for the Islanders in 1988, when he was traded to Minnesota.
He spent part of last season with Ottawa.


Big Picture of Cold War: U.S. Spy Photos Go Public
Their acquisition cost billions.
They number in the millions, with hundreds added every day.
Thousands of people have labored in secrecy to interpret them.
Hundreds of spacecraft, the most advanced ever made, were lofted over the decades to make them.
More than one person landed in jail for revealing something about them, one of the cold war's top secrets.
Until now.
Today, American spy satellite photographs came in from the cold, at least a bit, as the Clinton Administration lifted the veil on those taken between 1960, the beginning of the space-surveillance era, and 1972.
The Government has never before made public a spy satellite photograph.


Holyfield Ban Lifted
EVANDER HOLYFIELD won a split decision yesterday in his attempt to return to the ring when Nevada boxing officials agreed to lift the former heavyweight champion's medical suspension.
Members of the Nevada State Athletic Commission, meeting in Las Vegas, however, stopped short of endorsing Holyfield's plan to fight again, saying there were still questions that needed to be answered.
"This is not to say we will issue Evander Holyfield a license," Dr.
JAMES NAVE, the commission's chairman, said.
"It is to say we will not sit up here being pompous and say another state can't."


Wildlife Refuge Opens at Last
A southern New Jersey wildlife refuge created in 1989 has finally opened.
The 6,600-acre Cape May National Wildlife Refuge will permit hiking, bird watching, nature photography and wildlife observation.
Hunting, fishing and trapping are generally banned, but a white-tailed deer hunt will be allowed later this year.


George Worden, 73; In Public Relations
George Minturn Worden, a former public relations executive, died on Wednesday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
A resident of the Georgetown section, he was 73.
The cause was lung cancer, his family said.


Credit Bhutto for Transforming Pakistan
To the Editor:
Re Paula R. Newberg's attack on Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto of Pakistan in "The Two Benazir Bhuttos" (Op-Ed, Feb. 11):
Since Prime Minister Bhutto's reelection in October 1993, the economy and social structure of Pakistan have been remarkably transformed.
Her Government has taken hard economic and budgetary decisions, risking political unpopularity by establishing fiscal discipline, and has been called a model of successful adjust ment in the developing world by the International Monetary Fund.


White House Signals an Easing on Affirmative Action
The White House is undertaking a top-to-bottom review of Federal affirmative action programs, scrambling to maintain its footing against Republican attacks on preferential treatment of women and minorities.
"What we need to guarantee is genuine equality of opportunity," President Clinton said today in acknowledging the review at a news conference in Ottawa, after meeting with Canadian officials.
"That's what the affirmative action concept is designed to do, and I'm convinced that most Americans want us to continue to do that in the appropriate way."


RESULTS PLUS
MEN'S COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Carril Gets Victory No. 500  Princeton Coach Pete Carril got his 500th career victory last night, 64-54 over Cornell in Ithaca, N.Y.
Carril, 64, has a 500-265 record in 29 seasons, all but one of them at Princeton.
He is the 16th active coach and 40th over all to join the 500-victory club.
"I've been trying to downplay this 500 thing all week. It's no big deal -- really it isn't," Carril said as he smoked a cigar after the game.
"I'll still go down and have my eggs and ham for breakfast. What's the difference?"


U.S. Spy Satellite Photos Go Public


When Spies Go Unchecked
Washington and Moscow are discovering it is harder to change intelligence agencies than to create and sustain them.
Once in motion, these organizations are difficult to steer or stop, as the latest manifestations of backward thinking in both capitals suggest.
Russia's Federal Security Service, successor to the K.G.B., has been pushing for a new anti-crime law that would revive the chilling spirit of Feliks Dzerzhinsky three years after the towering statue of the K.G.B. founder was removed from its honored place in Moscow.
The Russian Parliament seems ready to approve the measure, which would give Security Service agents a free hand to tap phones, open mail, break into homes and businesses and spy on other government agencies, all on the slightest suspicion of criminal conduct or subversive activity.
The service would have to notify prosecutors no more than 24 hours after the action was taken, and would not be subject to sanction.


More Trouble for Newark
City officials in trouble with the law are nothing new for Newark, N.J.
The last Mayor was indicted but not convicted.
His predecessor went to prison.
Last year a Council member pleaded guilty to misusing government funds.
Two more are now on trial for graft.
This week a state commission charged Mayor Sharpe James with violating election law.
Mr.
James has been Mayor for nine years.
By most accounts he has been good for the city.
The National League of Cities elected him president last year.
But state investigators started looking into his affairs two years ago, and the United States Attorney for New Jersey took over last September as part of a larger inquiry into possible corruption.


State Rakes In Extra Cash
State bookkeepers got a pleasant surprise when they totaled January's tax collections, which took in $43 million more than anticipated.
The difference reflected continued strength in New Jersey's economy, Brian Clymer, the State Treasurer, said yesterday.


About Black Marines Fighting in Vietnam
You can't patch together an epic film from the cinematic equivalent of Scotch tape and construction paper.
That is one of the lessons of "The Walking Dead," a well-meaning mess of a movie about black troops fighting in Vietnam.
"The Walking Dead," which opened yesterday, follows a group of marines, most of them new recruits, who are dispatched by helicopter to airlift the survivors from an abandoned prisoner-of-war camp in North Vietnam.
The five main characters, whose civilian lives are shown in crudely inserted flashbacks, represent the typical cross section found in an old-time G.I.-Joe film.


Benjamin Goldstein, Retail Executive, 83
Benjamin Goldstein, a retailing executive in Detroit and New York who helped members of minorities establish their own businesses, died on Sunday at the Hebrew Home for the Aged in Rockville, Md.
He was 83 and a resident of Washington.
The cause was a stroke, said his daughter Carole G. Cohen of Washington.


The Stamp That Roared?
Did you know that Metro Goldwyn Mayer's famous lion, Leo, is buried in New Jersey?


A Dream Is Shattered On the Mean Streets
The dreams of Lawrence Meyers once played out just across the street from the spot where a drug arrest all but killed him.
The dark, creaking wood of the Y.W.C.A. basketball courts was the 16-year-old's main hope for a ticket out of his decrepit neighborhood, whose streets carry names like Martin Luther King Way and Rosa Parks Boulevard but offer little hope.


Eating Club Settles in a Lawsuit
After a night of heavy drinking five years ago, a Princeton University student climbed atop a train that shuttles between Princeton and Princeton Junction and touched an 11,000-volt power line.
The student, Bruce Miller, then 19, lost both legs and his left arm.
Now, one defendant in a Federal lawsuit filed by Mr.
Miller against school employees, New Jersey Transit and several campus groups has settled out of court.
Mr.
Miller will get $100,000 from Cottage Club, one of Princeton's 11 eating clubs.


Hospital Role Sought
Throwing up a potential hurdle to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to sell 3 of New York City's 11 public hospitals, City Council leaders said yesterday that they would seek state legislation to give the Council the power to disapprove any sales.
The Council announced its strategy a day after Mr.
Giuliani said he would seek offers from private or nonprofit hospitals to buy three hospitals.
He maintained that the sales would not require Council approval.


Carter Offers To Mediate For Haitians
Shrugging off attempts to undermine his visit here, Jimmy Carter said today that he is willing to serve as an impartial broker among Haiti's fractious political parties and would continue to help carry President Jean-Bertrand Aristide's message to Washington.
It was Mr.
Carter's apparent willingness to play the mediator's role that inspired much of the graffiti that greeted him when he arrived here Thursday for a three-day visit.
But the sun had barely risen this morning than the former President was preparing for a breakfast meeting with Haiti's electoral commission.
The voting is to be held on June 4.


CHRONICLE
To HELEN FRANKENTHALER, the Abstract Expressionist painter, the year she spent at the Dalton School 50 years ago marked a turning point at a difficult time.
On Monday, she and several other well-known graduates of the private school on the Upper East Side will discuss its impact on their lives.
They will speak at a celebration of Dalton's 75th anniversary in Avery Fisher Hall.


Is the Fed's Promised Land Appearing on the Horizon?
In a characteristically careful way, Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve Board chairman, told Congress this week that the economy might be entering the moderate-growth/low-inflation mode that for a policy maker is the functional equivalent of the Promised Land.
And for the investor, that would mean an end to rising interest rates.


Corrections
A picture caption on Feb. 11 about a speech to college students by the nominee for Surgeon General, Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr., misidentified the campus in some copies.
It was George Washington University, not Georgetown.


Corrections
A front-page article on Tuesday about the savings patterns of generations of Americans misstated the views of Michael J. Boskin, who was chief economic adviser under President George Bush.
He is pessimistic, not optimistic, that the aging of the baby boomers will raise the national saving rate.


Corruption in Supplying Schools
New York City's Bureau of School Supplies is once again caught up in a corruption scandal.
Earlier this month, a report on Channel 2 News showed truck drivers who had loaded up on goods from the bureau's warehouse selling them to private businesses.
The drivers reportedly "shorted" shipments to schools, delivering only part of an order and then selling off the rest, or they paid off people on the Bureau of Supplies loading docks to let them take goods, from pencils to cleaning supplies, for later resale.
Now three unsolved murders -- one of a school custodian whose body was found near the warehouse six years ago -- have been linked to corruption in the bureau.


Why I Switched
This week I announced that I would vote for a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution when the Senate takes it up next Tuesday, even though I voted against such an amendment last year.
Unlike flag burning and school prayer -- two issues that are the subjects of constitutional amendments that would limit personal freedom -- the decision to encumber future generations with financial obligations is a fundamental choice that can be legitimately addressed in the Constitution.
The question for me is not whether the budget must be in perfect balance.
The question is whether we can indefinitely sustain deficits of $200 billion and more without permanently and dangerously limiting future options for our children's generation.
Under current budget conditions, trying to spend our way out of recessions is no longer an option; deficits are now the norm, not a conscious policy choice.


Lukas Gets 60-Day Ban In Flanders Drug Case
D.
Wayne Lukas, who trained last year's juvenile champions including Timber Country, the co-favorite for the Kentucky Derby, was suspended for 60 days today by the New York State Racing and Wagering Board for an unresolved case involving his other juvenile champion, the undefeated filly Flanders.
Lukas was given 10 days to appeal the suspension, as he did last fall, and automatically win a stay and a new hearing.
He seems unlikely to miss the Derby because of the length of the appeals process and the complexity of the case, which hinges on a disputed drug finding.


China Trip Ends With Signing of Energy Deals
Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary culminated her six-day visit to China today by presiding over the signing of several important contracts and accords for the American power-generation industry.
Among them was an agreement allowing the Westinghouse Electric Corporation to sell steam turbine and generating equipment to the Qinshan Nuclear Power Station in central China.


METRO DIGEST
BOARD VOTES CUTS IN M.T.A.
SERVICE Under pressure from Gov.
George E. Pataki, the board of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has unanimously approved the first widespread reductions in subway and bus service in two decades.
The board, which brushed aside Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's objection to any loss of service, moved ahead with a plan that just two days earlier a board committee had decided to postpone.
Page 1.
Lament of the express-bus riders.
Page 26.
NEW YORK CITY  BOMB SUSPECT'S JAIL FAULTED BY LAWYER The new lawyer for the man accused of planning the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center complained to a Federal judge in Manhattan about the conditions of his client's imprisonment while awaiting trial, saying he had been kept isolated and under 24-hour surveillance.
Page 27.
ON A BRONX WALL, FADED COLORS OF AN ERA At a time when Government financing of the arts is under attack, when the Social Realism of the 1930's is out of vogue and when the Bronx is much maligned, what could be better than to visit the borough's Central Post Office on the Grand Concourse to look at the murals of muscular proletarians that Ben Shahn painted there in 1938 under Federal sponsorship?
About New York, page 27.
EX-OFFICER SENTENCED IN SCANDAL A 24-year-old former police officer was sentenced to 15 months in prison in the corruption scandal at the 30th Precinct in Harlem.
Wiping away tears as she left Federal District Court in Manhattan, the former officer, Justine Fazzini, said: "I miss my job and my colleagues; I'd do anything to get it back." Page 27. . . .
AND WELCOME TO THE UNITED STATES Pledging their allegiance to the United States was not the joyous occasion that 150 immigrants expected when they arrived at the Federal District Court in Manhattan yesterday morning.
The would-be Americans finally got to take the oath of citizenship -- but not before they were reprimanded by a Federal judge.
Page 27.
REGION  SENATE PRESSES DEATH PENALTY In the latest escalation of the legislative haggling over the death penalty, Gov.
George E. Pataki and State Senate leaders announced that they had agreed on the details of a bill and that the Senate would pass it on Monday, with or without the assent of the Assembly.
Page 28.
JURY REFUSES TO INDICT 'FRASIER' STAR A Somerset County grand jury has refused to indict Kelsey Grammer, the star of the television series "Frasier," on sexual assault charges based on a teen-ager's complaint that he had sex with her at a local hotel in 1993, when she was 15.
The young woman's delay of more than a year in pressing charges against Mr.
Grammer made it difficult to support her claim, the County Prosecutor said.
Page 29.
MAN CONVICTED IN CARJACKING A jury found Scott R. Johnson guilty of the rape and murder of a Piscataway woman in a 1992 carjacking.
Page 29.
Dismay and defiance were mingled in reaction to plans to close or curtail operations at military installations in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
Page 8 Neediest Cases...27


An Age-Old Education for a Special Colt
"When he arrived here," Bill Mott was saying, "there was no tag or label on him warning us that he was special. You know, this is Genuine Reward, the colt that Genuine Risk foaled when she was 16 years old. So, be careful. But we knew who he was."
"You try not to show favoritism," he went on.
"But you're always aware that a lot of people will be looking at him. You give him a good groom, somebody who's been with us a long time. You get him a good rider. You see he's a good-feeling colt with curiosity and personality. He'll jump around and play."


Why Wall St. Cheers as Economy Slips
Wall Street investors broke out the champagne this week, celebrating what appeared to be an economic slowdown by setting new records in the stock market.
But what's so great about a sluggish economy?
And doesn't this mean a recession is just over the horizon?
Perhaps, but not necessarily.
In fact, the overwhelming advantage of a slowdown now would be to bolster sharply the odds of sustaining America's four-year-old economic expansion for at least another couple of years or so.
"The biggest risk," said Edward Hyman, chief economist of the International Strategy and Investment Group, "is if the economy doesn't slow down."


Clinton, in Canada, Attacks G.O.P. on Domestic Politics
President Clinton opened a broad-based assault here today on the Republican-led campaign against big government.
He called the balanced-budget amendment a bad idea, denounced the party's attacks on affirmative action and said deep cuts in current Federal spending amounted to a war on children.
Turning to domestic politics at a news conference that was supposed to wrap up a meeting with Canadian leaders, Mr.
Clinton accused Republicans of trying to divide voters along racial lines.
He painted the spending cuts they have proposed as "radical right-wing measures," while back in Washington his lieutenants labeled the balanced-budget amendment "horrendous economic policy" that could deepen a recession by limiting the Government's ability to mitigate it with increased spending.


By Way of South Africa by Way of a Dream
The music of Ladysmith Black Mambazo, the 10-man chorus from South Africa, was supposedly inspired by a dream its leader, Joseph Shabalala, had in 1964 in which he saw and heard a group of children singing in an incomprehensible language.
In concert on Thursday night at Town Hall, after more than 30 years of performing, Ladysmith Black Mambazo continued to imbue its music with a haunting, ethereal, dreamlike quality.
Its seven bass voices and two of its three tenors sang such close harmonies and with such subtle nuances that they sounded like one deep, rich, resonant and proud voice.
Mr.
Shabalala wove his tenor in and out of the group's sustained chords, leading the chants, asking questions, encouraging the group and providing counterpoint.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Afternoon Spent Fiddling and Conducting
New York Chamber Symphony  92d Street Y


Highlights of the Commission's Report
Following are excerpts from the report by the Temporary State Commission on Constitutional Revision.
PART ONE:
What's Wrong With New York's Government and Our Proposal to Address It.


HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL REPORT
P.S.A.L.
It may have been only a regular-season game that took place more than a month ago, but Coach Larry Major will not let his Paul Robeson team forget that crushing overtime loss to Grady on Jan. 20.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Ensemble Surrounds  A Participating Audience Festival of 20th-Century Music Manhattan School of Music


Ex-Oilman Named Environment Chief
In a move that pleased business groups but angered some of his staunchest environmental supporters, Gov.
George E. Pataki today named a former oil company executive to be the state's highest environmental official.
The nomination of Michael D. Zagata to be Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Conservation ends what had been a difficult process for Mr.
Pataki, who draws broad support from both business and environmental leaders and had sought to satisfy both in his selection.


A Building Boom Transforms the Phoenix Desert
A happy man, Fred Keene stood beside his yellow bulldozer the other day as it idled among the century-old saguaro cactuses of the Sonora Desert and said, "Busy, busy, busy."
"I'm working nonstop," he added.
"I've turned down work. Just turned down a job Monday night -- no time to do it."


Bus Riders Say They Feel Betrayed
When Sunny Levine moved to Flushing, Queens, 15 years ago, she made sure that her new house would be near the express bus line to Manhattan.
Each day she takes the X51 bus from Flushing to work at 65th Street and Broadway in Manhattan.
During the ride, she chats with fellow commuters or relaxes.
But safety and civility aside, Mrs.
Levine said, the bus is the quickest and cheapest way.


Gily Bard-Staroben, Plant Scientist, 70
Dr.
Gily Epstein Bard-Staroben, a plant scientist at the City University of New York for some 30 years, died on Wednesday at a nursing home in Gaithersburg, Md.
A longtime resident of Tuckahoe, N.Y., she was 70.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, her family said.


Isn't It Time to Speak Openly of Hiroshima?
To the Editor:
The decision of the Smithsonian Institution to exclude displays showing the suffering and damage caused by the atomic bombing of Hiroshima from the proposed exhibition commemorating the end of World War II is regrettable, for it deprives the public of making a fair assessment of one of the most momentous happenings of the 20th century.


Hurt Wallenda To Be Retired
Wallenda, who won more than $1.2 million for the Dogwood Stable, suffered a leg injury this week and will be retired.
The 5-year-old son of Gulch ran eighth in his 33d and last race, the Donn Handicap at Gulfstream Park two weeks ago.
During a workout this week, the injury was detected and ultrasound examination showed it to be a tear in superficial flexor tendon in his left front ankle.


A Glimmer of Justice
Almost without relent in recent years the Supreme Court under Chief Justice William Rehnquist has found ways to deny new trials to state prisoners, even when they can show errors of a constitutional magnitude in their criminal cases.
On Tuesday there was an exception -- a decision of such evident fairness that it deserves a brief celebration.
The newest Justice, Stephen Breyer, delivered an opinion for the Court whose significance lay as much in tone as result.
Where the Rehnquist majority had been disparaging use of the writ of habeas corpus in Federal court to challenge state-imposed sentences, Justice Breyer praised the writ's potential for reversing "a grievous wrong."


Corrections
A brief report by Bloomberg Business News in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday about the initial public offering of Toy Biz Inc. misidentified the exchange where the stock is traded.
It is the New York Stock Exchange, not Nasdaq.


Foreign Holdings Can Balance Portfolios
Mutual fund companies are looking abroad for inspiration, as these three new overseas funds show.
Although investors are encouraged to own some foreign shares to balance domestic portfolios, they should expect interim volatility and plan to hold shares for the long term.
That is because overseas securities are subject to additional risks, like currency and political shifts.
The T. Rowe Price Emerging Markets Bond Fund will own high-yielding government and corporate bonds issued in Latin America, central Europe, Asia and Africa.
The fund will hedge some risk by buying short- and intermediate-term bonds.


Russia Insists Reactor Sale To Iran Is Firm
In two days of talks here, the United States and Russia have made no progress in narrowing their differences over Moscow's plans to build four nuclear reactors in Iran, senior Administration officials said today.
The Administration vigorously protested the contract during a two-day visit by Russia's Deputy Foreign Minister, Georgi Mamedov.
Republicans in Congress are threatening to cut off aid to Moscow unless it cancels the project, which American officials fear will speed Iran's efforts to build nuclear arms.


Is the Fed's Promised Land Appearing on the Horizon?
In a characteristically careful way, Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve Board chairman, told Congress this week that the economy might be entering the moderate-growth/low-inflation mode that for a policy maker is the functional equivalent of the Promised Land.
And for the investor, that would mean an end to rising interest rates.


F.B.I. Salary in Towing Sting
A businessman who is the key witness against current and former City Councilmen on trial for corruption testified yesterday that the F.B.I. paid him $3,000 a month and as much as $28,000 in expenses in one year to help in a Federal inquiry into city operations.
The businessman, Charles W. Geyer, has said he and others gave officials envelopes of cash to help win city towing contracts.


A Stealth Airport for New York; Lightly-Used Stewart Is New York's Stealth Jetport
Once, Stewart International Airport was going to be New York City's fourth jetport, a gateway to the rest of America that would outstrip Kennedy International Airport in size and passenger volume and transform the rustic Hudson Valley into an economic beehive.
Today, two decades after government planners announced that soaring vision and five years after passenger service began, even its ardent champions say Stewart is just a nice country airport.


A Youth Dies After Shooting By the Police
The unarmed 16-year-old shot by the police during a narcotics arrest Tuesday died late tonight, leaving behind questions about the circumstances that led to his death and fears of renewed street disorders by angry teen-agers.
The victim, Lawrence Meyers, died at 11:15 P.M. when his heart stopped, said a spokeswoman for St.
Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center.
He had been sustained by a respirator since the shooting, but had been described by officials as "brain dead."


On a Familiar Texas Campus, Gramm Makes It Official
Senator Phil Gramm formally declared his candidacy for the Republican Presidential nomination today, presenting himself as an unwavering conservative with the record and the grit to carry forward a rightward revolution that began last November.
Returning here to Texas A &amp; M University, where he was an economics professor for 12 years, Mr.
Gramm stood on the steps of the limestone administration building and delivered a message that was plainly spoken and razor-sharp.


Avron Douglis, Mathematician, 76
Avron Douglis, a professor emeritus at the University of Maryland who was an expert in partial differential equations, the means by which mathematicians express many fundamental laws of physics and engineering, died on Feb. 15 at his home in Silver Spring, Md.
He was 76.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Dr. Marjorie Douglis.


Whitman Speech at Alma Mater
Gov.
Christie Whitman has agreed to deliver the commencement address at Wheaton College in Norton, Mass., her alma mater.
She will speak on May 20.
CHARLES STRUM


Revival of Old Theaters Energizes 42d Street
To the Editor:
Three proposals for a hotel on 42d Street have been submitted (news article, Feb. 17).
The first physical evidence of the renovation of 42d Street is at New York City's oldest surviving theater, the Victory, where hard hats and jackhammers have transformed the decaying treasure into a hub of new energy.


THEATER
For Oedipus in Old Age, A Last Score to Settle  'Oedipus at Colonus' The Pearl Theater


Ohio Offers Its Versions of Experiments
The Ohio Ballet's second program at the Joyce Theater, following its splendid opening, is a mixed bag and devoted mainly to new work.
"Earth" (1992) by Laura Dean, and "Another Way," a local premiere by Charles Moulton, are outgrowths of the experimental scene in New York.
Whatever scene in Akron is behind "Square Play," a recent ballet by a company member, Luc Vanier, is downright mystifying.
By contrast, Heinz Poll, the company's artistic director, shows his usual accessibility with "In Full Swing," his latest work to Benny Goodman recordings.
Mr.
Moulton's way with structures is never dull.
"Another Way," performed on Wednesday night at the Joyce (175 Eighth Avenue at 19th Street) has some fine ebullience; its style differs from both the rigor of Mr.
Moulton's complex ball-passing games and the harshness of his pop-oriented choreography.


G.O.P. Leaders Reject a Repeal Of Food Stamps
House Republican leaders said today that they had abandoned plans to abolish the Federal food stamp program and shift the responsibility to the states after senior Republican lawmakers from farm states rebelled.
The decision marks the first significant setback for the House Republican campaign to pare social welfare programs established by the Federal Government over the last 60 years.


Harold Zabrack, 66, Composer, Is Dead
Harold Allen Zabrack, a composer, pianist and former professor at Westminster Choir College of Rider University in Lawrenceville, N.J., died on Feb. 2 at his home in Creve Coeur, Mo.
He was 66.
The cause was peritonitis, said a spokeswoman for the college.


Murdoch May Face New Woes
In a development that could mean new legal trouble for Rupert Murdoch, a top Federal regulator said today that he had not known in 1985 that an Australian company, the News Corporation, controlled 99 percent of the equity in six television stations that Mr.
Murdoch acquired that year.
The official's sworn declaration provides opponents of Mr.
Murdoch with new evidence that he misled the Federal Communications Commission about whether he violated rules that prohibit a foreign company from owning American radio or television stations.


No Headline
"With a love for America and a resolve to make her right again, I today declare myself a candidate for President of the United States." -- SENATOR PHIL GRAMM, the first Republican to enter the 1996 race formally.  [ 10:3. ]


Joseph Brenna, 74, A General Surgeon
Dr.
Joseph D. Brenna, former president of the medical staff at St.
Francis Medical Center in Trenton, died on Thursday at the hospital.
He was 74.
The cause was bladder cancer, family members said.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Through Thickets of Carter To Otherworldly Silvestrov  New Juilliard Ensemble Alice Tully Hall


Battered Israeli Stocks May Yet Offer Promise
ARE Israeli stocks in trouble?
As with many questions in the Middle East, the answer is yes and no.
But the weight of the evidence, analysts say, is that Israel -- which has the largest nonoil economy in the region and whose stock market is stuck in a deep slump -- may have a bright economic future, and so might its stock market.
Still, nobody cares to guess when the tide might turn.


Medical Tests for Secretary
After spending the night in a hospital in Ottawa for what doctors said was a small bleeding ulcer, Secretary of State Warren Christopher flew back to Washington today and checked into a hospital for tests and observation.
Christine D. Shelly, a State Department spokeswoman, said Mr.
Christopher was "progressing well" and planned to set off about March 7 on a weeklong trip to five Middle Eastern countries.


CHRONICLE
The earthquake that devastated Kobe occurred just three weeks before Peter, Paul and Mary were to tour Japan, so the three folk singers -- PETER YARROW, NOEL PAUL STOOKEY and MARY TRAVERS -- decided to go to that city to perform.
"We wanted to show our sense of solidarity and concern," Mr.
Yarrow said yesterday, shortly after his return.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Sobering Bach and Handel, Intermixed With Chitchat  James Galway, flutist Avery Fisher Hall


Times Co. to Buy TV Station
The New York Times Company has agreed to buy a Virginia television station, WTKR, from Narragansett Television Inc., the two companies announced yesterday.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.


BOARD VOTES CUTS FOR CITY TRANSIT
Under pressure from Gov.
George E. Pataki, the board of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority unanimously approved yesterday the first widespread reductions in subway and bus service in two decades.
The board, which brushed aside Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's objection to any loss of service, moved ahead with a plan that just two days earlier a board committee had decided to postpone for at least two weeks.


House Votes to Freeze Regulations as Democrats Fail to Gain Health and Safety Exemptions
The House of Representatives voted today to freeze most new Federal regulations for the rest of the year, with Republicans and Democrats arguing to the debate's bitter end over whether the proposal would endanger the public.
The vote was 276 to 146, as many Democrats ultimately joined to support a bill that President Clinton has threatened to veto if the Senate passes it, saying it would "cost lives." The outlook for the legislation in the Senate is uncertain.


U.S.-Canada Pact Ends Restrictions on Air Travel
The United States and Canada, after years of expanding trade, agreed today to open up their skies under a broad aviation agreement that will allow their airlines to fly any routes between the two countries.
The accord, the centerpiece of President Clinton's second and final day in Ottawa, is expected to expand passenger and cargo services significantly, generate even more business between the two countries and lead to lower fares.


U.S. Treasuries Are Mixed On Latest Economic Data
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday after a Government report showed surprising signs of strong economic growth.
The report, on factory orders for durable goods, which represent products ranging from personal computers to aircraft, showed a third consecutive monthly gain.
The data suggested that the economy might not be slowing at a pace analysts and traders had expected.
But the rise in orders for durable goods was at a somewhat slower pace than the gains in November and December.
And the durable goods report tends to be volatile, sometimes sending contradictory signals about the direction of the economy.


Jail Conditions Faulted By Lawyer in Terror Case
The new lawyer for the man accused of planning the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center complained yesterday to a Federal judge in Manhattan about the conditions of his client's imprisonment while awaiting trial, saying he had been kept isolated and under 24-hour surveillance.
After the lawyer, Roy R. Kulcsar, was appointed by Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy yesterday, he told reporters that his client, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, considered himself a political prisoner.


Oakley Return Means Bounce for Knicks
The imminent return of Charles Oakley is coming at an opportune time for the Knicks.
In their 103-90 victory over the Sacramento Kings on Thursday night at Madison Square Garden, the Knicks were outrebounded by 54-40 over all and by 25-10 on the offensive glass.
In five of their last six games, the Knicks have been outrebounded by a margin of 263-239.


HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL REPORT
P.S.A.L.
It may have been only a regular-season game that took place more than a month ago, but Coach Larry Major will not let his Paul Robeson team forget that crushing overtime loss to Grady on Jan. 20.


Congress Can Pitch a Perfect Game
It has been 73 years since Oliver Wendell Holmes, an "adviser" to the major league baseball players, told them they were lucky to be playing a kid's game for money, and that he and his fellow Supreme Court justices would be granting their employers an exemption from antitrust laws.
The exemption was based on the premise, dubious enough in 1922, that baseball was not interstate commerce.
Today, of course, almost no one believes that Major League Baseball still qualifies for such an exemption.
No other sport, no other entertainment, indeed no other industry anywhere near the scale of baseball, is exempt from antitrust laws.
The baseball owners themselves have not believed it when it was in their interest.
In 1966 the owners invoked the Taft-Hartley Act, which prohibited the payment of money by an employer to an employee's organization, to renege on a $150,000 payment to the fledgling Players Association.
The union's executive director, Marvin Miller, was delighted because by citing the law the owners admitted to engaging in interstate commerce.


Soviet Atomic Debris Discovered in Space
In the first major case of nuclear pollution in space, a team of American scientists has found that puzzling clouds of junk orbiting the Earth are made up of radioactive debris leaking from orbiting nuclear reactors once used by the Soviet Union to power spy satellites.


The Bratton Pulpit
As part of his effort to reduce Police Commissioner William J. Bratton's public profile, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani criticized the Police Department public relations office last week for trivializing law enforcement with stunts more fitting for "N.Y.P.D. Blue."
But as he attempts to assert more control over the Police Department, Mr.
Giuliani may risk weakening one of his administration's most effective policy tools: the ability of his Police Commissioner to communicate his agenda to help motivate his officers.


Last Seen in '77, Track and Field Showcase Is Back
For 16 years, the venerable Fort Washington Armory in Washington Heights played host to the city's premier track-and-field event for high-school students.
But hard times fell on both the building and the sport, and the Mayor's Trophy Meet was discontinued after the 1977 meet.
This Saturday, both the meet and the site will make a comeback.
More than 1,000 top high-school athletes are expected to descend on the Armory Track and Field Center, which first began holding prestigious track events in 1909 and is now a refurbished Olympic-style center with 96,000 square feet of wooden floors, more than twice the size of Madison Square Garden's athletic area.


A Way to Nurture the Gifted? Or Privileges for the Elite?
A simmering concern about the fairness of a 20-year-old program for gifted children in a Brooklyn school district has flared into controversy, sparked by the formation of a task force to re-evaluate the program and a counter-move to make sure it survives.
About 200 people -- most of them parents of children in the program -- packed a meeting of Community School Board 15 last month as the board voted 8 to 1, to create the task force.
District 15 serves about 20,000 students who attend 27 schools in Cobble Hill, Boerum Hill, Carroll Gardens, Park Slope, Kensington, Red Hook, Windsor Terrace and Sunset Park.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption on Feb. 12 for the What's Doing column, about San Juan, P.R., referred erroneously to a sculpture.
It was "La Rogativa" by Lindsay Daen, not a work by Sanguino. (The name of the Sanguino work was also misstated; it is "Raices," not "Raizes.")


The Readiness Gap. What Gap?
TO LISTEN TO REPUBLICANS and the military brass, you would think America's armed forces have fallen into the same 1970's morass that spawned the term "hollow military" and gave Ronald Reagan a potent issue for the 1980 campaign.
Is it possible that just four years after one of the most stunning military triumphs in modern times the services could be suffering from inadequate training, shortages of spare parts and poisonous morale?
Just to pose the question in those terms points strongly to the common-sense answer -- of course not.
This is not the 1970's and the Clinton Administration is not repeating the mistakes of the Carter Administration.
Today, the United States spends more than six times as much on defense as its closest rival, and almost as much on national security as the rest of the world combined.
In 1995, Bill Clinton will actually spend $30 billion more on defense, in constant dollars, than Richard Nixon did 20 years ago and substantially more than his own Secretary of Defense argued was necessary in 1992.


At Work; How the 'Compassion Crowd' Lives
ASK many people about their careers and they will tell a story of how they meandered serendipitously from ambition to opportunity to luck, good or bad.
Mostly they seem surprised to find themselves where they are.
But ask Barbara Fazio-McGrory, 41, to take stock of her career and she recounts an almost comical symmetry between her deepest self and her 14 years in social work, as if there were some sort of cosmic plan, which, she says, there wasn't.
Ms.
Fazio-McGrory is a master's level social worker in the AIDS Center Program at St.
Luke's/Roosevelt Hospital Center on Tenth Avenue in Manhattan, one of several facilities in the city that offers comprehensive care to people with AIDS.
She is part of an interdisciplinary team of hospital personnel who apply their different skills and knowledge to the care of patients with full-blown AIDS.
Many of their patients are in the final stages of the remorseless disease, wary of its malevolent endgame surprises and down to choices that mock the very idea of free will.
The dichotomy is more illusory than real, but to the extent it exists, doctors and nurses and other people with medical training tend to the patients' bodies.
Ms.
Fazio-McGrory takes care of their psyches.
She is a comforter, a counselor, a reality check, a broker of services, a massager of the system.
She helps patients, and sometimes her own colleagues, cope.


RESULTS PLUS
SPEED SKATING  Sundstrom Has Edge  Becky Sundstrom of the United States won the 1,000 meters and took third place in the 1,500 to take a commanding overall lead in the World Junior Speed Skating Championships yesterday in Seinajoki, Finland.
Sundstrom, 18, from Glen Ellyn, Ill., was timed in 1 minute 25.59 seconds, beating Anna Friesinger of Germany by 0.17 seconds in the day's opening race.
Sundstrom, who also won the 500 on Friday, leads over all with 129.718 points going into today's 3,000-meter final.
Friesinger is second with 131.076 points. (AP) BLAIR TRIUMPHS AGAIN: Bonnie Blair won her 500-meter race yesterday for the second day in a row at a World Cup meet in Inzell, Germany.
Blair, a five-time Olympic champion, clocked 40.73 seconds for a close victory over Canada's Susan Auch (40.76). (AP)


Kari E. Chin, Gil A. Chachkes
Kari E. Chin, the daughter of Christine Kemble-Chin of Corona, Queens, and Astley G. Chin of Mount Vernon, N.Y., is to be married today to Gil A. Chachkes, a son of Esther and Israel Chachkes of Manhattan.
Rabbi Aaron Raskin is to perform the ceremony at Congregation Mount Sinai in Brooklyn.
The bride, 25, graduated from Georgetown University and received a law degree from New York University.
She is an associate at Haight, Gardner, Poor &amp; Havens, a law firm in New York.
Her father is a photographer in Mount Vernon.


Dressing Long and Lean
This spring's coat dress is slim and shapely.


Extremities: Really Big Wave, Really Bad Wipeout
How not to ride a wave: It was his first wave of the day, at Maverick's, half an hour south of San Francisco.
It has been a year of the biggest waves in a decade in California, with storms sending huge swells to the coast.
Big-wave surfers tend to use big boards, 10 feet 6 inches in this case, compared with an average 6 feet or so, and have to cope with speed, and fear.
Jay Moriarity, 16, pictured above, got stuck in the lip of the wave when he should have been halfway down the face.
The wind caught his board and threw it up in the air a moment after this photo was taken.
Moriarity went down with the wave and actually hit bottom, something that almost never happens with a wave this size.
It was one of the worst-looking wipeouts anyone had seen.
But he wasn't hurt; he rested and then caught eight more waves that day.
Four days later at the same spot, one of the best big-wave surfers, Mark Foo, was killed when he wiped out on a smaller wave.


Manager Issues Ultimatum to Cantona
ERIC CANTONA, banned from soccer until October for attacking a fan, will be finished for good if he steps out of line again, the manager of his English club said yesterday.
"He has done a crazy thing but he has been punished," Manchester United Manager ALEX FERGUSON said.
"He knows that if he doesn't conform now he is finished anyway."
United imposed its own suspension on the 29-year-old Frenchman even before the English Football Association's decision Friday to ban Cantona until Oct. 1.
Seconds after being expelled during the game at Crystal Palace a month ago, Cantona exploded in reaction to the taunting of a 20-year-old fan.
He leaped over a barrier and aimed a two-footed, karate-style kick at the fan and followed it up with a punch.


Phlox and Peanuts: Can't Stop With One
SINCE there is a trend toward growing native plants in a garden, this might be a good time to take a brief inventory.
The object is to be sure that the best native varieties are included in plantings.
If a bit of enthusiasm can be allowed here, one flower should be a must for every garden: phlox.
No problem in selecting.
There are so many kinds of phlox, it is easy to choose one sort to satisfy whatever wishes the gardener has.
And who knows, the phlox selected might do so well that another, then another could be picked out.
The entire garden, of course, does not have to be phlox, but it's possible.


On Tiptoes, U.S. Shies From Salinas as Head of Trade Group
The Clinton Administration has determined that its candidate to head the World Trade Organization, former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico, stands no chance of winning, and the White House is searching for a graceful way to drop its support.
Officially, the Administration insists that it is still behind Mr.
Salinas, who was struggling for the post even before he was blamed for ignoring many of the economic problems that brought on Mexico's financial crisis.
But several top Administration officials say the competition between Mr.
Salinas and two other candidates, a top civil servant from Italy and a South Korean economist, has resulted in a stalemate.


Reading Between the Emotional Lines
THE man in the mismatched clothes and greasy hair stared into space while explaining to the judge, in an eerie monotone, why he should be released from the mental hospital.
After rambling for about five minutes, he put a hand to his forehead and began to weep.
"I don't deny the fact that I'm sick," he cried.
"But I'll do anything to stay out of the hospital. I don't get any better in the hospital."


Mullen Brothers Among Award Winners
JOEY and BRIAN MULLEN, brothers who grew up playing roller hockey in New York City and went on to long and successful National Hockey League careers, and the longtime amateur hockey executive BOB FLEMING are the 1995 winners of the Lester Patrick Award for outstanding service to hockey in the United States.


When the Weather Calls for Earthy Fare
ON a brisk winter day, I'd much rather sit down to a plate of braised lamb shanks and beans than some chic new dish made with monkfish and cilantro.
At this time of year, I want solid, earthy food, like a good stew, which can be mopped up with boiled potatoes, rice or a chunk of peasant bread.
Lamb shanks are an inexpensive and underused cut, but they are showing up with increasing frequency on the menus of restaurants.
They are delicious baked in the oven with white beans and served under a crust of bread crumbs, rather like a cassoulet.
A dark beef stew is another favorite, flavored with orange and rosemary and served with baby carrots and mashed potatoes.


Mexico Party Aide Arrested in Killing Of Candidate in '94
In the strongest indication yet of a political conspiracy in the slaying of Mexico's leading presidential candidate last year, federal agents charged a 28-year-old former employee of the governing party today as the second gunman in the shooting.
The charging of a second suspect with murder and a disclosure about tampering with evidence mark a complete reversal from the previous Government's claim that the candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio, was the victim of a lone, deranged assassin.


For Every Beat There Is a Fashion
From Cab Calloway zoot suits to Elvis Presley sideburns to Sid Vicious leather pants, rock-and-roll and fashion have always gone hand in hand.
You are what you listen to, but no one can tell what you listen to unless you wear the right accouterments.
Fans of each style of music have their own uniform: tie-dyes and faded jeans for Deadheads; small backpacks and logo-emblazoned T-shirts for ravers; flannel shirts and secondhand clothes for grunge rockers, baggy jeans and hooded sweatshirts for rappers.
Intentionally or not, most styles of music cater to a fashion sensibility.
For decades, the only clothing that record companies and musicians made was concert T-shirts, which could sometimes be found in record stores.
But this is the age of MTV, when music lovers are introduced to a band's image at the same time they are introduced to a band's music.


A Wave to the Past
Marcelled hair of the 1920's never looked like this.


Jewish Immigration Group Gets New Chairman
Avraham Burg, a young and outspoken Labor member of Parliament, has been appointed acting chairman of the Jewish Agency, the influential but troubled body that oversees Jewish immigration to Israel.
The "acting" modifier will be dropped in June when the appointment is expected to be ratified fully by the agency and its sister body, the World Zionist Organization.


Guardians In Disguise
A masked ball at Doubles to benefit Save Venice Inc., Feb. 16.


For Manley, Life Without Football Is Impossible to Tackle
Dexter Manley is in uniform, all right it is orange and says "County Jail." He has crack cocaine to thank for his last six disoriented months, but at least he can toss and turn on a cot now.
Just like week, he was curling up on a doormat.
Manley has met the enemy and it is 6 feet 4 inches, 260 pounds out of Oklahoma State: him.


Police Officer And a School Join Forces
Founded 61 years ago, the Modern School, the oldest private school in Harlem, is located in an immaculate building on 152d Street between Broadway and Amsterdam.
But neither the school nor the street has escaped the daunting problems of the neighborhood.
Enrollment at the Modern School has dwindled, but the principal, Sondra Carter, attributes that to the economy.
Some parents cannot afford the $2,900 tuition.
And the street outside has become one of the most drug-laden in the area.
Students are used to hearing gunshots and watching arrests outside their classrooms.


A Lively Port
FISH RESTAURANT ++  (212) 864-5000; 2799 Broadway, at 108th Street; $; American Express, Mastercard, Visa


The Liberal Who Loathes the Government's Debt
Senator Tom Harkin, who grew up poor in rural Iowa, is an unabashed old-fashioned prairie populist, a liberal who believes in government and ran for President in 1992 as a champion of liberal causes.
Yet here he was on Thursday announcing that he would support the balanced-budget amendment, the scourge of most liberals, who oppose the measure for the threat it poses to government programs, including Social Security.


Wall Street; A Fertility Drug Grows Scarce
MARIE M. DUENAS learned last week that her mail order pharmacy had been cleaned out of her drug.
"I feel like an addict," she says, explaining her anxiety.
Ms.
Duenas counts herself among the fortunate, however.
She has enough Pergonal -- one of the most widely prescribed fertility-boosting drugs in the United States -- left over from previous failed attempts at fertilization to try again.
In her efforts to become pregnant the 28-year-old Bostonian quit a public relations job three years ago.
Women like Ms.
Duenas and many doctors prescribing Pergonal are baffled and angry at the severe shortage of the drug.
Pergonal and Metrodin are the two best-selling fertility drugs made by Ares-Serono S.A. of Switzerland.
Infertility affects more than 2.5 million American couples and Zev Rosenwaks, director of the Center for Reproductive Medicine at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, faults Ares-Serono for failing to stockpile a contingency supply of Pergonal as the company began a changeover to a purer version of Metrodin.
"It has created needless anxiety for many patients," he says.


FULL-TEXT TV
Max Frankel's ode to C-Span was long overdue (Word &amp; Image: "Full-Text TV," Feb. 5).
It is a university of the air, and quite a bargain at 39 cents a year!


Tech Notes; Innovations on Innovations
EVEN as auto makers promote air bags and seat belt "pre-tensioners" as potential lifesavers in severe accidents, they are contemplating replacements.
New "smart bags" and "smart belts," which are supposed to be far more efficient than the current designs, are under development and might appear in cars within the next few years.
Unlike existing air bags, which inflate the same way regardless of the type of crash, the smart bags are being designed to inflate in various ways, depending on the circumstances -- or even not to inflate if no one is around to be saved.


The Best Ex-Job In the City; After 13 Months Out of Office, Dinkins Is Basking in Affection
When he occupied the cozy office in City Hall's northwest corner, David N. Dinkins was fond of saying that no job was better than being Mayor of New York City.
But in the 13 months since he left office, Mr.
Dinkins appears to have found an even better job: former Mayor.
Everywhere he goes these days, Mr.
Dinkins finds himself basking in the glow of New Yorkers' affections.
He cannot walk down the street or enter a restaurant without someone shaking his hand and wishing him well.


NO SEX. NO DRUGS. BUT ROCK 'N' ROLL (KIND OF)
Dawidoff's only criticism of the young women in the group Point of Grace was that they are bland.
Does he have any idea that there are thousands of parents who have "bland" kids and are exceedingly thankful for it?
These kids do not show up in court as the result of drug busts, do not burden society with the care of unwanted pregnancies or the ending thereof, do not get AIDS as the result of promiscuous sex, homosexuality or drugs.


SOFTIES
Sweaters and satin are the new mix for day - all the better if a sliver of skin shows midway.


Reaffirm the Affirmative
AFTER A GENERATION OF EXPERIMENT with "affirmative action," Americans all the way up to the Supreme Court are recoiling from the idea.
Many have concluded that the effort to make amends for past discrimination has itself become racist or sexist, creating expectations of group entitlements that offend the principle of individual right and merit.
What began as a desire to assist the handicapped in the race of life has often been misrepresented as a guarantee of success.
American society is still plagued by the inequalities and inefficiencies that slavery and bigotry bequeathed.
But it had better redefine the ends and means of affirmative action before passion overwhelms all reason.
I have active experience in the matter.
As editor of this newspaper, I took some affirmative actions while resisting others.
We energetically pursued greater diversity in our staff and made important progress.
But I resented the annual inquiries from professional societies that reduced the issue to a crude numbers game: How many blacks had been hired?
How many women or Hispanics had been made supervisors?
What, I asked in return, of the gifted female writer who didn't want to supervise?
Should Haitian blacks be listed with American blacks?
How to categorize a colleague with a Hispanic name and a Jewish mother?


Budget Amendment Will Handcuff Presidents
To the Editor:
Newt Gingrich's "Beyond the 100 Days" (Op-Ed, Feb. 22) celebrates halftime achievements of the Republican Contract With America.
Mr.
Gingrich is right to celebrate now.
Who knows how much will be there for him to celebrate at the end of the 100 days, what with the Senate's Democrats slowly waking up and even moderate Republicans (of whom there are a few left) having second thoughts about some of the radical ideas coming sometimes from both sides of the House?


February 19-25; The Pitter-Patter of Ordovician Feet
When a team of scientists from the British Geological Survey discovered some tiny footprints in the ancient hardened mud near the border between England and Scotland, they little imagined that they were seeing traces of one of the first invasions of land by multicellular animals.
But paleontologists who examined the tracks have concluded that the footprints were probably made by arthropods resembling modern centipedes.
The surprise is that the tracks were laid down in ashy volcanic mud about 440 million years ago -- some 50 million years earlier than previous estimates of the arrival of multicellular life on land.


Profile; A Physicist Is Propelling Microsoft Into Cyberspace
Russ Siegelman's passion is chess, but he hasn't had time to play it lately.
Instead, he is pondering the Microsoft Corporation's next big move -- into cyberspace.
An aggressive player, Mr.
Siegelman is putting different pieces into play, moving toward what he hopes will be checkmate: making the Microsoft Network king of the on-line universe.


Marcia Schirazi And Mike Lewis
Marcia Schirazi, a hospital administrator in Rochester, was married there last evening to Brig.
Gen.
Myron S. Lewis, a lawyer in Rochester.
Rabbi Judy Lewis, a niece of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the Strathallan Hotel.
Mrs.
Lewis, 57, directs the weight management center at Strong Memorial Hospital.
She graduated from Boston University and received a master's degree in public administration from the State University College at Brockport, N.Y.
She is a daughter of the late Lea and Meyer Miller.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


O Jin U, the Defense Minister Of North Korea, Is Dead at 77
O Jin U, the North Korean Defense Minister and long-time army leader in perhaps the most militarized country in the world, died today.
He was 77.
The cause of death was cancer, the official Korea Central News Agency reported.
Mr.
O received treatment for lung cancer in Paris in October.


Ellen Sulzberger Straus, Founder Of First Telephone Help Line, 69
Ellen Sulzberger Straus, who was active in Call for Action and other nonprofit organizations and in the communications industry, died on Friday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
She was 69 and lived in midtown Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said her husband, R. Peter Straus.


Magical 4 Weeks Continuing For Perry
The improbable run of Kenny Perry continued today, winding its way 40 feet up the hill at Riviera's storied last hole, climbing toward the cup as though guided by radar, or an unseen hand, and crashing into the bottom of the cup for a 68 and a one-stroke lead in the Nissan Open.
Again, for the third time in his last three tournaments, Perry enters the final round with the lead.
At Pebble Beach three weeks ago, it was three strokes.
Last week at the Bob Hope Classic, it was two strokes.
Now, it's one stroke, on the basis of his mystical 40-footer at the 18th.


Kalpana Joshi, 81; Struggled for India
Kalpana Joshi, a Bengali who was prominent in India's struggle for independence from British rule, died on Feb. 8 in Calcutta.
She was 81.
Mrs.
Joshi, whose maiden name was Dutt, was born in the town of Sripur in what was then the Bengal region of India.
Sripur is now in Bangladesh, 50 miles north of the capital, Dhaka.


Cindy Sternklar, Jacob Worenklein
Cindy Sternklar, a lawyer in New York, is to be married this evening to Jacob J. Worenklein, a managing director at Lehman Brothers, the New York investment bank.
Rabbi Jacob Kret is to officiate at the Essex House in New York.
The bride graduated from Brooklyn College and received her law degree from Yeshiva University.
She is a daughter of Lila and Jack Sternklar of Belle Harbor, Queens.


Devils Avoid Some Embarrassment by Eking Out a Draw
With the embarrassing prospect of losing to the second-worst team in the league staring them straight in the face, the Devils woke up in the late stages this afternoon at Byrne Meadowlands Arena and salvaged a 3-3 tie with the Washington Capitals.
The Devils, despite a dreadful effort for most of the game, overcame two Washington goals 20 seconds apart early in the third period and a two-goal deficit, scoring twice within the last four minutes.


Pueblo Nuevo: Housing Hero In Crisis
For two decades, on the frayed streets of the Lower East Side, Pueblo Nuevo was seen as a builder of dreams.
As the community's largest nonprofit manager of low-income housing, it transformed more than 40 troubled buildings into co-ops for the poor.
It kicked out drug dealers, rehabilitated buildings and gave people the pride of ownership.
But now, because of allegations of financial mismanagement and fraud made by several former employees, a number of Pueblo-managed buildings have opted to manage themselves, reducing the number operated by the agency by about 30 percent.


THE CUBAN-AMERICAN PRINCE
"ARE YOU GONNA HAVE A quince?" If you're a teen-age girl in Cuban-American suburbs west and south of Miami, 15 is more than a birthday, it's a major life decision.
In the balance: a year of preparation, hundreds of guests, thousands of dollars, and the production of a pageant featuring you and some equally flustered boy, 14 other teen-age couples, an hour of precision choreography and your anxious father.
Oh, and then there's the video.
What makes a modern suburban Cuban girl want to go through all this?
"A lot of girls don't," explains Mirla Freire, 1994 winner of the Miss Quinceanera Latina contest.
"They'd rather take the money from their parents and go on a cruise or a trip."


Business Diary: February 19-24
THE ECONOMY Greenspan Speaks, and Stocks Chalk Up Another Round Number On Wednesday, Alan Greenspan spoke the magic words that people have waited a year to hear: the economy, he told Congress, "may finally be slowing." What he meant -- or what the markets assumed he meant, because he wields such vast power that he's got to be vague -- was that the Federal Reserve may be ready to stop tightening the screws with that drumbeat of interest-rate increases.
And the next day, the stock market, which stalled out a year ago when those rate rises started, chalked up another milestone, with the Dow industrials closing over 4,000 for the first time ever -- and, yes, inched to another record on Friday.
Whoop-de-do, some traders said -- no inflation, no recession, smooth sailing.
But others cautioned that perhaps any celebration is premature.
After all, the Dow is up just 0.8 percent in 13 months.


Roberta L. Tross, Michael L. Cook
Roberta Lynn Tross and Michael Lewis Cook, who are lawyers in New York, were married last evening at the Westbury Hotel in New York.
Rabbi Irving Spielman performed the ceremony.
The bride is a vice president and the general counsel of "American Playhouse" and "P.O.V.," television programs on PBS.
She graduated cum laude from Boston University and received her law degree from Fordham University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Tross of Fort Lee, N.J.


The World; The Right Hon. Twerp Debates the Windbag
One of the delightful things about the British Parliament (besides the sight of grown-ups hissing and stamping their feet) is that its members can always be counted on to heap interesting abuse on each other.
In a fine example from the 1980's, for instance, Denis Healey declared that to be criticized by Geoffrey Howe, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, was like being "savaged by a dead sheep."


Same Creature Discomforts Plague the New City Pound
Animal lovers heaved a sigh of relief when the city's dogcatcher resigned after 100 years of service, hoping a new agency would bring a more meticulous and caring approach to the job.
But the Center for Animal Care and Control, which took over dealing with stray dogs and cats on New Year's Day, is already drawing criticism for inadequate care, bad record-keeping and assembly-line euthanasia.


Home Life


Habitats/631 Park Avenue; A Wreck Amid the Elite
AMID the Park Avenue mansions and limestone apartment houses of the abundantly well-to-do, there sits a small stuccoed building that was once a town house.
This house was humiliated, first by the stripping off of the ornament over its windows -- a decoration that still exists on its twin building just to the south -- and then by a first-story coating of what appears to be sheets of black Melmac, some kind of hard plastic whose surface is now, strangely, peeling.


When 'Allons, Enfants' Equals 'Come On, Kids'
The producers of "Les Parents Terribles," the Jean Cocteau revival starring Kathleen Turner, which opens in April at the Barrymore Theater, have renamed the play "Indiscretions," a choice so far from a literal translation that the surrealistically inclined Cocteau might have reveled in its illogic.
And last December, Miramax Films, the distributor of Robert Altman's film "Pret-a-Porter," decided to use the title's English translation, "Ready to Wear," on the assumption that American audiences would be put off by the French title.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
A first novel is a tiny entrant in a big lottery, and its odds of success are equivalent to the chances of a ticket holder in a multimillion-dollar sweepstakes.
Michael Ridpath's FREE TO TRADE (HarperCollins, $23) has beaten the odds.
His agent got excited, passed the word around and put the manuscript up for auction.
In short order, it was purchased by a British publishing house and some 20 foreign publishers, and Mr.
Ridpath was an instant millionaire.
Is it that good?


Alternative Shoulder Chic
Wendy Mullin, who calls herself an "arts and crafts kind of girl," sells the clothes and musical accouterments she designs in record stores.
Now, guitar straps with her "Built by Wendy" label are highly coveted stage ornaments for alternative rockers.
Both Kim Gordon and Thurston Moore of Sonic Youth use them, and Hole's bass player, Melissa Auf der Maur, last year gave them as Christmas gifts to other members of the band.
Ms.
Mullin, 24, is from Chicago.
She began designing the straps after her roommate brought home a guitar last summer with a strap that Ms.
Mullin said was ugly.
She copied its basic construction and added scraps of vinyl.
Now, she uses a variety of colors like blue, pink and red (and for glam-rockers, gold and silver) and has perfected the material: nylon webbing with vinyl sewn on.
Many of the straps have added attractions: small pictures of people like Kate Moss or a series of heavenly cherubs.


Scaling Down for a Big Job
GARRICK OHLSSON'S career as a pianist seems inextricably wedded to the name and music of Frederic Chopin, and so far the marriage has been happy.
Mr.
Ohlsson achieved international prominence by winning the prestigious Chopin Competition in Warsaw in 1970.
His longtime involvement with the composer's music is now culminating in several series of concerts and a series of recordings surveying all of Chopin's published works for solo piano.
Mr.
Ohlsson will present the second of his six Chopin recitals at Alice Tully Hall this afternoon, playing two towering creations, the 24 Preludes (Op. 28) and the "Funeral March" Sonata (Op. 35).
The sixth of nine volumes in his recorded survey on Arabesque, containing the nocturnes, is due in April.


Smithsonian Puts on Douglass Exhibit
The life of the abolitionist and civil rights crusader Frederick Douglass is commemorated on the 100th anniversary of his death with an exhibition at the Smithsonian's National Portrait Gallery, in Washington.
The show, "Majestic in His Wrath: The Life of Frederick Douglass," will run through Nov. 19.
More than 80 paintings, sculptures, photographs, engravings and documents, along with personal memorabilia, will trace Douglass's life from his birth into slavery in about 1818 through the years following his escape to the North in 1838, when he began his lifelong struggle for the abolition of slavery and for full equality for African Americans.


Documentation: What to Keep and What to Toss
MONTHS from now, well after tax returns have been filed, 1 to 2 percent of taxpayers will get audit notices from the Internal Revenue Service.
At that point, a good set of records is invaluable.
Avery E. Neumark, director of employee benefits and executive compensation for Rosen Seymour Shapss Martin &amp; Company, a New York accounting firm, recalled a recent audit in which he represented a doctor.


Collie on Highway, Rescuer and Happy Ending
THE collie running loose along a busy road escaped the attention of most passers-by, but Marilyn Horton sensed trouble.
Ms.
Horton, a 31-year-old poet and former English teacher, has volunteered at an animal shelter and is intuitive about dogs.
Seeing the stray collie, she feared that it would be hit by a car.
It was a cloudy January Sunday, and Ms.
Horton was out walking her own dog, Nicky, a 7-year-old mixed breed she adopted from the Elmsford Animal Shelter.
Hoping to avert an accident, she entrusted Nicky to a friend, and with a neighbor, set out by car to find the collie.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
PRINTS ON PARADE
Prints by Warrington Colescott, Frances Myers and Richard Ziemann are on display through March 15 in the Joseloff Gallery of the University of Hartford in West Hartford.
Their work is represented in the collections of the Yale University Art Gallery, the Fogg Art Museum at Harvard, the Brooklyn Museum, the Whitney Museum of American Art, the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Museum of Modern Art in Manhattan, as well as the Victoria and Albert Museum in London.
Mr.
Colescott's 40 years as a printmaker have produced a catalogue of human foibles executed in wildly decorative and piercingly satiric fashion.
His wife, Frances Myers, off in an entirely different direction, has on view a mixed media installation on the life of St.
Teresa of Avila, a 16th century Carmelite nun who had ecstatic visions.
Mr.
Ziemann specializes in finely detailed images of woods, trees and the natural world.


'I've Walked in Their Shoes'
He started around 8:30 A.M., shortly after his wife, Lana, left for work.
For Curt Blefary, the drink of choice was whisky, a blend called Philadelphia.
He took it with barely a splash of water and a handful of ice.
By noon, he would have finished more than a quart.
With the drink came the bitterness, and with the bitterness, the depression.
While he drank, Blefary read the sports sections, checking, enviously, on the progress of his former big league teammates and friends.
Gene Michael was running the Yankees.
Bob Watson was in Houston.
Frank Robinson in Baltimore.
He would see no-name players -- guys who had less talent and less notoriety than he'd had -- get hired as coaches or instructors.


Premieres for Flutist and Harpsichordist
ONE of the world's most famous flutists, James Galway, is coming to call.
The Irish virtuoso will appear with the New Haven Symphony in a 8 P.M.
Tuesday concert in Woolsey Hall at Yale to present the Connecticut premiere of Lowell Liebermann's Flute Concerto.
He will also add his own interpretation of the Bizet-Bourne "Carmen Fantasy", and speak at a free 7 P.M. pre-concert session.
The music director Michael Palmer will complete the concert program with Beethoven's Leonore Overture No. 3 and the Sibelius Seventh Symphony.
The number for reservations is 776-1444.
A reknowned French artist is playing at 8 P.M.
Friday in Wesleyan University's Crowell Hall in Middletown.
Although Huguette Dreyfus is often called Europe's First Lady of the Harpsichord, and she has recorded some 20 compact disks on the Denon label alone, this will be her first American recital in more than two decades.
Her program lists Suites of Rameau and Couperin, Bach's "Italian Concerto", four Scarlatti Sonatas and -- with the university organist Ronald Ebrecht -- Antonio Soler's Concerto for Organ and Harpsichord (685-3355).


Sydney
To the Editor: I was glad to see the Russell Hotel mentioned in the article about Sydney ("What's Doing in Sydney," Jan. 22).
I stayed there a few years ago, and when I go back to Australia, I won't even try to find any other accommodation in Sydney.
I found the Russell a most charming hotel, of the kind that gives you the feeling that you are the guest of a relative rather than the customer of a commercial establishment.
Saying the hotel is in a "central location" does not quite explain how convenient it really is.
The Russell is at the heart of the Rocks, the site of Australia's first settlement, and in itself a delightful place to visit.
It is also steps away from Circular Quay, thus the terminals of all harbor cruises, excursion buses and city buses.


Child's Portion; Displaced by the Welfare Wars
Behind the national welfare debate is a deep but usually unspoken moral and political question: What will happen to children whose families are denied part or all of their cash benefits?
Over a half-century, social welfare has evolved into a system so vast and complex that for every innovation, regardless of motivation, the law of unintended consequences prevails.
The real impact of House Speaker Newt Gingrich's approach may have less to do with philosophical disagreements over the merits of orphanages than with the reality of how much cash is available to care for young refugees from the welfare rolls.


We Should Call It Profit Care, Not Managed Care
An article on Jan. 29 about a San Francisco hospital's adjustment to the new era of managed care drew a range of letters, most from physicians, citing the moral difficulties, both for individual doctors and for American society, of keeping an eye on the bottom line when a suffering patient awaits help.
To the Editor:


Marriage Penalty Likely to Decline, if Not Disappear
FEW inequalities in the Federal tax code strike as many people as the marriage-tax penalty, which may be reduced this year if Republicans in Congress have their way.
The outcry for repeal among taxpayers, even those adversely affected, appears more muted than for other types of tax relief, however.


Memorial to Martyrs With Iroquois Ties
THERE is nothing particularly unusual about the congregation, the clergy or the Roman Catholic Masses at the mission church in Lake Peekskill, a hamlet in Putnam Valley.
But the worshipers are surrounded by the day-to-day symbols of a strikingly different culture.
The mission church, the Church of the North American Martyrs, is built like an Iroquois long house, with a barrel-shaped ceiling and false-face masks staring outward to ward off evil spirits.
On the outer walls, along with the Lord's Prayer and the Hail Mary translated into Iroquoian, plaques and carvings commemorate eight French Jesuits who were tortured and tomahawked or burned at the stake between 1642 and 1649 while helping spread Christianity in North America.


The Nation; Who Wears the Blindfold at Executions?
FIRST they'll swab your arm with an antiseptic.
Then, a dose of sodium thiopental puts you comfortably to sleep, as if you were going under for surgery.
You won't feel a thing when the second injection, of pancuronium bromide, paralyzes your muscles.
And you'll be utterly numb by the time the third, potassium chloride, stops your heart.
That's the new American way of death by execution.
Lethal injection is the preferred choice in 22 of the 37 states authorizing capital punishment for first-degree murder.
Legislators in New York, which is poised to become the 38th, also favor lethal injection as the most acceptable method.


We Should Call It Profit Care, Not Managed Care
An article on Jan. 29 about a San Francisco hospital's adjustment to the new era of managed care drew a range of letters, most from physicians, citing the moral difficulties, both for individual doctors and for American society, of keeping an eye on the bottom line when a suffering patient awaits help.
To the Editor:


At Expo, Gear Galore And Advice on Its Use
An astonishing array of fishing tackle and advice from experts on how to use it are major attractions of the World Fishing and Outdoor Exposition, which opens Wednesday afternoon at the Rockland Community College Field House here and closes at 7 P.M.
Sunday.
Billed as the largest sportsmen's show in the Northeast, Expo, as it is commonly called, has more than 400 exhibitors whose wares include fishing tackle, hunting and shooting gear, outdoor clothing, boats, marine electronics, canoes, camping equipment and sport utility trucks.
In some instances, there are show discounts for the items displayed.
Also on hand will be guides, outfitters and lodge operators from the United States and Canada.


What Actually Happened
To the Editor:
Walter Reich, reviewing Lawrence L. Langer's books "Admitting the Holocaust: Collected Essays" and "Art From the Ashes: A Holocaust Anthology" (Jan. 29), states that during the last five decades Holocaust writers "have too frequently lost sight of what actually happened." I beg to differ.
Historians like Christopher Browning ("Ordinary Men"), journalists like Gitta Sereny ("Into That Darkness"), novelists like David Grossman ("See Under: Love") and Louis Begley ("Wartime Lies") and editors like Alan Adelson and Robert Lapides ("Lodz Ghetto"), among many others, have provided explicit details "of what actually happened, of how the suffering was actually felt, of how death actually came, of who actually caused it and of how it was actually carried out."


Damascus Citadel
To the Editor: In "The Timeless Heart of Damascus" (Jan. 8), William E. Schmidt identifies the Umayyad Mosque as "the spiritual and historical core of Damacus." From the perspective of many Syrians, and particularly the residents of Damascus, the more appropriate "heart" of the city is the Damascus Citadel.
The Citadel, which served as the city's defense against countless invasions for over a millennium, has in recent years been under restoration and therefore technically off-limits to tourists.
But Schmidt is wrong to describe it as merely "the fortified redoubt" which was built in the era of the great Muslim warrior Saladin to fight off the incursions of the Crusaders.


Men Deny Police Account Of Incident in Paterson
Three men who said they witnessed the shooting of an unarmed 16-year-old Paterson youth by a police officer on Tuesday night disputed the police account of the incident yesterday, saying they saw no struggle between the teen-ager, Lawrence Meyers, and the officer who shot him.
The men who raised questions about the police version of the incident were Glenn Reed, 34, a cousin of Mr.
Meyers; Kiante M. Hall, 19, and Thomas Jackson, 20.
Mr.
Hall and Mr.
Jackson were with Mr.
Meyers at the time and were arrested at the scene on charges of drug possession.


Jumbo Bids Flying in War for Park Hot-Dog Stands
Forget fiber optics, cyberspace and virtual reality.
The city's sizzling growth industry these days is hot-dog carts -- in and around Central Park.
Bidding wars have sent rents for concession stands soaring, parks officials say.
Two brothers bidding against each other sent the rent for the cart on the north side of the Metropolitan Museum of Art to $192,200 this year, up $78,000 from last year.
It will climb to $296,200 in 1997.
But hang on to your soda.
The space for the hot-dog cart on the south side of the Met will go for $288,200 this year, double last year's rate, and $316,200 in 1997.


Quayle Will Be Heard
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 11 editorial on the withdrawal of former Vice President Dan Quayle from the Republican Presidential race attributes false sentiments to me I would like to correct.


An Entire Industry Is Unfairly Convicted
In "Brookhaven Trial Raises Ethical Issues"  [ Jan. 15 ]  your reporter has tried, convicted and sentenced the entire Long Island real-estate community in his speculative essay that seeks to suggest a regional pattern of corruption following the repudiated testimony of self-admitted swindler John McNamara in Brookhaven Town.
While the two elected officials who were tried on McNamara's testimony have been exonerated by a jury, the real-estate industry has no such relief.
It is ironic that your article offers no examples of inferred corruption among the leaders of the real-estate community, but allows others to cynically speculate about "What ifs" and "who knows?" The article is more a lynching of an entire industry than a factual review of Long Island real-estate practices.


Miller Highway Counts Its Days
The Federal and state governments have just spent more than $65 million to reconstruct Miller Highway, the elevated portion of the West Side Highway from 59th to 72d Streets.
But the highway, which would impede access to a development planned by Donald J. Trump, may be torn down and relocated -- at a cost of $100 million.
Earlier this month, a key permit for sewage hookups was granted to Riverside South, the 16-building complex that Mr.
Trump plans to build on former rail yards abutting the highway; while Mr.
Trump will pursue the project even if the road stays up, he and other supporters of Riverside South are eager for it to be moved inland and placed below grade level.


For Social Security Recipients, Higher Rates Loom
AS their 1994 tax returns are prepared, many retirees will discover that a much bigger chunk of their Social Security benefits is taxable.
The situation is quite irksome to Joseph Feinberg, a retired salesman who works part-time to supplement his retirement income.
He puts in roughly 20 hours a week at the Bergen Tile Corporation in Brooklyn and would be happier to work more hours to earn more -- if those extra earnings were not going to tip the Social Security scale and devour more of his benefits.


A.C.L.U. Fights Plan For a New Caller ID
SEVEN years after Bell Atlantic brought the nation's first statewide Caller ID service to New Jersey, the company wants to go itself one better.
It has petitioned the Board of Public Utilities for permission to offer a program that shows telephone callers' names, as well as their numbers, on a recipient's display unit.
But the plan is being fought by the American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey, representing groups ranging from the New Jersey Coalition for Battered Women and the Coalition Against Sexual Assault to the hundreds of thousands of New Jerseyans with unlisted numbers.


BEST SELLERS: February 26, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
52
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
2
36
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
3
1
BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road with an exotic dancer.
4
4
3
ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D.
James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a prestigious London publishing house.
5
3
6
KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The police detective Alex Cross pursues a serial killer and the kidnapper of his niece.
6
5
2
DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) In words and pictures, the story of a girl whose head unexpectedly sprouts a daisy.
7
7
3
HOME SONG, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $23.95.) The appearance of his unknown biological son threatens the serenity of a man's family life.
8
6
5
ACCEPTABLE RISK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $23.95.) A researcher's quest for the ultimate drug to treat depression has devastating consequences.
9
11
133
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
10
13
21
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
11
8
6
EYES OF A CHILD, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $24.) The apparent suicide of a San Francisco man leads to courtroom encounters.
12
9
3
ALWAYS A RECKONING, by Jimmy Carter. (Times Books/Random House, $18.) A collection of poems by the former President.
13
10
5
THE MURDERERS, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Putnam, $23.95.) A series of murders and "willful deaths" beleaguers the Philadelphia police force.
14
1
THE CAT WHO BLEW THE WHISTLE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $21.95.) Aided by his two cats, Jim Qwilleran investigates embezzlement and a murder.
15
12
7
SELF-DEFENSE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tries to help a woman who says she is being stalked.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
I WANT TO TELL YOU, by O.J.
Simpson. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) The former football star, now on trial for murder, responds to letters he has received.
2
5
9
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
3
2
3
RAGING HEART, by Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $18.) An account of the marriage of O.J. and Nicole Brown Simpson.
4
3
20
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
5
8
25
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
6
4
5
INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE, by Ronald Kessler. (Pocket, $23.) Anecdotes about events at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue during the past 30 years.
7
11
51
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
8
12
2
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
9
14
21
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
10
6
17
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of belief, suffering and hope.
11
10
13
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
12*
7
5
ALL MY CHILDREN, by Gary Warner. (General Publishing, $25.) A scrapbook of photographs and mementos about the long-running television show.
13
9
9
NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker. (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J.
Simpson as remembered by a friend.
14
13
62
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
15
15
22
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
92
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
3
44
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
2
2
THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE. (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips.
4
4
6
FOOD, by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Information about recipes, nutritional menus and diets.
5*
1
THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) Marketing techniques.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 11, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE AGE OF CONSENT, by Geoffrey Wolff. (Knopf, $22.) In Mr.
Wolff's sixth novel Teddy Jenks, a 13-year-old child of the children of the 1960's, is transformed by his sister's near suicide into the historian of his family's emotional life.
AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS: Seven Paradoxical Tales, by Oliver Sacks. (Knopf, $24.) More tales of the engrossingly abnormal by a generous, humane neurologist who explores the peculiar thinking of both physician and patient.
BETWEEN FRIENDS: The Correspondence of Hannah Arendt and Mary McCarthy, 1949-1975, edited by Carol Brightman. (Harcourt Brace, $34.95.) The 26-year correspondence of two extraordinarily bright, active, articulate women who thought a lot and gossiped no little.
A CROOKED MAN, by Christopher Lehmann-Haupt. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An attentive thriller by a daily reviewer for The Times; it debates the decriminalization of drugs in an up-to-date Washington environment.
THE CUNNING MAN, by Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) The hero of this intelligent, entertaining novel, a chronicle of personal and social change in Toronto, is a doctor whose superb diagnostic skills rest on shamanism and Platonism as well as scientific medicine.
DOSTOEVSKY: The Miraculous Years, 1865-1871, by Joseph Frank. (Princeton University, $35.) Volume 4 of this planned five-part biography excels in providing a cultural, literary, social and biographical context for Dostoyevsky's works.
FRANCO: A Biography, by Paul Preston. (Basic Books, $37.50.) A huge, all-inclusive life of the outright winner of Spain's civil war, the shrewd, lucky dictator of his country for almost 40 years.
FROM TIME TO TIME, by Jack Finney. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Simon Morley, hero of Mr.
Finney's idiosyncratic novel "Time and Again," returns to scramble the pages of history by trying to prevent World War I.  KWANZAA AND ME: A Teacher's Story, by Vivian Gussin Paley. (Harvard University, $18.95.) A wise kindergarten teacher, long committed to integration, re-examines its value by paying attention to what children and parents say.
TERRIBLE HONESTY: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s, by Ann Douglas. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) The great big city in the great good time, analyzed with broad scope and minute complexity as the locus of the national psyche when Americans attacked the conditioned responses of the pre-1914 world.
THE UNUSUAL LIFE OF TRISTAN SMITH, by Peter Carey. (Knopf, $24.) Its tough, spare, considered language sustains this big and thoughtful novel, whose hero learns that imperialism is universal, bad for weak and strong alike.
THE WEDDING, by Dorothy West. (Doubleday, $20.) A novel by an 87-year-old survivor of the Harlem Renaissance; its main subject is the subtle assumptions of color, class and status in a summer colony of upper-class black families.


February 19-25: Taking Charge; Haiti Cripples its Army And Schedules its Elections
Complaints that the government of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide was slipping into inertia ended abruptly last week when the Haitian president strengthened his grip on the creaky machinery of state.
One day after elections for a new parliament were set for June 4, he crippled the Haitian Army by summarily dismissing every officer above the rank of major.


Eating More Carrots Can Only Do You Good
To the Editor:
I would like to correct three erroneous inferences that might be drawn from the Feb. 22 Personal Health column on carotenoids.


Waking Up to a New Audience
VETERAN disk jockeys Ken Webb and Jeff Fox are sitting in a small, airless studio in Times Square bantering the early-morning hours away on WRKS-FM's "Wakeup Club" and filling the time by teasing their female newscaster, holding name-that-group-type contests, reading faxed requests from listeners and even, every once in a while, giving their attention to a particular song.
But if the "Wakeup Club" patter seems pretty standard, what is going on at WRKS -- known as KISS-FM -- is anything but.
Last month, KISS-FM (98.7) became the first station in New York to specifically target an older black audience by limiting its entire playlist to a mixture of what it calls smooth R&amp;B, defined as current mellow rhythm-and-blues songs from artists like Anita Baker and Barry White, and classic soul dating to the late 1960's.
In the radio business and among advertisers, the format change has made KISS-FM the city's most talked-about station.


Who Opens the Door? Some Candidates Feel Shut Out
Panathy Hill was an experienced city corrections guard with four years of college, training in security and self-defense and a license to carry a gun.
But when she tried to get a part-time job as a doorman, she says, she was told the job was off-limits to women.
Last year, Ms.
Hill sued Douglas Elliman Gibbons &amp; Ives, a leading management company, for discrimination.


A Step-by-Step Guide to Coping With the Form 1040
FILLING out a tax return is scarcely one of life's great joys, but today's powerful, easy-to-use personal computers and software ease the task greatly -- even for people who know very little about either tax law or computers.
After a simple set-up instruction, the program loads itself onto the machine's hard disk and configures itself for the system.
Jan M. Rosen of The New York Times used the CD-ROM version of Turbotax in consultation with Mark Goines, vice president of Intuit, which publishes Turbotax, and Guy MacNeill, group product manager for Turbotax, to prepare this return for a hypothetical two-income New York family.
The program includes 60 I.R.S. publications and The Money Income Tax Handbook to help taxpayers find the deductions, credits and strategies that lower taxes.


Don't Scream During the Play
THE HIPPOPOTAMUS By Stephen Fry. 292 pp. New York: Random House. $22.


'It Runs in the Family' in Croton Falls
IF there is a stage counterpart for the new wave of dumb and dumber American movies, it's the old English sex farce of the dumbest kind.
And the playwright Ray Cooney may be the most exhaustively drilled practitioner of a genre that depends on mistaken identities, double-entendres, idiotic puns and the accessibility of doors.
With titles like "One for the Pot," "Not Now, Darling," "Move Over, Mrs. Markham," "Two Into One" and "Why Not Stay for Breakfast?" all written or partly written by Mr.
Cooney, who has a tendency to act in them as well, such scraps of mechanical mindlessness go on for years in London; perhaps weeks, if at all, in New York.
Few of the barometers of the differences in comic sensibilities among English and American theatergoers seem so dead on.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  House
1.
Taxes: Vote on a Democratic proposal that would allow self-employed people to deduct part of their health insurance costs from their taxes and would cap the tax breaks available under a program that encourages the sale of radio and television stations to members of minority groups.
Rejected 234 to 191, Feb. 21.
2.
Taxes: Vote on a bill to restore a tax deduction that would help self-employed people buy health insurance and repeal a tax break encouraging the sale of radio and television stations to members of minority groups.
Approved 381 to 44, Feb. 21.


Two String Ensembles Are Sharing the Spotlight
TWO of the world's finest string quartets are visiting Purchase College this week, one in celebration of an anniversary, the other in a farewell concert.
The Tokyo Quartet, busier than ever in its silver anniversary season, has chosen quartets by Mozart and Beethoven for its recital today at 3 P.M.
The Cleveland Quartet, the Tokyo's senior by a year, will play Schubert, Beethoven, Turina and Dvorak on Friday at 8 P.M.
But the music will be tinged with regret, since the ensemble has announced its retirement at the end of the year.
Friday, in other words, may well be the last opportunity to enjoy the sort of performances in the county that a Boston Globe critic once dubbed "second to none."


House Hunters' Friend: Buyer Brokers
WHEN Denise and Fred Weiss started looking for a house last spring, instead of going to a traditional realtor, they enlisted the services of a buyer broker.
"At the time we were in a rental apartment in Riverdale with our two young sons, and it was tight," said Mrs.
Weiss who is 29.
"Interest rates were low, so we figured it was a good time to get into the housing market. When we discussed it with our families, my brother-in-law, who is an appraiser, suggested that we go with a buyer broker."


Simpsoniana
THIS CASE IS ABOUT A RUSH to judgment," the defense counsel, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., told the jury in the O. J. Simpson trial, and repeated the phrase twice to drive it home.
The term was the title of a 1966 book by Mark Lane, among the first to suggest a conspiracy in the Kennedy assassination, and has been used ever since to describe hasty assumptions.
Fred Shapiro of the Yale Law School library checked the Westlaw data base, which covers court cases back to the 1700's, and found no earlier legal use of the term.
"If Mark Lane didn't coin the term," Fred says, "at least he popularized it."


A New Way to Pay for School Extras
WHEN the school budget was too tight to provide students with the equipment or programs parents wanted, they organized P.T.A. bake sales or booster club fund-raisers.
Today, they are setting up private, nonprofit educational foundations as well.
The New Jersey School Boards Association counts more than 50 public school foundations that have sprung up around the state in recent years.
They have raised millions of dollars, and their ranks are growing.
"This was one of the hottest topics of 1994," said Patricia Petracco, associate director of policy for the association.
"We've gotten inquiries from every corner of the state."


CURVES
The jacket is the key to the new spring suit.
Cut close to a woman's body, it hugs the bosom, the waist, the hips.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Fashions of the Times  Magazine Part 2


A Standby Takes an Adventurous Turn
UNTIL now the three-year-old Nocello's was not an unusual restaurant.
Its neighbors in Northport were attracted by reliable Italian food, amiable service and live music and dancing on weekends.
Regulars have been happy with standbys like a huge portion of tender veal parmigiana lightened by fresh diced tomatoes and accompanied by linguine in a spunky tomato sauce.
Yet on a recent evening more exotic fare was spotted in the dining room.
At a nearby table a man waxed enthusiastic over a ragout of wild mushrooms surrounded by crisp triangles of polenta and topped with rabbit, wild boar and venison sausages.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Now, the Education Mayor
IN an unusually candid display of frustration, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines recently complained to Albany lawmakers that he was tired of having to "go across the river and genuflect" to get money from City Hall.
Mr.
Cortines had come from the school system's headquarters in Brooklyn, just across the East River from City Hall.
Seventeen months into the job as head of the nation's largest school system, he was chafing under the constant attempts by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to gain more control of the city's schools.


Wall Street; But What Will You Do for Me Next Year?
BUOYED by the defeat of health care reform and its pipeline of new drugs, Merck's shares hit a 52-week high of $42.75 on Friday before closing at $42.375.
Merck's shares have outperformed other drug stocks since Labor Day, rising about 30 percent compared with 25 percent for the industry, said Hemant Shah, a pharmaceutical analyst at HKS in Warren, N.J.


FIRSTS: Chinese Ulysses
A Peking professor, Xiao Qian, 85, has just finished the first full Chinese translation of James Joyce's "Ulysses," three volumes with 5,840 footnotes.
"Joyce used nearly 30 languages, including Sanskrit and Greek, in 'Ulysses,' " Xiao says.
"I think he made it deliberately difficult."


En Route to the Grassy Knoll
AMERICAN TABLOID By James Ellroy. 576 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Once Again, a New Building For a High School Is Tardy
On Thursday, a week after the opening of Townsend Harris High School's new building was postponed for the fourth time since September, construction officials met in the "lateness office," where tardy students will, eventually, be sent.
"It was just coincidence," said the spokesman for the School Construction Authority, Albert A. Gallardo.


The Shape of Spring
When the supermodel Tatjana strolled down the runway at the Calvin Klein spring show in the suit at right, I scribbled in my notes "womanly!" Next to other numbers I wrote comments like "models look curvier . . . clothes hug the hips . . . so many exposed middles!" And it wasn't just at Calvin Klein's show.
There they were, bouncing down all the runways of Paris, Milan and New York.
Fashion aficionados are already acclimated to the return of the bosom, since big breasts have been a prominent style point for several seasons.
But now all the curves a woman can possibly have are being accentuated.
Such is the power of fashion.
This is the spring of The Woman.
Suits have been shaped to fit so snugly that no curve is constrained.
Often midriffs peek out beneath tops so tight they appear to have shrunk.
Skirts and pants end at any length but are usually skinny.
The rage for the slipdress continues unabated.
Designers, notably Donna Karan, have even made it seem fairly plausible as a foundation for executive dressing.
Pastels like blue, apricot and particularly pink are now haute fashion.
And an unabashedly sinuous fabric like satin is deemed quite d'accord for day wear.
Designers who tend toward fantasy are right at home in the current milieu: the desire for fluttering femininity can be fully expressed in over-the-top creations of tulle and point d'esprit.


Foreign Affairs; Boris, Bill &amp; Voltaire
Ever since the French philosopher Voltaire carried on his famous 18th-century pen-pal correspondence with Russia's Catherine the Great, there has been a special relationship between the Russian and French elites.
It was no accident that Tolstoy wrote the opening of "War and Peace" in French.
After spending a day talking to delegates at the United Nations, I've been thinking that this old romance between Russia and France might have some modern-day applications.
American officials have been grumbling lately about a budding Russo-French alliance.
Russia and France have teamed up against the U.S. to push for an early lifting of the U.N. sanctions on Iraq.
They have also worked in tandem at times to ease the isolation of Serbia.
The Russians have even probed about joining NATO on the same terms as France -- being part of the alliance but not part of its military command.
And the Russians have clearly taken to the French national sport of poking a stick in Washington's eye to assert independence.I don't believe there is any real Russo-French strategic alliance; it's more a coincidence of pragmatism.
But I do share the view, first articulated by Sovietologist Stephen Sestanovich, that the future of Russian foreign policy is "Gaullist" -- that somewhere in the psyche of the Kremlin is a desire to create the sort of relationship with the U.S. that France enjoys.
That is, to be seen as broadly part of the Western camp, but still free to define Russia's interests on a range of issues as different from America's -- without creating a crisis in the relationship every time it does.
I think this Russian impulse should be nurtured.
The problem with U.S. policy toward Russia today is that in order to persuade Congress to give aid to Moscow, Presidents Bush and Clinton oversold the relationship.
Our aid to Russia, they declared, was intended to make Russia just like us.
When Russia does not behave like us, there are two responses.
The "I-love-the-cold-war" crowd immediately calls for severing aid.
Just last week, Newt Gingrich declared that "we should cut off all aid to Russia" if it sells nuclear reactors to Iran.
The Clinton Administration responds with the other extreme -- apologizing for Boris Yeltsin, saying in effect: "Don't pay attention to that man behind the curtain. He's not really drunk. Chechnya was just an aberration, a speed bump on the road to democracy and blah, blah, blah." All of which only signals to the Russians that there is little cost to misbehavior.
In other words, right now we have a conceptual approach toward Russia that does not fit the reality of Russia.
We keep checking to see if the Russians have become like us, and when we discover they haven't we want to either punish them in ways that only hurt reformers there, or turn a blind eye.
It is time we started thinking of Russia as being more like France and less like us -- but only if the Russians are ready to do the same.
You see, the French may disagree with us on issues.
They might even kick our spies out of Paris.
But it is virtually unimaginable that France would ever take a position that threatened fundamental U.S. national security interests.
It is unlikely that Russia today would take such a threatening position -- but not unimaginable.
The reason for that difference is that France is an established democracy and an established state.
It knows exactly who it is and where its borders are.
The modern Russian state is basically three years old.
It is not an established democracy, and it is not certain about its borders or who its citizens are.
Russia today is America in 1779.
That is 10 years before we agreed on a constitution and 82 years before we had our own civil war.
It would actually be healthy for us to think of Russia the way we think of France.
That is, drawing red lines to define fundamental U.S. interests (and I think banning nuclear reactors for Iran is one of those), while learning to raise our eyebrows in other cases and say of the Russians what we say of the French: "What else do you expect? It's the French."
We have to understand the difference between a pain in the neck and a mortal threat.
But we will only be able to treat Russia like France after the Russians learn to respect red lines the way the French do.
Russia can only be France in our eyes after Russia decides who Russia is.


A.T.M. Rape Suspect Arrested
The police yesterday arrested a Brooklyn man they say is responsible for raping at least seven women whom he also robbed and abducted at automated teller machines across central Queens over the last five months.
The man, Derrick Bonner, 22, of 354 Van Siclen Avenue in East New York, was charged with 11 counts each of rape, possession of a deadly weapon, sodomy and sexual abuse, and several counts of robbery.
The police said that he stole about $10,000.


Budget Amendment Will Handcuff Presidents; The Great Rollback
To the Editor:
It is not necessary to observe that the aim of the Gingrich Republicans (Op-Ed, Feb. 22) is to repeal the legislation of Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal and all the social programs enacted since (including despite disclaimers, Social Security; the balanced budget amendment takes care of that).
This much is obvious and widely acknowledged.
But their aim goes deeper.


White House Seeks to Blunt New Questions on Nominee
The White House today tried to repel the latest assault on Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr., accusations that he played a marginal but knowing role in the infamous Tuskegee experiment in which 400 black men were denied treatment for syphilis to study their progress of the disease.
Dr.
Foster, President Clinton's choice to be Surgeon General, emphatically denied the accusations that he knew the details of the medical experiment three years before it was publicly disclosed in 1972 in news reports.
The charges were made by the Family Research Council, a conservative group that has been at the forefront of efforts to defeat the Foster nomination.


Battling for Hearts and Minds at Time Warner
BY now, the lesson is clear to every chief executive in corporate America: build friendly relations with your company's big shareholders or else.
All the stormy C.E.O. departures at major corporations in the last few years -- General Motors, I.B.M., Eastman Kodak, Morrison Knudsen and others -- have followed much the same script.
Performance lags, the stock-price languishes and the major shareholders apply pressure to the board of directors, who then oust the hapless chief executive.
Yet even by today's standards, which require executives to woo major shareholders, Gerald Levin, the chairman and chief executive officer of Time Warner Inc., has been a busy man lately.
The 55-year-old Mr.
Levin, a lawyer known as a cerebral manager, has courted big Time Warner shareholders in a flurry of meetings and discussions since late last year.


NO SEX. NO DRUGS. BUT ROCK 'N' ROLL (KIND OF)
Reading Nicholas Dawidoff's article "No Sex. No Drugs. But Rock 'n' Roll (Kind Of") (Feb. 5), I took notice of the so-called "morality clauses" inserted into the contracts of many of these performers.
The four Kewpie dolls known as Point of Grace may lead exemplary Christian lives, but I imagine that Beethoven -- who drank and fought and swore and was no doubt sexually impure, but who composed the "Missa Solemnis," the Ninth Symphony and the late quartets -- was a damn sight closer to God than these young women.
KELLY YOHO Rochester


Ancient to The Ancients
IN the year 146 B.C., the Romans destroyed two great cities with singular thoroughness and brutality.
One, famously, was Carthage.
The other was Corinth, leader of the league of Greek cities that had tried to resist Roman imperial expansion.
Under the command of the consul Lucius Mummius, the Romans destroyed Corinth's buildings, killed the men, sold the women and children into slavery, and shipped its art treasures back to Italy.
For about a hundred years Corinth lay broken and abandoned.
Finally, in 44 B.C., no longer willing to let the site's strategic position go to waste, the Romans founded a colony there.
Although the proletarian colonists did not much appreciate the former greatness of their new home (they did grasp the value of the works of art they scavenged among the ruins and shipped back home), by that time more sensitive Romans were well aware of the barbarity of Mummius's act.
One historian, writing in the early first century A.D., offers as proof of the man's boorishness his warning to the transporters of paintings and statues by the greatest artists of the Greek world that they would have to replace anything they broke.


Textbook Case In New Jersey: Political Art Of Bond Deals
The Securities and Exchange Commission's lawsuit last week involving New Jersey municipal bond deals might well have been subtitled "How to Peddle Your Political Influence for Fun and Profit."
More than any other document so far in the S.E.C.'s two-year investigation of the $1.5 trillion municipal bond market, the New Jersey complaint diagrams the intricate machinery that shuttles money between power brokers and bond brokers, enriching both of them at the expense of the citizens -- taxpayers, toll payers, fee payers -- who must ultimately repay the bonds their governments have issued.


Driver Fatigue Deserves More Serious Attention
To the Editor:
Your sketchy and somewhat cynical treatment of driver fatigue ("Don't Sleep and Drive," Business Diary, Jan. 22) trivialized a serious issue.
Driver fatigue is a problem facing our entire society, and it is more complex than meets the eye.
In many cases, how many hours you drive may not be as important a contributing factor as how much sleep you had the night before or the quality of that sleep.
The National Transportation Safety Board's report, which your story cites, includes an estimate of the incidence of truck driver-fatigue that is not substantiated by the research.
In fact, in the materials accompanying its report, the board acknowledged that "little data are available to estimate the incidence of fatigue in the less serious heavy truck accidents." Unfortunately, this important qualifying statement was ignored in the rush to sensationalize the fatigue issue.
THOMAS J. DONOHUE  Alexandria, Va., Jan. 25  The writer is president and chief executive of the American Trucking Association.


Now Look Who's Taunting. Now Look Who's Suing.
Men don't dare leer or mock their female colleagues at the sensitivity training sessions that Stephen M. Paskoff conducts at workplaces around the country, where he preaches civility between the sexes and compliance with anti-discrimination laws.
But during these same seminars, some women, without compunction, spit stereotypic insults at the men.
And one female manager, who hired Mr.
Paskoff to quiet gender strife among her employees, displays on her office wall a snide cartoon that says, "If you want the job done right, get a woman to do it."


How Muggsy Overcame Long Odds
In the den of their splendid suburban home here, the one distinguished by, among other items, an outdoor basketball court done in teal and purple, the colors of the Charlotte Hornets, two short guys were conducting a television interview -- a mock television interview, that is.
The two short guys were father and son.
The subject of the interview was Tyrone Bogues Sr., known universally as Muggsy, who is 30 years old and stands 5 feet 3 inches tall.
He is the speedy, stocky, starting point guard for the Hornets, the team's most valuable player last year and the shortest player in the history of the National Basketball Association.


Should We Even Consider Such Questions?
To the Editor:
Let us hope that your article on cost-accounting to arrive at the value of a human life was tongue-in-check ("How Much for a Life? Try $3 Million to $5 Million," Jan. 29).
Otherwise, it speaks the unthinkable.
We begin with the axiom that life is priceless; setting a dollar value on human life is the ultimate obscene greed.


THE NATION: A Cash Crop Since Columbus; Gone Are the Days When Tobacco Brought Only Wealth
Anyone wondering why it has taken so long for the tobacco industry to suffer legal defeats, many decades after the dangers of smoking became well known, should consider two factors: a history dating from America's colonial days and the economics of a $50 billion business.
The economics, however, are shifting, and not just because judges this month stripped away the legal defenses that have enabled the tobacco companies to avoid having to pay a dime in court-ordered damages.
The costs of treating lung cancer, emphysema and other tobacco-related illnesses are only now outweighing the revenues to tobacco farmers and corporations.
Even so, the industry's extraordinary prosperity still commands deference from politicians, arts groups and investors.
And those who think themselves free of tobacco's stain sometimes find tobacco is closer than six degrees of separation.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Safety for Sheep's Beard
PEOPLE wondering how budget cuts affect Long Island need look no further than Sagamore Hill.
The home of the 26th President was closed on Presidents' Day.
"That doesn't quite make sense does it," said Mike Cerrati of Oyster Bay, who toured the grounds of Theodore Roosevelt's house last Sunday with his family.
"If they opened it only one day a year shouldn't it be Presidents' Day?"


Citizens Debate Change In a Maryland Suburb
Designed almost 30 years ago as a planned suburban community, distant enough to avoid the urban sprawls of Baltimore and Washington but near enough to commute, Columbia has more than met expectations.
Streets are safe.
Schools provide quality education.
Shopping is convenient.
With a population approaching 80,000, Columbia would be Maryland's second-largest city, after Baltimore.
And that is the problem, says the Columbia Municipal League, which wants to transform Columbia from a collection of 10 villages and its current form of government, a community association, into a city, with a mayor, city council and direct accountability to voters.


THE CONCILIATOR
What if Jimmy Carter were indeed engaged in an all-out campaign to win the Nobel Peace Prize ("The Conciliator," by Jim Wooten, Jan. 29)?
We root happily for those who race around tracks, swat balls or leap into piles of sawdust "going for the gold." We openly admire the individual who spends years in a pool or on an ice rink in pursuit of a goal.
DAVID CRANE Stockbridge, Mass.


BENEFITS
Honor for Mike Richter  MONDAY -- A dinner and an auction honoring Mike Richter, a goaltender for the New York Rangers, will benefit the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
The event, at Mickey Mantle's Restaurant, 42 Central Park South, will begin with cocktails at 6 P.M.
Items to be auctioned include trips, sports items and events.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 876-4384.
TriBeCa Ball  TUESDAY -- The second annual TriBeCa Ball to benefit the New York Academy of Art will be held at the academy, 111 Franklin Street (between West Broadway and Church Street).
The evening, which will begin at 7, will include dinner and dancing as well as an auction of masks decorated by Peter Max, Tom Wolfe and Mary McFadden, among other artists and writers.
Tickets, $350, or $100 for dessert and dancing only, from (212) 966-0300.
Learning Is the Mission  TUESDAY -- The National Center for Learning Disabilities will benefit from a dinner honoring Roberto C. Goizueta, the chairman of the Coca-Cola Company, at the New York Marriott Marquis, Broadway at 46th Street.
A reception starts at 6:30 P.M., and there will be an auction of items including trips, a car, dinners and parties.
Tickets, $450, from (212) 362-2233.
Concert for Tibet House  TUESDAY -- Tibet House, a cultural organization, will benefit from a concert at Carnegie Hall with David Byrne of Talking Heads, Jimmie Dale Gilmore, Allen Ginsberg, Philip Glass and others.
Curtain is at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, from $20 to $75, from (212) 247-7800 or (212) 213-5592.
Tokyo String Quartet  WEDNESDAY -- The Tokyo String Quartet will celebrate its 25th anniversary at a concert at Carnegie Hall that will also benefit the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center Pediatric AIDS Clinic.
The concert will begin at 8 P.M.
Tickets, $10 to $30, from (212) 222-4843.
Lincoln Center Laureates  WEDNESDAY -- Richard L. Gelb, the chairman of Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Frederick P. Rose, the vice chairman of Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, will receive Lincoln Center Laureate awards at a black-tie dinner and concert.
The evening will begin at Avery Fisher Hall with cocktails at 5:30, followed by dinner at 6:15.
The concert, with the soprano Kathleen Battle, the baritone Thomas Hampson and the Orchestra of St.
Luke's, will begin at 8.
Tickets, $750, from (212) 875-5460.
Cooking Tips at Christie's  WEDNESDAY -- An auction at Christie's, 502 Park Avenue at 59th Street, will benefit Upward Inc., which provides educational and recreational programs in Harlem.
The evening will begin with drinks at 6.
The auction, starting at 7:30, will include a home entertainment center, cooking lessons and trips.
Tickets, $100, or $50 for people under 30, from (212) 337-9265.
Echoes of Games Gone By  WEDNESDAY -- A cocktail reception and a silent auction featuring sports memorabilia and equipment will be held at the Club at Madison Square Garden to benefit the social, educational and vocational youth programs of Phipps Houses, a nonprofit developer of housing for families of low and moderate incomes.
The event begins at 6:30.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 243-9090, extension 292.
New York Flower Show  WEDNESDAY -- A preview of the 1995 New York Flower Show on Piers 90 and 92, Hudson River at 55th Street, will be held from 6 to 9 P.M., to benefit the Horticultural Society of New York.
The event will include a cocktail buffet and dancing.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 410-5008.
Award for Vernon Jordan  WEDNESDAY -- Vernon E. Jordan Jr., the civil rights leader, will receive the Anti-Defamation League's Democratic Legacy Award at a dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The event begins at 6:30 with cocktails.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 885-7868.
For Contemporary Art  THURSDAY -- Independent Curators Inc., which arranges contemporary art exhibitions in the United States and abroad, will celebrate its 20th anniversary with a benefit dinner at Industria Superstudio, 775 Washington Street (between West 12th and Jane Streets).
Elizabeth C. Baker, the editor of Art in America, and Toshio Hara, the founder of the Hara Museum of Contemporary Art in Tokyo, will be honored.
Drinks at 6:30 will be followed by dinner at 8.
Tickets, $300, from (212)254-8200.
Fashion Show  THURSDAY -- A dinner and fashion show to benefit the Staten Island Children's Museum will be held at LiGreci's Staaten, a restaurant at 697 Forest Avenue, Westerly, S.I.
The proceeds will be matched by the City Cultural Challenge Initiative.
Tickets, $50, from (718) 273-2060, extension 147. 'Carnival in Venice'  THURSDAY -- Executives That Care will sponsor a "Carnival in Venice" at the 200 Club in the International Toy Center, 200 Fifth Avenue at 23d Street.
The event will benefit God's Love We Deliver, a group that delivers free meals to homebound people with AIDS.
A cocktail reception at 7 will be followed by a buffet dinner and dancing.
Tickets $75, from (212) 213-4102.
For the World's Children  THURSDAY -- Cooking classes to benefit Unicef will be held at Les Celebrites in the Essex House Hotel, 160 Central Park South.
Instructors will include the chefs Michel Troisgros, Jean-Andre Charial and Michel Roux.
The one-hour classes, limited to 10 students each, will be held between 9 A.M. and 1 P.M.
A food fair will be held from 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Tickets, $150 for cooking classes, $50 for the food fair, from (212) 856-0115.
Hispanic Federation Benefit  THURSDAY -- A black-tie gala to support the Hispanic Federation of New York City, a health and human services organization, will be held at the Plaza Hotel.
The evening will begin with a cocktail reception at 6:30.
Tickets, $500, (212) 888-7003.
For Texas and the Arts  THURSDAY -- The St.
Ann Center for Restoration and the Arts and Texas Independence Day will be celebrated at a 7 P.M. concert at the Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity, at Clinton and Montague streets in Brooklyn Heights.
Jimmie Dale Gilmore and Guy Clark, Texas singers and songwriters, will perform.
A dinner will follow at 9 at the Williamsburg Savings Bank, 1 Hanson Place at Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn.
Tickets, $200, or $40 for the concert alone, from (718) 834-8794.
Concert for Hunter Symphony  THURSDAY -- Joseph Kalichstein will perform Beethoven's "Emperor" Concerto at a benefit concert for the Hunter Symphony Endowment.
Clayton Westermann will conduct.
The performance, which starts at 7 P.M., will be at the Hunter College Assembly Hall on 69th Street between Park Avenue and Lexington Avenue.
A dinner will follow.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 772-4085.
Dinosaur Dance  THURSDAY -- The American Museum of Natural History's 1995 winter dance will benefit the museum's scientific research programs.
The event, beginning at 9 P.M., will include drinks, dinner and dancing to the Bob Hardwick Orchestra.
A silent auction featuring designer clothes, jewelry, circus tickets and dinners will also be held.
Tickets, $130, from (212) 769-5166.
Antique Show  FRIDAY -- The Yorkville Spring Antique Show will be held at the Jan Hus Presbyterian Church, 351 East 74th Street, to benefit the church's homeless outreach program.
Hours on Friday are from noon to 8 P.M.; Saturday, from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Tickets, $3, at the door.
Information, (212) 288-6743.
St.
David's Day Dance  FRIDAY -- A dinner-dance at the Waldorf-Astoria will benefit scholarship programs sponsored by the St.
David's Society.
The evening begins with cocktails at 6:30, followed by dinner and dancing at 7:45.
Black tie and decorations.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 924-8415 or (212) 924-3945.
Junior League Winter Ball  SATURDAY -- The New York Junior League's community service projects will benefit from its annual winter ball at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The black-tie evening will begin with cocktails at 8, followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $150, or $65 for dancing only, from (212) 288-6220, extension 267 or 285.
Shirley Verrett Sings  SATURDAY -- Shirley Verrett, the soprano, will give a recital in Walt Whitman Hall at Brooklyn College, Campus Road and Hillel Place, to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts.
A dinner at the college's student union building will follow.
The concert will begin at 2 P.M.
Drinks, in the penthouse of the student union, will begin at 4, and dinner will be served at 5.
Tickets, $150, or $25 for the recital only, from (718) 951-5291.
The Kitchen Sets a Table  NEXT SUNDAY -- The Kitchen, a performing arts center, will benefit from a performance by the playwright Robert Wilson and an auction and dinner at the Hudson Theater in the Hotel Macklowe, 145 West 44th Street.
Chairmen for the evening include Sydney and Frances Lewis, Arthur Gelb, Kitty Carlisle Hart and Harvey Lichtenstein.
The performance will begin at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $150, or $50 for the performance only, from (212) 255-5793.
China Institute  MARCH 6 -- A dinner and an auction of 130 Chinese and Western objects will benefit the China Institute, a cultural organization.
The evening, at Sotheby's, 1334 York Avenue at 72d Street, will begin with cocktails at 6, followed by dinner and the auction at 8.
Tickets $500, from (212) 362-2233.
For Contemporary Arts  MARCH 6 -- Two theater groups, the Home for Contemporary Theater and Art and the Creation Production Company, will benefit from a silent auction, dancing, musical performances and other entertainment at Here, 145 Avenue of the Americas at Spring Street.
A reception will begin at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 674-5593 or (212) 647-0202.
Community Service Society  MARCH 6 -- A black-tie dinner at the Plaza honoring Margaret L. Burden, David Rockefeller Jr. and Frank Savage will benefit the Community Service Society of New York.
The event starts with cocktails at 6:30.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 245-6570.
Celebrity Readings  MARCH 6 -- Vanessa Redgrave, Dick Cavett and other celebrities will read at a benefit for the New York City School Volunteer Program.
The event, at the Roundabout Theater, Broadway at 45th Street, will begin with drinks at 6:30 P.M., followed by the readings from 8 to 9.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 213-3370.


A QUESTION FOR: Sonny Bono
Q: Is Washington a big change from Palm Springs?
A: Oh, gosh, yes!
There's definitely a tradition here in every aspect of your life, especially if you're in Government, even if you're a lobbyist or if you work here or whatever.
There is a tradition and a protocol that is adhered to in restaurants, in the halls, in the city, and so there's a high awareness of tradition by the general public.
Even taxicab drivers, you know, they're all acquainted with every issue.
You just don't find that in California.
The minute you get into a taxi, they'll talk issues, and they'll have issues on the radio.
Whereas in Palm Springs, that's one of the most nontraditional towns.
The life style there is very loose and very casual.
It's a major culture shock.


February 19-25; A Child's Internet Sins Visited on the Parent
AMERICA ONLINE said on Tuesday that it had grown to 2 million customers, but it was really only 1,999,999.
I know because I was no longer one of them.
"Your account is inactive," said the notice on the screen one Sunday morning this month in crisp, full-color letters.
It gave an 800 number to call.


Corrections
An article and a chart yesterday about the Pentagon's recommendations for military base closings omitted, in some copies, one major installation that would be closed.
It is Brooks Air Force Base in San Antonio.


Barefoot and Booming


2 Boys Wreck School Buses in North Carolina
Two ninth-grade boys wrecked nine school buses in what one official called a "little demolition derby thing" that produced $25,000 in damage and a string of charges against the youths.
"The number of charges they are facing may keep them off the road for a long time," said the Transportation Director for Buncombe County Schools, Jim McCanless.


Washington
C-Span just doesn't do Washington justice.
Yes, it is a hard-working town, conservative by nature, where the overeducated meet to mull weighty matters in stately chambers and spend endless hours kicking around the meaning of it all, preferably on-air.


Corrections
The What's Doing column on Jan. 29, about Austin, Tex., misidentified the anniversary celebrated on March 2.
It marks Texas Independence Day; the Battle of San Jacinto was fought on April 21, 1836.


GENDER WATCH: Sex of A New Machine
The Little Engine That Could was female.
Thomas the Tank Engine is male.
Rusty, the newest addition to the cast of train characters on "Thomas the Tank Engine and Friends" is neither.
The creation of Britt Allcroft, Rusty is about to make a debut on videotape.
And the new machine is being billed as the first "gender neutral" train engine.
That's a brave gamble.
Small children are known for being conservative about gender, demanding boy things for boys and girl things for girls.
The same is true for adult conservatives who have been grumbling lately about public broadcasting, where Thomas and friends usually appear.
Rusty is going to need friends.


Homeless Camp Swept From DeWitt Clinton Park
Under a chilling mix of drizzling rain and swirling snowflakes, the longtime encampment of about 20 homeless people was rousted from DeWitt Clinton Park last week.
Park officers accompanied by city social workers conducted the sweep, the latest move in an ongoing fight between advocates for the homeless and neighbors who look on the park dwellers with fear and disgust.
As city workers quietly reminded people to remove their possessions, Jim Chavis crawled from a makeshift tent with his wife, Kelly Conway.
"I've been living in this park since July, and now they're running everybody out," he said.
"For some people, this is their home." Did he know where they would stay that night?
"Not really."


Phlox and Peanuts: Can't Stop With One
SINCE there is a trend toward growing native plants in a garden, this might be a good time to take a brief inventory.
The object is to be sure that the best native varieties are included in plantings.
If a bit of enthusiasm can be allowed here, one flower should be a must for every garden: phlox.
No problem in selecting.
There are so many kinds of phlox, it is easy to choose one sort to satisfy whatever wishes the gardener has.
And who knows, the phlox selected might do so well that another, then another could be picked out.
The entire garden, of course, does not have to be phlox, but it's possible.


Petition Excerpts: The Brazen 'Beast' of Corruption
Following are excerpts from a petition that was presented today by Chinese intellectuals who called for an independent inquiry into corruption in the Communist Party leadership, as translated from the Chinese by The New York Times.
Corruption appears to be a strange beast that likes to run counter to the flow, and the more it is opposed, the stronger and more brazen it gets.
The amount of money involved in graft is getting bigger and bigger, the rank  [ of officials involved ]  gets higher and higher, and the scope gets wider and wider, to the point where it pervades the entire society. . . .


Sanctions on Trade With Beijing Begin As Deadline Passes
Trade sanctions on more than $1 billion in Chinese goods, the largest punitive trade measure ever imposed by the United States, technically went into effect today as negotiations to avert a trade war passed a deadline set three weeks ago.
With trade negotiators from both sides still working in Beijing, and with prospects that the talks could continue even as the sanctions begin to be applied on Monday, neither Government openly declared that a trade war was on.


Baring your Midriff by Day
Designers in Paris, Milan and New York are intent on showing a swath of skin.


Curtain Up


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
96.95
97.25
104.80
per Dollar
German Mark
1.4615
1.4890
1.7101
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3903
1.4040
1.3480
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5885
1.5815
1.4887
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$376.25
$378.20
$378.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Red Storm Falls Short In Bid to Be Noticed
The St.
John's season has come down to this: Defeat either Syracuse on Wednesday or Georgetown next Sunday and hope the attraction of having a New York team in its post-season tournament will be enough to get the Red Storm a bid to the National Invitation Tournament.
That's the only hope remaining for St.
John's, following a disheartening 74-70 loss to ninth-ranked Villanova tonight at duPont Pavilion.


Jennifer Babcock, Ashley T. Griggs
Jennifer Cecelia Babcock, a daughter of Darrell and Sheila Babcock of Jidda, Saudi Arabia, was married yesterday to Ashley Thorndike Griggs, a son of Betsy T. Griggs of Ardsley-on-Hudson, N.Y., and the late Maitland L. Griggs Jr.
The Rev.
Charles Colwell performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of St.
Barnabas in Irvington, N.Y.


Russia, Iran and the Bomb
The United States, Russia and Iran are tangled in a nuclear thicket that threatens to impede disarming by Moscow while helping Teheran develop atomic weapons.
That would qualify as a first-class failure in post-cold-war diplomacy and arms control.
President Clinton, President Boris Yeltsin and members of Congress, all contributing to the problem, need to rethink their strategies.
Russia, desperate for hard currency and trying to keep its nuclear industry alive, wants to sell four nuclear reactors to Iran, which could use them to generate plutonium for bombs.
The Clinton Administration is trying diplomatically to get Moscow to cancel the deal outright.
Not satisfied with the Administration approach, some in Congress are eager to retaliate by cutting all aid to Russia, including help to dismantle its nuclear arsenal.


Streetscapes/Frank Freeman, Architect; After a Century, a Fond Remembrance
FRANK FREEMAN, a ruggedly individualistic Brooklyn architect, has finally gotten what his colleagues covet: an exhibit devoted solely to his own vigorous, richly modeled buildings.
But he designed most of them 100 years ago, and many of his bold designs now exist only in photographs.
The show runs through April 23 in the lobby of 1 Pierrepont Plaza, an office building at the corner of Tillary Street and Cadman Plaza West, near Borough Hall.
Organized by the nonprofit Rotunda Gallery, it is financed by the developers and managers of the building: Forest City Ratner Companies, Forest City Pierrepont Associates and First New York Management Company.


Ulster Debates Its Future, but Prefers Talking to Violence
Three days after the British and Irish Prime Ministers unveiled proposals for the future of Northern Ireland, the people of the province are still sharply divided along sectarian lines over whether they want to remain British citizens or become part of a new united Ireland.
But as they begin to digest the 58 proposals, while enjoying the sixth month of a cease-fire that has fanned hopes for a permanent peace, the Protestant majority and the Roman Catholic minority seem united on two points.
First, they prefer peace to the killings in pubs, bookmaker shops and back streets of Ulster.
Second, they want their political leaders to set aside anger and mistrust, sit down with each other and work out a permanent end to the strife that has killed more than 3,100 people since 1969.


A New Place To Pick Up a Piece Of Old Hollywood
GENE London, a costume designer, has been collecting the clothes of Audrey Hepburn, Grace Kelly and other Hollywood stars for the last 26 years. (He started with a trunk full of clothes given to him by Joan Crawford.)
Last year Mr.
London decided it was time to start a vintage clothing shop, with a portion of the profits going to charity.
In June he and his partner, John Thomas, opened the Fan Club, at 22 West 19th Street.


La Vie


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Dr. Alan J. Sholomskas; Treating Depression Among the Elderly
THE signs of depression can easily be mistaken for the normal signs of aging, making it difficult to recognize the disorder and get treatment for an older person.
But an estimated 1 percent to 3 percent of elderly people experience major depression, and the figures rise to 15 percent to 20 percent among older adults in hospitals and nursing homes, said Dr.
Alan J. Sholomskas, the recently named director of psychiatry at the new geriatric medical psychiatric unit at Masonic Home and Hospital in Wallingford.


For L.I.R.R. Killer, Privileges End but Wrangling Continues
He no longer has a telephone in his cell, but Colin Ferguson is still calling his lawyers several times a day, even as they argue over the appeal of his conviction in the Long Island Rail Road shootings.
The phone, installed when Mr.
Ferguson was acting as his own lawyer, was removed after his conviction on Feb. 17, jail officials said.


Coke's Great Romanian Adventure
IN winter, this city takes on a particularly grim tone.
The overcast skies, the leafless trees, the dirty buildings and the fine dust blowing in from the surrounding plains form a monochrome landscape that accentuates the poverty and struggle in the faces of so many people here.
But a familiar color dots this veil of gray -- the red of Coca-Cola.
It is the rare shop or kiosk in the capital here and throughout Romania that does not have a red circle poster with a Coke bottle in the middle, or a red awning, or red umbrellas, or windows lined in red stripes or red plastic cases stacked outside.


Symbolism of a Stain: A Dry-Cleaner's Story
FOR seven years, I brought my unclean clothes to Young's Cleaners on Third Avenue and 17th Street, and handed them to an unfailingly pleasant Korean man whom I called Mr.
Young and, later, John.
He would say, "No problem," as he handed me a ticket.
Then one day I stuck an open felt-tipped pen into the pocket of a favorite shirt and compounded the mistake by trying to wash out the stain.
When I finally brought it to Mr.
Young, he said, "Big problem," and he smiled with pure joy and his eyes -- well, his eyes actually seemed to light up.


Dead Mothers Walk
THE QUANTITY THEORY OF INSANITY Together With Five Supporting Propositions.
By Will Self. 211 pp.
New York: Atlantic Monthly Press.


Putting Aside Audit Fears For Big Payoff
ARE you being too conservative with your tax deductions? If so, you're not alone.
Although there are no Government statistics on the subject, tax professionals say that many taxpayers forgo perfectly legitimate deductions because they are afraid the write-offs will invite an audit.


Agonizing Over Disclosure of AIDS
Should an athlete's medical history be an open chart, a declaration of diagnoses from a torn rotator cuff to H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS?
Must a boxer, goalie, swimmer or point guard tell all in order to keep playing?
Or should the athlete keep the diagnosis to himself while risking disclosure in the media, as the late Arthur Ashe did, or suffer personal and financial reverses by confessing it, as Magic Johnson did.


Gangs Terrorizing East Timor Seen as Effort to Quell Dissent
Black-hooded gangs have rampaged through East Timor in recent weeks in what dissident groups say is a stepped-up campaign by the Indonesian Army to crush a popular separatist movement in the former Portuguese colony.
Human rights campaigners and exile groups have alleged that the Indonesian military is responsible for the terror campaign, in which gangs armed with knives and sticks and wearing black hoods have abducted and beaten dozens of people linked to the independence movement.


THE NEEDIEST CASES HEADLINE&gt;Dentists On Wheels Fill Needs Of Children
A typical tooth cleaning it was not.
The patient sprawled cheerfully in the chair, oblivious to the tray of sharp instruments at her elbow.
As the dentist applied a fluoride treatment, three spectators hovered.
"Brush my teeth! Brush my teeth!" they pleaded, peering into the gaping mouth of the 4-year-old patient, Tiffany.
Overhead, a cartoon featured dancing broccoli and beans singing tributes to healthy snacks.
But the vegetables went unnoticed as the spectators awaited their moments in the chair, when their molars would be scrubbed with Mighty Morphin Power Ranger polish.


The Art of His Choosing
Klaus Kertess, a pencil-thin, 54-year-old art curator and writer with a long, somber face and a gentle manner, steps onto the sidewalk in front of a Chicago hotel with the hesitant air of someone in foreign territory.
He looks up as an old brown Toyota swoops to the curb; he climbs in somewhat gingerly and sits beside the driver, a 39-year-old painter named Kerry James Marshall.
In search of small talk on a subject other than art, Kertess takes a cue from the music on the radio and starts a conversation about Chicago blues that, thankfully, lasts until they arrive 10 minutes later at an office building in an industrial neighborhood south of the Loop.
Once inside Marshall's third-floor studio -- a small room with a view of the Sears Tower, crammed with paintings, stools, tables and old paints -- Kertess gets down to the business at hand.
With a soft, graceful precision, he begins to grill Marshall, a black man whose elaborate paintings of urban life have made him one of Chicago's fastest-rising young artists.
"So when you start a painting, what do you do?" Kertess asks.


New Job, Controversy Find Howe Once Again
Steve Howe became the first striking major league player to enter a replacement spring training camp this morning when he exited from a white minivan to a maze of reporters, almost tripped over a garbage can and disappeared into the Yankees offices.
As usual, Howe supplied his own unique reasoning for his presence here.
The 36-year-old reliever said that as one element of his three-year probation from a drug conviction in 1992, he needed to secure legitimate employment in a structured environment, and the Yankees are assisting him by giving him a job in their ticket office.
Howe, the team's union representative, will receive a $772 weekly living allowance from the Yankees to sell tickets for games fielding men who are replacing the striking players.
He'll be permitted to use the facilities at Fort Lauderdale Stadium after the replacement workouts are finished.


February 19-25: Mexican Relief; The Austerity Cure May Be As Lethal As the Illness
Bailing out Mexico was hard enough for President Clinton, who bypassed Congress after he discovered that loaning $20 billion to a foreign nation that can't pay its bills is not part of the Contract with America.
But the bailout will be even harder for the Mexicans.
When the deal was signed last week, it included American requirements that Mexico keep its interest rates sky-high -- they were 50 percent last week -- balance its budget and get Washington's approval for almost any major economic move.The fear now is that the cure could be as debilitating as the disease, that Mexico may be plunged into a recession.


Watchers on the Net
To the Editor:
Re "Hacker and Grifter Duel on the Net" (Week in Review, Feb. 19): Your injured tone regarding Tsumomu Shimomura's cybernetic capture of Kevin Mitnick serves readers poorly.
Like a child who needs simplistic answers, you give us a hero and a villain so that we all might sleep better knowing the good guys are out there policing the Internet.


A Handicap Does Not Deter A Boy From His Dream
JAMAL SMITH started playing baseball when he was 5 years old.
He took up basketball and football at the age of 8.
Today, he is a 15-year-old freshman at Trenton High School and a member of the varsity wrestling squad.
What makes Jamal's athletic career special is this: when he was 17 months old, following an auto accident, his left leg was amputated just above the knee.


February 19-25: Olympian Blood; Debate about HIV Tests Sparked by Diver with AIDS
Greg Louganis, who won four Olympic gold medals in diving, has announced that he has AIDS.
His admission ignited a debate about whether athletes should be tested for the HIV virus, and whether he should have admitted he was HIV-positive at the 1988 Summer Olympics where he hit his head on the diving board and got a scalp wound that required stitches.


Don't Blame Israel for Creating Middle East's Suicide Bombers
To the Editor:
Re "Where Suicide Bombs Come From" (Op-Ed, Feb. 17):


The Turn Of the Thread
During a long career in engineering I have maintained an interest in the illustrative arts and have always been assured that the practitioners thereof are proud of their observational faculties.
Even so I frequently discover that in matters mechanical they have no conception of how things "go together."


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Reading between the emotional lines: A judge decides who goes free and who stays put in the city's mental hospitals.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Going after black baby boomers, KISS-FM finds a formula in classic soul.
And it's rising rapidly.


Baring your Midriff by Day
Cropped tops turn up in sporty versions.


Letters / Arendt and McCarthy; Friends in Adversity, Writers Write on Their Reviews
FRIENDSHIP often begins inauspiciously.
In 1945 Mary McCarthy's flip remark about Hitler incensed Hannah Arendt, a German-born Jew who had fled a French internment camp.
Yet politics drew them together.
"Let's end this nonsense," Arendt said three years later.
"We think so much alike."
"Between Friends" is a collation of 25 years of letters between them, edited by Carol Brightman and published last month.
Their relationship thrived on divergence and agreement -- an American orphaned at 6 and a European uprooted by Fascism.
The letters began in 1949, ending in 1975 with Arendt's death, and show two intellectuals translating Latin as well as trading gossip.


We Should Call It Profit Care, Not Managed Care
An article on Jan. 29 about a San Francisco hospital's adjustment to the new era of managed care drew a range of letters, most from physicians, citing the moral difficulties, both for individual doctors and for American society, of keeping an eye on the bottom line when a suffering patient awaits help.
To the Editor:


POP BRIEFS
Kevin Mahogany: 'Songs and Moments'  Enja; CD.


'Reflections of Eden'
To the Editor:
I would like to reply to Frans B. M. de Waal's review of my book, "Reflections of Eden" (Jan. 29).


Italian Theme With Lots of Potential
MAYBE restaurants should be rated the way it was once done on grammar school report cards, with personal attributes listed along with academic marks.
If such were the case, Grappa in Litchfield might earn grades along these lines: artistic ability (culinary skills) B, personal appearance (decor) B+, deportment (service) C, generosity (size of portions) C.
Grappa, the Italian-theme offspring of the highly publicized West Street Grill (further up the road on the Litchfield green), is ensconced in a Colonial-style house in the rear of a small shopping complex called Litchfield Common.
Next to the entrance of the clapboard house is a covered porch, to be an outdoor dining area come summer.
In the three dining areas inside, banquettes and booths, wall sconces draped in faux ivy and floral-painted exposed beams add a cozy charm.


The Hicksville Connection to Brooklyn (Downtrodden Division)
WE are like a lost tribe of Israel," Hadley N. Scottland of Jericho said. Only instead of wandering in the desert Mr. Scottland and his contingent were about to board a Long Island Rail Road train to Brooklyn. In hiking boots and pin-striped suits they stood, lined up beside the second garbage can past the stairs at the Hicksville station.
Every day they head for Flatbush Avenue while tens of thousands of other commuters head for Pennsylvania Station.
"We are the forgotten ones," Mr.
Scottland said.
And the frustrated ones.
Having to arise before dawn to insure a place to park, having to stand for most of the train trip and then arriving at a station that has no bathrooms makes these commuters liken their trip to a journey in a third world country.


The End of History?
To the Editor:
Bernard Knox begins his review of Donald Kagan's "On the Origins of War and the Preservation of Peace" (Jan. 22) with a reference to Francis Fukuyama's now-famous 1989 article, "The End of History?" Mr.
Knox says that Mr.
Fukuyama's announcement of the end of history meant "the end of full-scale wars between great powers." Nothing could be further from the truth.


Hong Kong Hotel
To the Editor: I enjoyed Craig R. Whitney's brief remembrance of Hong Kong's Repulse Bay Hotel in "Christmas on the Road" (Dec. 25).
To answer his question: Yes, there were ceiling fans that slowly circulated when the warm air returned.
In fact, one of them is central to my first memory of the hotel, which became my favorite in the world.
As I sat under it, in a rattan chair, sipping a gin and tonic and looking past tropical gardens toward the South China Sea, I felt as if I were living in a story by Somerset Maugham.


Awakened Labor Federation Tries to Cope With Hostile Times
This was the week of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. leadership's self-proclaimed great awakening, aptly expressed by Thomas R. Donahue, the federation's secretary-treasurer: "My God, we have to do more ourselves."
The A.F.L.-C.I.O. executive council, dropping its trademark blandness at its winter meeting here, engaged in a rare display of self-examination.
Battered by defeats from the Administration and Congress, the council recognized more publicly than ever before that the federation is suffering from the same sort of powerlessness that afflicts millions of workers.


The World; Sometimes, a Hitch In the Ordinary Exchange of Spies
Like Claude Rains in "Casablanca," French officials were shocked, shocked, last week that a Government report charging the United States Embassy with spying on its oldest ally was splashed all over the newspapers.
The French, who invented diplomacy, know perfectly well that one of the things diplomats are supposed to do is to spy -- strictly in accordance with the rules of protocol, of course -- the same rules that give them immunity from being sent to jail for ignoring parking fines, skipping the rent and even for overstepping the fine line between diplomatic reporting and espionage.


We Should Call It Profit Care, Not Managed Care
An article on Jan. 29 about a San Francisco hospital's adjustment to the new era of managed care drew a range of letters, most from physicians, citing the moral difficulties, both for individual doctors and for American society, of keeping an eye on the bottom line when a suffering patient awaits help.
To the Editor:


University Administrators Protest Cuts in Student Aid
Harold Martinez, an earnest 19-year-old in a roomy suit and a tie, pulled out a sheaf of documents listing the various grants and loans he gets to attend Pratt Institute, where annual tuition, board and supplies cost almost $27,000 -- nearly twice what his stepfather, who works as a roofer, makes in a year.
"Without the loans, I would never be able to finish college, no matter how much I try," Mr.
Martinez told Representative Nita M. Lowey, Democrat of Westchester County, at a meeting this week of New York college students and administrators worried about proposed cuts in Federal student loan and grant programs.


Why the Hudson Walkway Falters
To the Editor:
Your article on Jan. 1 headed "Jersey's Hudson Walkway: Stop and Go" fails to identify the real reasons that the walkway has not been more successful outside of Liberty State Park.


Housing for the Deaf: Independence and Community
Frederique McCall is a 35-year-old, married mother of two.
Until last year, she and her family -- her husband, Michael, and sons Terrence, 8, and David, 6 -- lived with her parents on Long Island.
She had not returned home because of hard times.
She had never left.
"My parents didn't think I could live independently," said Mrs.
McCall, who is deaf, through an interpeter.
"They didn't want me to move here."


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE HANGED MAN By Francesca Lia Block. 137 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $14. (Ages 12 and up)


We Should Call It Profit Care, Not Managed Care
An article on Jan. 29 about a San Francisco hospital's adjustment to the new era of managed care drew a range of letters, most from physicians, citing the moral difficulties, both for individual doctors and for American society, of keeping an eye on the bottom line when a suffering patient awaits help.
To the Editor:


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
MINDING THE CHILDREN
The Chappaqua Library will present a three-part baby-sitting workshop, beginning next Saturday and continuing on subsequent Saturdays from 10 to 11:30 A.M.
The workshops, given every two years, attract more than potential baby sitters, said a spokeswoman for the library, Joan Kuhn.


In Quebec, Sale Rumors and an Arena Agenda
The early-season success of the Quebec Nordiques masks the never-ending intrigue in this special hockey city.
The owner, Marcel Aubut, who once traded Eric Lindros to two teams in the same day, now enjoys serious interest from potential franchise buyers in Phoenix and Denver.
He wouldn't dare sell the team to two cities at the same time, would he?


Another Day, Another Secession Movement
FOR as long as anyone can remember, a vast expanse of land north of the Merritt Parkway in southern Fairfield County has been known as North Stamford, as if it were an entity separate from the city itself.
Never mind that, apart from one elementary school, a recycling center and a few stores on Long Ridge and High Ridge Roads, North Stamford has no municipal facilities of any kind nor any other semblance of a town.


Correction
An article last Sunday about rhyme and language misidentified the writer who said a baby's world was a "blooming, buzzing confusion." It was the philosopher William James, not the novelist Henry James.


Night Life


At Eastchester High, Dance-Floor Dramas of Teen-Age Anxiety
WHAT do teen-age boys worry about?
What do teen-age girls worry about?
Are their concerns the same?
If a meeting of the minds is hard at age 45, can boys and girls even begin to understand each other at 17?
The students at Eastchester High School here have found an unusual way to talk to each other: they dance.
At first, it was just the girls who met in an after-school club, Jazz Co., where they made up dances that reflected their lives.
The boys saw the dances, learned about the yearly retreats the girls took with their dance teachers and became interested in joining.
Now 7 boys and 50 girls take part in the club, which students can join without auditioning.
Sometimes, the works they produce are performed in places like the Dance Theater Workshop in Manhattan.


Radioactive Debris in Space Threatens Satellites in Use
After sifting clues for five years, a team of scientific sleuths has found that puzzling clouds of junk orbiting the Earth are made up of radioactive debris leaking from a large group of orbiting Russian nuclear reactors.
It is the first major case of nuclear pollution in space and one of the messiest environmental legacies of the cold war.
The atomic debris, estimated at 70,000 detectable particles and perhaps millions of smaller ones, poses no danger to humans, experts say.
But it threatens to damage working satellites and will force engineers to add more shielding to help protect new spacecraft.


Some Russians in New York Meet Winter in All-Out Style
Russians in Fendi furs, with their signature looped edging, are adding a touch of Czarist style to Fifth and Madison avenues.
These Russian women, seen in Manhattan, are wearing the newest creations by Karl Lagerfeld for the Roman house of Fendi.
The favorites seem to be blond mink, black Swakara lamb and a sidewalk-length Russian sable (large photograph, right) with a suede cape collar.
A sumptuous chinchilla was worn with Chanel sneakers (top right).
Almost all the women chose Chanel accessories -- sunglasses, caps and totes -- though Versace caps were also popular.


IN SHORT: FICTION
ADRIAN MOLE: THE LOST YEARS By Sue Townsend. Soho, $22.


The Origins of the Specious
MADAME BLAVATSKY'S BABOON A History of the Mystics, Mediums, and Misfits Who Brought Spiritualism to America.
By Peter Washington.
Illustrated. 470 pp.
New York: Schocken Books. $27.50.


What's Unusual About 13 Grenades? The Attention, Says Bomb Squad
When 13 grenades were discovered last Monday in the cellar of five-story, yellow-brick building in Hunts Point, Sgt.
John Lanigan, a Bomb Squad supervisor, was surprised -- by the headlines in the next day's papers.
Finding grenades, he said, is fairly common.
"It's not unusual to find them," Sergeant Lanigan said.
"It's not that it's not a big deal to us, but it happens so often that we don't think of it as a big deal."


When the Weather Calls for Earthy Fare
ON a brisk winter day, I'd much rather sit down to a plate of braised lamb shanks and beans than some chic new dish made with monkfish and cilantro.
At this time of year, I want solid, earthy food, like a good stew, which can be mopped up with boiled potatoes, rice or a chunk of peasant bread.
Lamb shanks are an inexpensive and underused cut, but they are showing up with increasing frequency on the menus of restaurants.
They are delicious baked in the oven with white beans and served under a crust of bread crumbs, rather like a cassoulet.
A dark beef stew is another favorite, flavored with orange and rosemary and served with baby carrots and mashed potatoes.


12 Intellectuals Petition China On Corruption
A dozen prominent intellectuals today formally petitioned China's parliamentary bodies to conduct an independent investigation into corruption in the Chinese leadership.
The surprisingly bold step by a group that includes two former top editors of The People's Daily, the official Communist Party newspaper, represents a significant challenge to party leaders as they prepare for the death of Deng Xiaoping and an unpredictable period of political transition.


New Yorkers Remember the Neediest
A family loses a father because of a crippling disease.
A young mother's partner is killed, leaving her with a toddler and a baby.
A new immigrant finds himself on welfare because he cannot find a job using his professional training.
A man struggles to raise three daughters by himself and keep a job.
New York is full of such stories, of people who put all their energy into surviving in the city and still find it is not enough.
For New Yorkers, it is easy to become hardened.
This is a tough city, and everyone knows it.
Sometimes the problems of its individual residents seem overwhelming and insoluble.
But then, there are other stories.


SURFACING
FOOTWEAR  Boot of the moment, again: Frye boots, the status symbol of the 1970's, are back on the streets of New York.
Available in black, brown, tan and orange-brown, they range from just above the ankle to just below the knee.
With their round toes and chunky heels, they give an instant jolt of urban cowboy.


Quarterbacks to Participate in Camp
The Heisman Trophy winner GINO TORRETTA, TONY SACCA and SHAWN MOORE are among 19 quarterbacks who will participate in a World League of American Football camp starting Wednesday in Suwanee, Ga.
The camp will be run by former San Francisco 49ers and Stanford Coach BILL WALSH, now an offensive consultant for the National Football League.


Corrections
The Westchester Q&amp;A column on Feb. 5, with Lawrence E. Dwyer Jr., president of the Westchester County Association, omitted a crucial word from one quotation.
Mr.
Dwyer said, "Businesses have not been leaving here in droves."


On Sunday; If the World's A Stage, What Is City Hall?
PERHAPS the mayoral stage character will be portrayed as the Cowardly Lion and go huffing forth in the footlights, scaring no one and amusing the assembled politicians and their public relations operatives as he bellows out altered lyrics to the tune, "If I Were King of the Forest."
"Ruff! Nnn-ruff!" he could minigrowl in tribute to the comic actor Bert Lahr and the determined Mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani.


The Executive Computer; Intel Looks Beyond the Pentium
DESPITE its recent well-chronicled stumbles, Intel's Pentium microprocessor is expected to dethrone the 486 chip later this year as the PC industry's best-selling chip.
But in this business, which has more overlapping generations than "The Waltons," PC's based on an entirely new line of even speedier microprocessors will already be rolling out of the factories by the time the Pentium moves to the No. 1 spot.
The new Intel chip, code-named the P6 and publicly displayed for the first time earlier this month, is designed to achieve speeds twice that of the top-of-the-line Pentium -- and 1,000 times the performance of the Intel 8088 chip that powered the original IBM PC in 1981.
Put four of these new chips together, a feat entirely possible with the P6, and you'd have the computing equivalent of what just a few years ago would have been called a mainframe.


F.Y.I.
Tanks a Lot, Pop Q.  As someone new to the city, I would like to know what the story is with these funky wooden water towers on top of so many buildings.
Are any of them still used for anything or are they just relics?


Children's Seats In Air Faulted
THE Federal Aviation Administration has tested forward-facing child safety seats certified for use aboard airplanes and found them wanting.
The results do not mean that parents who ordinarily take forward-facing safety seats aboard to buckle in larger children, those over the age of 2 and under about 3 1/2 years, should stop doing so: At the moment there is no substitute.
It does mean that forward-facing safety seats bearing a Government seal for use in a car or plane may not safeguard their riders in a survivable air crash.
Rear-facing safety seats for smaller children were judged safe.


ECONOMY REELING, MEXICANS PREPARE TOUGH NEW STEPS
Clear signs that Mexico's economic crisis is worsening have forced the Government to concede that its original economic stabilization plan has failed and that a tougher new plan of budget cuts and tax increases will have to be enacted soon.
President Ernesto Zedillo announced his original damage-control plan on Jan. 3, but Mexican officials say it failed to arrest stampeding inflation and an impending recession largely because the United States took too long to deliver the vital financial assistance that President Clinton offered to help Mexico.


A Mixture of Messages in Three Shows
THE three shows at the Aljira center for contemporary art here are "No Easy Walk," a selection of black-and-white photographs by Helen Stummer; "Nourish!," an installation by Stefanie Nagorka, and an anthology by 10 artists titled "On and Off the Wall."
Ms.
Stummer may not have taken a vow of poverty, but her view of those stuck with the condition bespeaks an almost religious outlook.
Yet, in her statement, the photographer presents herself as a messenger bringing news to suburbanites, whom she likens to generals "insulated from the realities" faced by soldiers at the front.


Homophobia's Rare in Italy And a Gay Culture Thrives
To the Editor:
I was surprised to see in "What Gay Travel Agencies Tell Their Clients," Feb. 5, that Italy was listed among "gay-unfriendly" places.


Technique-Wise
To the Editor:
In "Choreographing a Singular American Creation"  [ Feb. 5 ] , Danny Buraczeski is quoted as saying, "Jazz dance has no specific technique, like fifth position, first position or some of the moves codified by Martha Graham." Actually, there is a codified jazz technique important in the United States and in Japan and Europe.
It is the Luigi technique; students include Twyla Tharp, Michael Bennett and Alvin Ailey.
Luigi, who has taught for 44 years, still teaches in his New York studio -- when he is not giving master classes around the world.
LORRAINE KRIEGEL  New York


Using Credits From Foreign Funds
MUTUAL fund shareholders may find a small gift in the mail along with their annual tax statements -- a deduction or a credit for foreign taxes paid.
But many people will fail to make the most of this benefit because the necessary tax forms are byzantine.
"It's a pain in the neck to figure out," said David J. Mangefrida, senior tax manager in the Washington office of Ernst &amp; Young, the national accounting firm.


Note to Readers
The Travel section regrets that because of the volume of mail it receives, an unsolicited manuscript or article proposal cannot be acknowledged or returned unless accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If a manuscript is accepted, the author will be notified before publication.
Writers should not include photographs.


Commercial Property/World Trade Center; Attuning a Huge Concourse to an Upscale Trade
IT should have been a retailer's dream: an enclosed urban mall fed by four mass-transit lines, with 325,000 square feet available for stores, more than 12 million square feet of office space, a tourist-friendly observation deck, and more than 200,000 people passing through on any weekday.
But the World Trade Center's concourse has been anything but dreamlike.
It has been a hodgepodge of budget stores and banks.
Until a couple of years ago, its anchor tenant was Alexander's, not exactly the store to attract upscale neighbors.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Technology Monopolies Are Big, but Often Brittle
Remember the "I.B.M.-compatible" computer?
Only 10 years ago, I.B.M.'s power was so great that it singlehandedly decreed the technical standards for most personal computers.
But today, that phrase is quaintly out of date.
The once-mighty Big Blue, plagued by billions of dollars in losses over the last several years, no longer sets the standards and is now merely one of many rivals in the market.
Today, however, a new company has transfixed the country, and the Federal Government, with its seemingly awesome power.
Microsoft Corporation, started from scratch in 1975, arguably generates even more fear and loathing in some quarters of the industry than I.B.M. ever did.
Its two core products -- MS-DOS and Windows -- provide the basic operating instructions for about 80 percent of all personal computers.
It has expanded ferociously into almost every other corner of the software industry.
Its stock-market value rivals that of General Motors, and its chairman, Bill Gates, has a net worth of more than $6 billion.
Rivals accuse it of bullying tactics, arrogance and dirty tricks.


Even Greenspan Can't Fine-Tune The Economy
WALL STREET sat transfixed by Alan Greenspan last week, and in the end could not figure out what he was saying.
In fact, it appears that Mr.
Greenspan wasn't really trying to say much of anything.
He doesn't know what is happening to the economy either.
There is evidence it is slowing, and there is evidence of growing inflationary pressures.
So he might choose to cut interest rates.
And he might choose to raise them.


Taxi Owners Divided on Medallion Plan
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposal to sell 400 new taxi medallions has exposed a rift between the owners of large, long-established taxi fleets, who do not oppose the move, and smaller operators, who say their business would be badly hurt by it.
But the two factions are united in opposition to the Mayor's plan to do away with the Taxi and Limousine Commission as an independent agency, a move that they say would be a boon to illegal cabs.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-12  MEXICANS PLAN TOUGH STEPS  Facing signs that the economy is slipping into an inflationary whirlpool, the Government concedes that its original economic plan failed and that budget cuts and tax increases will have to be enacted.  1  CHALLENGE TO CHINA'S LEADERS  In a bold challenge to Communist leaders, a dozen prominent intellectuals formally petitioned China's parliamentary bodies to conduct an independent investigation into official corruption.  1


In the Region/Westchester; Large Shopping Centers Set to Move Northward
FOR the last several years, a flurry of retail development has gripped the southern and central sections of Westchester County.
It has now moved northward, as town boards in Somers, Yorktown and Cortlandt consider applications for new, large-scale shopping centers.
Several of the projects involve the so-called "big box" discount retailers, which have proliferated in other sections throughout the county in recent years.
No specific operators, however, have yet been named.


CORRECTIONS
An article on Feb. 12 about young conservative intellectuals misstated the background of Roger Kimball, managing editor of The New Criterion.
He formerly worked at the 20th Century Fund, not the Mellon Foundation.


PRO BASKETBALL: Sports of The Times; Tuning In to Pat Riley's Channel
ON the Knicks, the life of Riley has a life of its own.
It's trying to understand just what Coach Pat Riley really means when he talks about his players' "unprofessional attitude" or about his team's success in the National Basketball Association playoffs being "all or nothing." Or trying to understand if there will even be a life of Riley next season.
With a 34-18 record, the Knicks need to win 23 of their final 30 games, beginning tonight against the 76ers at Madison Square Garden, to match last season's 57-25 record.


The Turn Of the Thread
During a long career in engineering I have maintained an interest in the illustrative arts and have always been assured that the practitioners thereof are proud of their observational faculties.
Even so, I frequently discover that in matters mechanical they have no conception of how things "go together" and little interest in learning.
For instance, I have a large collection of pictures from various sources, including prominent artists, depicting steam locomotives in which the piston and connecting-rod assemblies are configured in all sorts of physically impossible ways.
The perpetrators obviously had only the vaguest notion of how these classic mechanisms are supposed to function.
Many artists show similar ignorance about the elements of nautical, aeronautical and other applied sciences.


Pleasure Horses Over Racing Horses 3 to 1
"Once-Booming Horse-Breeding Industry Falls on Hard Times"  [ Jan. 29 ]  gives the unfortunate impression that the entire Long Island Horse industry is ready to be put out to pasture.
The article focuses on the racing thoroughbred breeding farms, a highly visible and picturesque, but small part of the overall industry.
The Long Island Business News  [ Jan. 23 ]  reports over 60,000 pleasure horses in our region, ranking Long Island "No. 1 in the state's horses per capita," contributing to an "annual revenue estimated at $1 billion. This reflects the national experience that pleasure horses tend to outnumber racing horses by 3 to 1 in regions such as Long Island.
L.I.
Business News also reports that "there are more horses on L.I." than ever before, especially for the middle class, describing the experience of farriers who used to shoe horses at racetracks and estates, but are now more likely to find themselves shoeing horses "in people's backyards."


Bookshelf
DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE.
Written and illustrated by Dr.
Seuss.
Random House. $15. (All ages) A story based on a manuscript from the 1960's, discovered in Dr.
Seuss' papers, gives new meaning to flower power.
The heroine, who sprouts a daisy right on the top of her head, is rescued from invasive, impersonal worldwide fame by the Cat in the Hat.


Constant Communication
Mobile-telephone users can avoid separation anxiety the next time they go to Paris.
The Hotel Montalembert, off the Rue du Bac and Boulevard St.-Germain in the seventh arrondissement, has equipped its 56 rooms and suites with mobile telephones.
You can get your number before you arrive and give it to anyone at home.
The reception desk activates the telephone upon check-in.
Then you can leave your room instead of waiting for the phone to ring.


Q and A
Amsterdam Houseboats
Q.
I will be traveling in Amsterdam in May and wondered if it is possible to rent a houseboat there by the week. -- K. Aumann, Philadelphia


Skiing Information Via CD-ROM and Fax
Skiers are getting some high-tech help from two Colorado companies.
"Skiodyssey Interactive Annual" is an exhaustive guide on a CD-ROM to more than 400 ski areas in the United States.
"The Skier's Edge" is a three-page newsletter faxed to subscribers every Tuesday on the condition of slopes the previous night at 55 leading resorts around the world.


It's Hard To Be Green
Hardship is implicit in the flavor of cabbage; its bitterness tells a story of frozen and unforgiving lands.
Other winter greens are not nearly as irascible or cranky, though their reputations are tarnished just the same.
Take kale, a member of the cabbage family, but a mild-mannered cousin to be sure.
Kale contains fewer of the mustard oils that blanket the winter kitchen with a skunky shroud.
Nevertheless, it is born of hard soil and hard times, and so it's dismissed as hard luck food.


Between a Rock and a Soft Place
MY wife, Ina, and I were in Hoppe's, our favorite restaurant in California.
With a quick jab of the fork I rescued her from the last bite of an appetizer we were allegedly sharing, venison sausage on a bed of spicy carrots and ginger.
I gazed out at State Landmark 801: El Moro, a k a Morro Rock, the fat, rugged 576-foot mound of splintered volcanic dacite that guards the entrance to Morro Bay.
The rock was backlighted by a lurid Pacific sunset, as pterodactyls -- well, silhouetted pelicans -- circled near the top.
I took a sip of fine locally produced pinot noir, pleased to be back in Morro Bay, just three hours but worlds away from Los Angeles.
At the center of the Central Coast in San Luis Obispo County, Morro Bay never achieved the popularity of the Big Sur-Carmel axis a few hours north.
The scenery there is wilder, greener, taller, steeper.
The landscape at Morro Bay includes a power plant with three towering concrete smokestacks, right on the water line.
Drivers approaching on Route 1 spot the Rock -- Whoa!
Then the stacks -- Oh, no . . . and keep going.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PORTRAIT OF JENNIFER  A Biography of Jennifer Jones.
By Edward Z. Epstein.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.


A County Jail Copes With State Prisoners and Overcrowding
FROM the outside, the aging four-story red brick building might be just another administration center in the court complex in Morristown.
But just step inside, and the mission of the Morris County jail is clear: the building is up to its rafters in prisoners.
Built in 1930 to house a maximum of 144 prisoners, the jail now holds 325.
Fifteen guards watch over them.
"We do the very best we can," said John Lombardi, deputy chief of the county's Corrections Department, who is in charge of the day-to-day operation of the jail.
"But you have to realize that with this number of inmates, it's really become their jail and not ours."


WHAT WORKS
Career clothes can be any style, as long as they're tailored to the job.
On the following pages, 12 women show what works.


The N.E.A. Is Elitist, True. It Should Be.
DEBATES ABOUT THE NATIONAL endowment for the Arts tend to become fairly pious, so Americans will no doubt be hearing many grand proclamations beginning on Wednesday, when the Senate Appropriations Committee starts its hearings on the endowment.
In recent months, House Speaker Newt Gingrich has attacked the Government agency for supplying "patronage for an elite group." The N.E.A. has responded by citing evidence of the spiritual, social and economic benefits of the arts for all Americans.
Both the attack and the defense are misguided.
Populist conservative critics, in accusing the endowment of "elitism," are echoing a criticism the agency addressed long ago.
In 1991, for example, endowment literature pointedly portrayed the agency as nonelitist, boasting that it served 170 ethnic minorities and insured a broad distribution of benefits, taking into account race, ethnicity, sex and geography.
Unfortunately, those criteria have little to do with artistic judgment and much to do with social policy.
When it comes to art, there is no way of judging even vastly divergent styles without some notion of differentiation and choice -- in other words, elitism.
If the N.E.A. is doing its job properly, Mr.
Gingrich should be praising it, not condemning it, for being elitist.


Warnings Unheeded -- A special report.; F.A.A.'s Fatal Fumbles on Commuter Plane's Safety
American Eagle Flight 4184 had been holding for 32 minutes in a chilly drizzle last October when air traffic controllers in Chicago cleared the pilots to make a routine descent from 10,000 to 8,000 feet.
Although the pilots did not know it, a dangerous ridge of ice had built up on the wings, and in a fraction of a second, to their complete and ultimately final terror, the pilots lost control of the ATR-72 turbo prop.
The plane's controls moved on their own, tilting the right wing almost perpendicular to the ground.
The pilots wrestled with the aircraft, but the wing tilted violently again, the plane flipped on its back and, without hope of recovery, the plane plunged toward earth.


Maria A. Sarath, Frederic Ragucci
Maria Adele Sarath, an assistant general counsel for Chemical Bank in New York, was married yesterday to Frederic Louis Ragucci, a partner at Schulte Roth &amp; Zabel, a New York law firm.
The Rev.
Giles R. Spoonhour, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Water's Edge Restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
The bride, 39, graduated magna cum laude from Williams College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her law degree from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Florence and Edward Sarath of Ridgefield, Conn.


Border War Against Drugs Is Stepped Up
The United States Commissioner of Customs, George J. Weise, had been told that the war between drug runners and his border inspectors was heating up all along the 2,000-mile line, from the Pacific to the Gulf.
On Friday night, he nearly experienced it first-hand.
Shortly before Mr.
Weise arrived at the busy San Ysidro border crossing just south of here to announce he was dispatching reinforcements, officials said, a suspected drug trafficker tried to run down a Federal agent after the man's car was flagged to pull over.


Dining in Madrid
To the Editor: "What's Doing in Madrid" by Penelope Casas (Sept. 25) recommended a restaurant in Madrid named La Gran Tasca.
We visited the dining room and were disappointed.
A party of six, we made reservations and were prompt.
We were greeted by a white-coated proprietor who was impatient and could not explain the menu.
The pollo al ajillo (garlic chicken) was overcooked and almost inedible.
The garlic soup was laden with oil and not appetizing.
I like garlic but this was too much for my palate.
The baby lamb was greasy and not well received.


The World; In Africa, West Can Pay Now, Or Later
Having struggled across the Sahara, 250,000 starving Sudanese refugees assemble on the Moroccan coast, hoping to cross the Straits of Gibraltar to Europe.
As an armada of camera crews film them, the refugee's leader launches this challenge to European Union coastal guards who would stop them: "All we ask of you is, watch us die."


The World According to Judd
WHEN THE AMERICAN artist Donald Judd died a year ago this month, he was in his prime, though it would not have seemed that way.
For one thing, he was 65.
For another, his most influential work was 30 years in the past: the stripped-down, vividly colored objects that had made his name synonymous with Minimalism, and the perceptive, hard-nosed art criticism that had earned him the enmity of most painters. (He considered their medium moribund.)
Furthermore, the cantankerous Judd, who was notorious for dismissing most art made since 1975 and for despising the way American museums treated postwar art, had all but dropped out of the New York scene.
He exhibited irregularly with the Pace Gallery, but that was about it.


Advice On Gifts, Deadlines
BEGINNING with the 1994 tax year, a charitable donation of $250 or more is not deductible unless you obtain a written acknowledgment.
The statement must include an estimate of the value of any goods or services, like football tickets, received in return.
A canceled check is no longer enough.
Separate gifts of less than $250 to the same recipient, however, will not generally be lumped together to push you over the $250 threshold.
In another change, payments of more than $75 also require written acknowledgment if goods or services are received in exchange.
The statement from the charity needs to break out the portion that is a deductible gift and the portion that is a nondeductible benefit.


Rookie Manager Puts Plans on Hold
In one way, Phil Regan's job as a rookie major league manager is easier than the task his colleagues face.
Because Peter Angelos, the Baltimore Orioles' owner, has decreed that his team shall not be infested with replacement players, Regan does not have to deal with the replacement problem afflicting other managers.
In another way, though, Regan is at a disadvantage.
Because he is new to the Orioles, he doesn't know his players.
And because his players are on strike, he can't get to know them when he expected to.


POSTINGS: 201 Murray Hill Apartments for Rent; 60's Building, 90's Renovation
When the Rockrose Development Corporation bought the building at 340 East 34th Street last spring, it found that the 17-story, 1960's apartment tower looked very much like the dormitory it had been for more than 25 years.
The 201-unit building between First and Second Avenues, built in 1962, had been purchased by New York University Medical Center in 1967 and used as nurses' housing until 1993, when the hospital moved the nurses out and sold the building.
The building suffered severe water damage during the brutal winter of 1993-94, said Tom Elghanayan, president of Rockrose.
"That's what forced our decision to replace everything," he said.


A Repulsively Lonely Man
THE TUNNEL By William H. Gass. Illustrated. 652 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


And Now Get Ready for Southern Coastal Food
THE Old South is coming to Southampton in April, when Savanna's opens at 268 Elm Street in the restored Village Hall.
The 82-seat restaurant will serve Southern Coastal food cooked by a rising young Southern chef.
Hamilton Hoge and Craig Watson, who own Calaluna in Southampton, have teamed up with John Halpern and Harry Cocowitch, manager of the Meadow Club, in the new venture.
The four partners plan to offer seafood and vegetables from the Carolinas, Virginia, Georgia and the Caribbean.


'Resounding Success'
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein is entitled to his opinion of our opera "Harvey Milk"  [ "Heroes Make Good Opera; Icons Don't," Feb. 12 ] , but we reject his dismissal of its favorable international critical reception.


A Portrayal of Lincoln Spices Up Class Work
WHEN a lanky six-footer stands up in front of schoolchildren here, an air of expectancy settles over the room.
They know him as Lou, a storyteller who understands childhood secrets, fears and triumphs.
Lou Del Bianco performs in many states, but he is perhaps best known in Port Chester, where he often works in the schools.
He was born and raised here and serves as one of five artists in residence at the Port Chester Council for the Arts.


A PRO-NOUNCED PRESENCE
When Carrie Donovan heard that Al Hirschfeld was going to caricature her for this page, her response was immediate.
"Well, he shouldn't have any problem. I am a caricature." In truth, Carrie Donovan has been a striking figure in the world of fashion for 40 years, 26 of them at The Times.
A year ago, she retired as the Magazine's style editor after 17 years, continuing as editor of the twice-yearly Fashions of The Times.
This issue, her 36th in a row, will be her last.
To know Carrie is to know a pronounced presence -- pronounced in three senses of the word.
Her look is pronounced, individual: huge glasses, black bows, leopard-print skirts, colossal fake pearls.
Her sound is even more pronounced: crisp diction, animated in-to-NA-tion, a singular vocabulary drawing loosely from the French.
Sometimes, her most captivating vocabulary consists not of words at all but of sounds, like a long, loud "whoo-ooo."


'I'll Be Ever'where'
JOHN STEINBECK A Biography.
By Jay Parini.
Illustrated. 536 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $30.


At the Carnival in Rio, Celebration and Caution


Art and Honors For Charity's Sake
Two art exhibitions open; three men are celebrated for their accomplishments.


Bringing Out la belle Poitrine
Day or evening, bosoms are big this spring.


Ticket Prices Rising At New Denver Airport
Next month, travelers to Denver may pay $20 to $40 or more on their round-trip tickets, an increase levied by some of the major carriers there to offset the higher costs of operating at the new Denver International Airport.
Many ticket prices will go up by about 3 to 6 percent, although the increase on some discount tickets may be as high as 7 to 8 percent.
Fares for passengers on connecting flights through the airport will not be affected.


Think Pink
When you fantasize, conjure up a column of slithery silk crepes, a froth of point d'esprat sprinkled with pink.


Selecting a Phone for a Car
MANY people would like to pass time behind the wheel chatting on a car phone, but an idea they like even better is a phone they can take on the sidewalk, too, and into a store or an office.
But few people will buy more than one phone.
Is it possible to have a model that works both ways?
The answer is clear: sort of.


The Tame and the Uncaged
Hair can be flying wild or caught in a snood.


No Headline
"Everybody out here is struggling. It's hard to  survive, to make ends meet. This used to be a real city of opportunity -- Silk City! -- but now there's nothing.  Everything used to be here. It's a 'used to be' city." RAYMOND BROWNFIELD, an unemployed cook in Paterson, N.J.  [ 1:4. ]


Phlox and Peanuts: Can't Stop With One
SINCE there is a trend toward growing native plants in a garden, this might be a good time to take a brief inventory.
The object is to be sure that the best native varieties are included in plantings.
If a bit of enthusiasm can be allowed here, one flower should be a must for every garden: phlox.
No problem in selecting.
There are so many kinds of phlox, it is easy to choose one sort to satisfy whatever wishes the gardener has.
And who knows, the phlox selected might do so well that another, then another could be picked out.
The entire garden, of course, does not have to be phlox, but it's possible.


The Executive Life; Where Partnership Thrives in Filmdom
SINCE the dawn of the silent era, success in the movie industry has belonged to those special talents able to merge their creative instincts with canny business sense.
Because it is rare for one person to boast both strong suits, entertainment companies founded on executive partnerships go back to the time of the Warner brothers (Harry, Sam, Jack and Albert) and the "united artists" (Charlie Chaplin, Mary Pickford, Douglas Fairbanks and D. W. Griffith).


REIMAGINING BERLIN
Berlin residents cope with a seemingly permanent housing shortage, but little in present renewal plans addresses the impact of construction, in Potsdamer Platz or Mitte, on surrounding, densely populated neighborhoods ("Reimagining Berlin," by Paul Goldberger, Feb. 5).
When I lived in Berlin from 1989 to 1992, I attended a community meeting in which stunned former "East Berliners" were told of planned changes and demolition in their neighborhood.
Without input into these decisions, the residents soon saw the parallel with earlier centralized-planning experiences.
"Is this democracy?" someone whispered.


Confession, Terminable and Interminable
A DIVING ROCK ON THE HUDSON  Volume 2 of "Mercy of a Rude Stream." By Henry Roth. 418 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $23.95.


IT'S DRUGS, STUPID
Joseph Califano's "It's Drugs, Stupid" (Jan. 29) is an outstanding example of the politics of denial.
For a quarter of a century now, we have pursued a policy of drug prohibition, precisely the policy that failed when we tried it with alcohol earlier in this century.
There are answers the public needs before it can decide whether to end prohibition of drugs and what to put in its place.
But those answers will never be available as long as politicians of both parties persist in refusing to have a serious public discussion that distinguishes between the pharmacological effects of the drugs on the one hand, and the social and economic effects of our laws on the other.


The Controversy Over Plans To Trim the State's Budget
CLUTCHING their handmade suits and dresses, the old women at the Home for the Aged Blind in Yonkers were both proud and frightened -- proud that they had learned to sew again, although this time it was without their eyes, but worried that they would soon be shut out of the day-care program that taught them their new skills.
Under Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposal to close a $5 billion budget gap and cut taxes, day-care programs like theirs, along with home-care programs for the elderly, would lose some of their financing.


Campaign In Chicago Barely Stirs A Breeze
This is a place once famous for its punch-in-the-nose politics, where a prudent alderman donned a bulletproof vest at a raucous City Hall meeting in the 1980's and a skittish mayor-elect took his oath of office in the protective shadow of armed guards.
But the current Democratic mayoral primary is as bland as dry toast.
If they can stay awake, voters here will go to the polls on Tuesday and almost surely award the nomination to Mayor Richard M. Daley, who leads Joseph Gardner, a commissioner on the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, by more than 40 percentage points, polls show.


CORRECTIONS
A report in the "Sunday" pages on Jan. 29 about the National Anthem at Super Bowls misidentified the group that performed at Super Bowl XIX, in 1985.
It was made up of children from the Piedmont Children's Choir, the San Francisco Girls Chorus, the San Francisco Boys Chorus and the San Francisco Children's Chorus; it was not the Children's Choir of Los Angeles.


The Hottest Hot Dog Stand


Congressional Memo; A Capitol Dynamic to Do the Framers Proud
They might be flustered by the daily news conferences, the constant drumbeat of talk radio and all the bright young freshmen with their laminated copies of the Contract With America.
But James Madison and the rest of the Framers would understand very well the underlying dynamic of the first two months of this 104th Congress, scholars say.
After years when the House and the Senate seemed to be growing more and more alike, the institutions have reverted to classic -- and very distinctive -- form in recent months:


A SENSE OF PLACE
WELL, who's this, making a surprise visit?
Why, it's Mr.
Toll, the legendary New Jersey Department of Transportation answer man.
He is ready to respond to all those thorny travel-related questions about New Jersey's highways and byways.
Here are some of the most commonly asked questions about the state's newest controversy.
Mr.
Toll, what should we make of all this publicity about a merger of New Jersey's major highways?


Joan G. Wilmarth And Miller Biddle
Joan Grace Wilmarth, an assistant vice president at Cooper Hospital/University Medical Center in Camden, N.J., was married on Thursday to Dr.
Charles Miller Biddle 4th, an endocrinologist in Cherry Hill, N.J.
Judge Theodore Z. Davis of the New Jersey Superior Court officiated in his chambers in Camden.
Mrs.
Biddle graduated from Elmira College.
She is the daughter of Arloween L. Wilmarth of Ocala, Fla., and the late Russell Remington Wilmarth.
Her father was a deputy director of the United States Customs Service in Utica, N.Y.
Her mother was the director of hospital volunteer services at St.
Luke's Hospital in Utica.


Keyes Returns to Purdue as Assistant
LEROY KEYES hopes to restore some pride to a Purdue football program that hasn't had a winning season since 1984.
Coach JIM COLLETTO announced Friday that Keyes, a member of the National Collegiate Hall of Fame who in 1987 was voted Purdue's greatest player, will rejoin the Boilermakers as an assistant football coach in charge of running backs.


An Inaugural Ride Can Have Its Bumps
The New York Skyride, on the mezzanine of the Empire State Building, isn't a chairlift to the World Trade towers or a monorail to the theme-park restaurants on 57th Street.
Rather, it's an indoor "motion-simulation experience" that presents a cinematic tour of New York City more hair-raising than most cab drivers can provide.
"I'm going to sit in the front," declared 9-year-old Allison Pataki on Tuesday at the New York Skyride's inauguration party.
She was waiting with her brother Owen, 6, who'd already ridden it once with his mother, Libby Pataki, and the entire Giuliani family.


Oscar's Quirky Taste in Music
HOLLYWOOD HAS BEEN giving out Academy Awards for best song since 1934, when "The Continental," which was first performed by Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers in "The Gay Divorcee," took the honors.
Sixty years later Bruce Springsteen's "Streets of Philadelphia" won, becoming the first time that a dyed-in-the-wool rock songwriter triumphed.
"The Continental" and "Streets of Philadelphia" (sung by Richie Havens, since Mr. Springsteen's version was unavailable for licensing) are among the 60 songs in "The Envelope Please: Academy Award Winning Songs, 1934-1993" (Rhino; five CD's or cassettes).


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
For the Color of Money, Check the Fall Collections  Hoping to raise its profile in the garment district, National Westminster Bank has started holding monthly fashion shows in a newly renovated branch on Seventh Avenue and 38th Street.


The Function Followed Form
A dinner party celebrating the 60th anniversary of the design collection at the Museum of Modern Art, Feb. 15.


Eviction by St. Ann's Church Baffles Arts and Restoration Center
Since 1983, a private group has raised more than $2 million for the restoration of the landmark Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity.
Yet now, the group has been told it is being evicted from church premises.
Under orders from the Episcopal Diocese of Long Island, the church has ordered the eviction of the St.
Ann Center for Restoration and the Arts, a move that has touched off a dispute between the church vestry, a 14-member body elected by the parishioners, and the leadership of the 150-year-old Gothic Revival church.


Angry Nets Cry Foul After Loss To Cavs
Danny Ferry's radar 3-pointer a few steps right of the key found the netting tonight, and with 12.6 seconds left he had decided this carnival affair with the drama of a last-second heave.
Armon Gilliam took a few last-minute shots for his team, too.


February 19-25: Holy Wars; 96 Shot in Islamic Militants' Attempted Jail Break
An attempted jail break this week by several hundred Islamic fundamentalist prisoners ended with the largest bloodbath yet in three years of turmoil between the Muslims and the military government in Algeria.
The government said that its security forces shot and killed 96 prisoners trying to escape from the Serkadji jail near Algiers' teaming Kasbah neighborhood.
The regime, which is engaged in a fierce war against militant muslims bent on replacing the secular government with an Islamic state, said it killed the prisoners after they had taken seven prison guards hostage and killed four of them.
YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM


Before the Cross Bronx, You Lived East or West
To the Editor:
The Feb. 19 article "Mapping the Lower Bronx: It's South, but South of What?" failed to mention that in the days before the Cross Bronx Expressway, most Bronxites would have told you they lived not in the South or North Bronx, but in the East or West Bronx.


'Making Faces,' Fun and Pedagogy at Hudson River Museum
MAKING FACES," at the Hudson River Museum here, promises fun in its title and delivers it by way of about 200 years' worth of portraits -- literal, metaphorical and symbolic. But this being a family affair, the fun comes mixed with a liberal dose of pedagogical medicine in the form of captions with questions seemingly designed to stimulate sluggish minds. The one under Gilbert Stuart's portrait of George Washington asks, "Why do we make portraits of heroes?"
This is but a small fly in a delightful ointment that has been jointly concocted by Philip Verre, director of the museum; Laura Vookles, curator of collections; Cathy Shiga-Gattullo, director of education, and Andrea Lilienthal, curator of public programs.


Civic Leader, Or Alchemist?
To community activists on the Upper West Side, Alexander Cevallos came across as an articulate, well-dressed professional whose interest in improving the area led him to the presidency of his neighborhood association in early 1992 and memberships in two other civic groups.
But admiration soon turned to animosity.
In late 1993, he was expelled from all three groups when community leaders accused him of stealing $1,400 from the Duke Ellington Boulevard Neighborhood Association, the group he headed.
The leaders say he has made partial restitution.


Japanese Weddings: Long and Lavish (Boss Is Invited)
The lights went off and a heavy mist filled the stage, spreading into the audience.
The curtain opened and the spotlight fell on the bride and bridegroom, she in a patterned evening gown, he in a white dinner jacket.
It was the fourth appearance and fourth set of outfits in the four-hour wedding party of Mitsuko Ogasawara, the bride, and Yasuyuki Shimane, the groom.
First came a Shinto ceremony in which they wore formal white kimonos, then a reception for which they wore colored kimonos, followed by a cake cutting, in which she wore a Western-style white wedding dress and he a tuxedo.


Bombs Kill 25 Soldiers in Northern India
Bombs exploded today in a passenger train carrying Indian troops in a remote northeastern region of the country, killing at least 25, reports from the area said.
Officials in the state of Assam blamed tribal rebels who have fought for independence in the region for four decades.
News accounts of the attack, which took place early this morning, said that the toll was expected to rise because 30 soldiers and other passengers were on the critical list.


Western Canvas, Palette of Blood
SAM PECKINPAH WAS already regarded as a volatile personality in Hollywood when he and his band of outsiders went down to Mexico in the spring of 1968 to film "The Wild Bunch." With his use of slow-motion gunfights, spurting blood and fractured editing, Peckinpah created a savage tableau of violence and redemption.
But for all its bloodletting "The Wild Bunch" has influenced a generation of film makers, not only with its bold technique but with its surprisingly graceful exploration of character.
"I think Peckinpah has been misinterpreted to mean how many heads can you blow off," says the director Ron Shelton.
"But in the middle of the action there are characters to whom great attention has been paid."


Jaspers Are Flat and Hear About It From Coach
It wasn't a basketball bouncing off of Manhattan's locker-room walls after the Jaspers lost to Canisius, 65-58, at Draddy Gymnasium in the Bronx yesterday -- it was the voice of their irate coach, Fran Fraschilla.
"I'm just really disappointed in how we came out today, I don't think we came out with any pride," said Fraschilla, who ripped into his players for more than 20 minutes after watching their 14-game winning streak come to an end.
"This is the most disappointing performance I've seen since I've been here."


SIRENS
Slink about in sensuous slips that shimmer like molten metal.


Survey Makes the Case For Park Safety Rules
To the Editor:
The vast confusion concerning the rules that govern the drives in Central Park extends far beyond the automobile, which was the focus of the Jan. 22 article "The Park Drives Are Open, No, Closed, No . . . "


If You're Thinking of Living In/Armour Villa; Bronxville, but Without Its High Taxes
BRENDAN GILL, the New Yorker writer, moved to this middle-class neighborhood of Armour Villa in Yonkers 15 years ago, just after his youngest child left home for college.
Previously, he and his family had been living in Lawrence Park, in Bronxville, for 50 years.
"We owned a classic Westchester Tudor with 27 rooms," Mr.
Gill said.
"Our present house is much more modest, about 12 rooms. It was a slight moving of our kingdom."


Borrowed From Britain
IF there is a stage counterpart for the new wave of dumb and dumber American movies, it's the old English sex farce.
And the playwright Ray Cooney may be the most exhaustively drilled practitioner of the genre, which depends on mistaken identities, double-entendres, idiotic puns and the accessibility of doors.
With titles like "One for the Pot," "Not Now, Darling," "Move Over, Mrs. Markham," "Two Into One" and "Why Not Stay for Breakfast?" all written or partly written by Mr.
Cooney, who has a tendency to act in them as well, such scraps of mechanical mindlessness go on for years in London.
They last perhaps weeks, if at all, in the New York area.
Few of the barometers of the differences in comic sensibilities among English and American theatergoers seem so dead on.


Little-Noticed Court Gains Scrutiny in Custody Fight for Twins
In a decision that opens a window onto the uncommon flexibility within the most personal of courts, a county family judge has ordered the separation of identical twin girls, temporarily giving custody of one to her mother and the other to her father.
The 10-year-old girls, Tara and Sheena Raymond of Wareham, had been living with their father, Dana Raymond, since the parents divorced two years ago.
After their mother, Jean Ardizoni, sued to modify the custody arrangement, both parents, their lawyers and expert witnesses went to Plymouth County Probate and Family Court here on Feb. 14, prepared for a scheduled two-day trial.


FLASHBACK
30's sophisticates, 40's starlets, 60's swingers and 70's attitude are inspiration for this season's designs.


New York Housing: Sellers Finally Sell
OWNERS of residential real estate in New York City, particularly those with co-ops, may look back on 1994 as the year when it once again became possible to sell their homes -- even studios and one-bedroom apartments.
It still wasn't easy, and the big profits of the 1980's remained only a memory, but the increased demand and stable prices were a substantial improvement over the early 1990's, when market activity slowed drastically and prices fell.
The outlook for this year, however, is clouded by the specter of rising interest rates and fears that the region's economic recovery may be ending.
Indeed, sales volume and prices for co-ops in Manhattan in 1994 -- though generally higher than in 1993 -- peaked last summer, according to the Real Estate Board of New York, and have been drifting downward for six months.


DOUBLE HELIXES, CHICKENS AND EGGS
Nicholas Wade's excellent column "Double Helixes, Chickens and Eggs" (Method &amp; Madness, Jan. 29) should not lead to the pessimism of the authorities he quotes.
Ian Tattersall surely knows that hybridization has been a major factor in the evolution of humankind. (He writes: "Homo sapiens today is in a mode of intermixing rather than of differentiation, and the conditions for significant evolutionary change simply don't exist," so "we shall have to learn to live with ourselves as we are. Fast.")
Well, not so fast.
Hybridization, which is another word for intermixing, frequently results in hybrid vigor.
America is the outstanding example of the land in which this intermixture has occurred on a grand scale, with resulting differentiation, which is most beautiful to behold, and on a less visible scale characterized by many significant changes.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
TRAGIC MUSE: Rachel of the Comedie-Francaise By Rachel M. Brownstein.
Duke University, $16.95.
French theater experienced its own revolution in 1838, when Rachel Felix, a 17-year-old girl, first thrilled audiences with her natural, passionate portrayals.
This biography explores her fame and her fierce independence.
The author's "discerning analysis and sure command of her material provide the reader with tantalizing insights," Julie Martin said here in 1993.


Record Numbers of Adults Enrolling in Vocational Education
VOCATIONAL education is attracting record numbers of adults, officials say.
Adults in Boces programs have increased twofold in five years, particularly for courses aimed at job preparation or employment.
The rise is a result of changing workplaces, the Superintendent of Eastern Suffolk Boces, Dr.
Edward J. Milliken, said.
Adults increasingly need training or retraining to find jobs or keep them, he said.


REIMAGINING BERLIN
Paul Goldberger's "Reimagining Berlin" is the best essay about a contemporary city that I have ever read.
The passing references to modernism and post-modernism are not throwaways.
They are searching commentaries on the current state of architecture.
ALEXANDER GARVIN New York


House Seats
Most people start decorating in the wrong place -- floors, windows, walls.
Instead, they should be thinking about sanctuary, in the shape of a strong chair and the right light for reading the Great American Novel.
Comfort isn't just about sinking into clouds of cushions.
You need a chair that's as easy on the eye as it is on the back.


Phlox and Peanuts: Can't Stop With One
SINCE there is a trend toward growing native plants in a garden, this might be a good time to take a brief inventory.
The object is to be sure that the best native varieties are included in plantings.
If a bit of enthusiasm can be allowed here, one flower should be a must for every garden: phlox.
No problem in selecting.
There are so many kinds of phlox, it is easy to choose one sort to satisfy whatever wishes the gardener has.
And who knows, the phlox selected might do so well that another, then another could be picked out.
The entire garden, of course, does not have to be phlox, but it's possible.


To Some Haitians' Chagrin, Carter May 'Referee' June Election
Former President Jimmy Carter ended a fact-finding mission to Haiti this evening in much the same manner as he began it three days ago: surrounded by controversy about what role he intends to play in the country's domestic politics and upcoming elections.
That controversy was underscored by a dispute arising from talks between Mr.
Carter and President Jean-Bertrand Aristide concerning elections, scheduled for June 4, to contest more than 2,000 legislative and municipal positions.
What each man said in private was not quite clear, but the outcome dismayed some of Mr.
Aristide's most ardent supporters and awakened nationalist sentiment among other Haitians.


GADGET: A Better Birdwasher
After years of research, a team of veterinarians and technicianshas developed a better method for washing birds caught in oil spills.
The French oil company Elf Aquitaine paid for the machine, which was built in Toulouse and is now undergoing testing on the northern coast of Holland.
The idea was to develop an alternative to hand washing oiled guillemots (shown above) ducks and other sea birds.


A Shift to the Clean
Last season's waiflike slip has given way to the simple, svelte sheath.


Homeless Man Hit Woman In Penn Station, Police Say
It had been 10 years since Karen Biolsi, a 38-year-old sales representative from Oyster Bay, L.I., last ventured into New York City.
"I'm an Island girl," she said resolutely yesterday.
"I'm not a city person at all." But on Friday, a friend had persuaded her to take a train into Manhattan for dinner, saying: "Come on. Get a grip. What's going to happen to you?"


Alexis Steinberg, Erik T. Ekstein
Alexis Thea Steinberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Steinberg, was married last evening to Erik Tyler Ekstein, the son of Roberta P. Lieberman and Myron G. Ekstein, both of New York.
Rabbi Myron Kinberg performed the ceremony at the University Club.
Mrs.
Ekstein, 23, graduated from New York University.
She and her father are in the real-estate business in New York.
She is an associate at Williams Real Estate Company.
He is the president of Steinberg &amp; Pokoik.


Alyssa Dorfman, Donald Scherer
Alyssa Sherry Dorfman, the daughter of Janis and Michael Dorfman of Syosset, L.I., was married last evening to Donald Andrew Scherer, the son of Joan and Dr.
Warren Scherer of New York.
Rabbi Joel Goor officiated at Bridgewaters, a restaurant in New York.


6 Noses and Necks, But Just One Winner
How close is close?
Well, six horses made the photo finish today in the Gulfstream Budweiser Breeders' Cup Handicap, and the photo showed that the 7-year-old favorite, Misil, got his nose to the wire first, with five other horses bunched within one length of him.
All six made the picture, with this remarkably tight separation: Misil first by a neck, Myrmidon second by a neck, Star of Manila third by a nose, Turk Passer fourth by a nose, Awad fifth by a neck and Yokohama sixth.
It was more like a class picture than the end of a race run at a mile and three-eighths, but a lot of horses will be able to say they "almost" won.


Mark Twain's Romulus and Remus
To the Editor:
With all due respect to Caryn James ("Amy Had Golden Curls; Jo Had a Rat. Who Would You Rather Be?" Dec. 25) and Peter Gay ("The 'Legless Angel' of 'David Copperfield': There's More to Her Than Victorian Piety," Jan. 22), the most misunderstood figure in literature is neither Amy March nor Agnes Wickfield.
That honor goes, of course, to Sid Sawyer.


Rose Is a Rose
To the Editor:
In the review of two books about Gertrude Stein (Jan. 29), you have quoted Stein as saying, "A rose is a rose is a rose." All my reference books give this quotation as "Rose is a rose is a rose is a rose." The sentence does not start with "A"; it plunges right into "Rose."  FRANCES HANSEN  Metuchen, N.J.


For Pataki, a Close Brush With Possible Death-Penalty Ills
Nate Carter and George Pataki both grew up in Peekskill, N.Y., playing basketball together on the local courts.
Both starred for the Peekskill High School Red Devils.
Mr.
Carter remembers his older friend George as a good ball handler who got the job done without any fancy moves.
In 1982 their lives took divergent paths.
Mr.
Pataki was elected Mayor of Peekskill, beginning a political career that took him to the Governor's Mansion.


The Medium With a Message
THE MASTERS REVEALED Madame Blavatsky and the Myth  of the Great White Lodge.
By K. Paul Johnson.
Illustrated. 288 pp.
Albany:  State University of New York Press.
Cloth, $49.50.
Paper, $16.95.


Roe Takes Charge as UMass Rebounds&lt;HE
Massachusetts 77 St. Joseph's 58
Lou Roe was 9 for 10 from the field, scored 24 points and grabbed 9 rebounds to lead No. 5 Massachusetts to a 77-58 victory over St.
Joseph's yesterday in Philadelphia.
The Minutemen were coming off a 72-63 loss at Temple on Thursday night.
"It was exciting the way we responded," said Massachusetts Coach John Calipari.
"Lou had a great practice yesterday and I told him he would play great off that."


Joseph Sparkles in Goal As Blues Top Red Wings
Blues 3, Red Wings 2
Curtis Joseph made 35 saves to lead the visiting St.
Louis Blues over Detroit, 3-2, last night, snapping the Red Wings' five-game winning streak.
The victory was the Blues' fifth in six games.
Detroit's Chris Osgood entered the game as the hottest goaltender in the league.
His goals-against average was just 1.29, and he hadn't allowed more than two goals in any of his seven starts.
But Osgood gave up three goals on the Blues' first four shots, and after 8 minutes 38 seconds of the first period, he was gone.


Revived California Economy Confronts New Base Closings
With its long ailing economy finally rebounding, the news that California could lose more than 6,000 jobs with the proposed closing of two of its military bases was met this week with dismay but not alarm.
After all, some economists said, the state is expected to add as many as 400,000 new jobs during 1995.
But the picture looks considerably darker from the perspective of the ill-prepared communities next to the bases, where the closings could prove devastating.
That is especially true of Long Beach, the big port at the southern end of Los Angeles County, which is suffering from a deep post-cold-war hangover.
It already has one of the highest unemployment rates of any urban area in the country because of previous cuts by the military industry.


At Overgrown Cemetery, Some Jews Find Ancestors, Others Themselves
In the transient culture of Southern California, it sometimes seems that only the dead stay still.
Jewish law commands that people honor the deceased, but the weeds thriving at Mount Zion Cemetery appear to have deeper roots than the local Jewish community, which long ago moved out of the neighborhood and stopped tending the graves.
But last Sunday, 45 Los Angeles Jews, all at a stage of life when cemeteries seem like distant destinations, set out to clean up Mount Zion.
Armed with hoes and shovels and pitchforks, they yanked and hacked and raked, stuffing decades of neglect into giant plastic bags and carting it away.


Why Law Is No Fun Anymore
OVERCOMING LAW By Richard A. Posner. 597 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $39.95.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Mon.
Existing-home sales, Jan., mils., ann. rate
3.89
3.80
Tues.
Consumer confidence index, Feb.
102.1
101
Wed.
Gross domestic product, 4th qtr., pct. chg.
4.5
4.3
Construction spending, Jan., pct. chg.
1.1
-0.2
Auto sales, Feb., mils., ann. rate
7.0
7.0
Thur.
Personal income, Jan., pct. chg.
0.8
0.8
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
349
335
New-home sales, Jan., thous., ann. rate
637
630
Fri.
Leading indicators, Jan., pct. chg.
0.1
0.0
This Week's Developmkents
Tues.
Balanced-budget amendment vote in Senate
Thur.
Bundesbank Council meeting


Mary C. Rothwell and Evan A. Davis
Mary Carroll Rothwell, the principal law clerk to Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye of the State of New York, was married yesterday to Evan Anderson Davis, a partner in Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton, a New York law firm.
The Rev.
Herbert G. Draesel Jr., an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University in New York.
Mrs.
Davis, 36, was formerly a lawyer with the Criminal Appeals Bureau of the Legal Aid Society in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a law degree from the University of Kansas.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth S. Rothwell of Burlington, Vt.
Her father is a professor emeritus of English at the University of Vermont..
Her mother, Marilyn Gregg Rothwell, is a nurse practitioner and a clinical assistant professor of medicine at the University of Vermont College of Medicine.


Journal; Cheney Dumbs Down
So it wasn't the Army-McCarthy hearings.
But those who were there say that the biographer David McCullough's Congressional testimony 10 days ago was a home run.
In arguing for the National Endowment for the Humanities, the agency that finances museums, libraries and academic research, Mr.
McCullough didn't cite Truman but he did quote Kennedy, Jefferson and, rather more prosaically, Lynne Cheney, who said in 1991 that the N.E.H.'s projects "are sound investments for the Federal Government to make, even during this era of fiscal constraints."
Lynne Cheney?
Didn't she call for the complete abolition of the same agency before the same committee last month?
Well, yes.
She is also the same Lynne Cheney who ran the N.E.H. from 1986 through 1992, singing its praises all the way.
Now that she is leading the right-wing vigilantes to kill it, some might call her a hypocrite.
But not Mr.
McCullough.
He just used Mrs.
Cheney's own words to demolish the credibility of her recent about-face.


Next-to-nothing Knits
Knits this spring are as sheer as chiffon.


Paul D. Schickler, Yvonne E. Stevens
Yvonne Ellen Stevens, the daughter of Joan Stevens of New York and Olaf Stevens of Park Ridge, N.J., was married yesterday to Paul David Schickler, a son of Joyce and William Schickler of West Hartford, Conn.
The Rev.
Susan Marlan, an interfaith minister, performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Ballroom in New York.
The bride, 30, graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a vice president of corporate finance at SunAmerica Inc., an insurance company in Los Angeles.
Her father owns the India Pavilion Restaurant in New York.


High-Tech Medicine Delivers on Cost Too
To the Editor:
In "Better Care, Yes. Cheaper, No Way" (Op-Ed, Feb. 18), Henry J. Aaron exposes an outdated vision of health care costs and benefits.
Technology has revolutionized the way care can be delivered, not just the way patients are diagnosed and treated.
A combination of phone lines, computers and cameras makes it possible for expertise at a major medical center to come to a patient and to that person's doctor.


Isles Outplay Penguins After Losing Kasparaitis
If tonight was any indication, having to say goodbye to Darius Kasparaitis for the rest of the season does not necessarily mean saying goodbye to the season itself.
The Islanders announced before tonight's game against the league-leading Pittsburgh Penguins that a doctor's examination on Thursday had disclosed a torn anterior cruciate ligament in Kasparaitis's right knee.
The hard-hitting 22-year-old defenseman will have surgery next week and miss the rest of the year.


We Should Call It Profit Care, Not Managed Care
An article on Jan. 29 about a San Francisco hospital's adjustment to the new era of managed care drew a range of letters, most from physicians, citing the moral difficulties, both for individual doctors and for American society, of keeping an eye on the bottom line when a suffering patient awaits help.
To the Editor:


Folk Art With an Eye Toward the Modern
THE QUIRKY WOODEN DOLL Michael and Julie Hall bought for $8 in 1967 changed their lives.
The freshly carved American-gothic figure of a woman by Edgar Tolson, a Kentucky farmer, chair maker and cobbler, was their first taste of American folk art.
On a trip to New York several months later, the Halls visited the Museum of American Folk Art, where they were introduced to 18th- and 19th-century portraits, weather vanes and trade figures like cigar-store Indians.
They also met the museum's curator and one of its founders, Herbert Waite Hemphill Jr., who was wearing many hats that day -- guard, desk person, curator and owner of some of the art on view.


Playing Grammy Roulette
A CRITIC TRYING TO GUESS WHO WILL WIN the Grammy is a little like a chemist trying to whip up a souffle.
The principles may be familiar, but in practice the variables are tricky, and past behavior only predicts so much.
When the awards are handed out on Wednesday, there are bound to be a few sure things and plenty of head-scratchers.
The National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, whose 9,000 members vote for the awards, has criteria for "best" that are neither purely esthetic nor thoroughly commercial.
Its calendar is also peculiar; albums eligible for 1994 awards are those released from Oct. 1, 1993, through Sept. 30, 1994.


Housing for the Deaf: Independence and Community
Frederique McCall is a 35-year-old, married mother of two.
Until last year, she and her family -- her husband, Michael, and sons Terrence, 8, and David, 6 -- lived with her parents on Long Island.
She had not returned home because of hard times.
She had never left.
"My parents didn't think I could live independently," said Mrs.
McCall, who is deaf, through an interpeter.
"They didn't want me to move here."


Gila E. Gellman, Jerome Fortinsky
Gila Ellen Gellman, an associate at the New York law firm Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy, was married last evening to Jerome Steven Fortinsky, an associate at the Shearman &amp; Sterling law firm in New York.
Rabbi Adam Mintz officiated at the Jewish Community Center of Harrison, N.Y.
Rabbi William Horn, an uncle of the bride, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Fortinsky, 31, graduated summa cum laude from Boston University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her law degree from Georgetown University, from which she also received a master's degree in international relations.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Should We Even Consider Such Questions?
To the Editor:
Your article omits the substantial savings associated with safety features and thus considerably overstates the cost of the product on a "per-life" basis.
For example, cars equipped with devices like antilock brakes and air bags may avoid accidents altogether or make accidents far less severe.
Therefore, in addition to saving lives, these products save hundreds of millions of dollars in avoided medical costs and reduced property damage.
In the end, the so-called cost of saving lives, when all the additional saving are included, is far less than stated in your article.
DAVID A. LOEWENSTEIN  Rye Brook, N.Y., Feb. 1  The writer is a lawyer in private practice in Manhattan.


A Reason to Rubberneck on the Expressway
I'M LOST OUT HERE.
AND IT'S SO blissful to drift along the suburban highway, just letting the sprawl breeze by in the hypnotic American way, that I almost resent Richard Meier for bringing me to a halt with a solid piece of architecture.
But in a place not generally known for architectural rubbernecking, that's just what he has done.
His new office building for Swissair -- the first publically accessible building Meier has completed in America in 10 years -- is a swan among Long Island's architectural ducks.
Housing offices and a computer-reservations system formerly at Kennedy Airport, the Swissair North American headquarters is parked in Melville, just off the Long Island Expressway.
Surrounded by examples of generic industrial-park architecture, the new Swissair building is small in scale, and this in itself is a jolt.
Though Meier has designed projects of all sizes throughout Europe in recent years, for the past decade his reputation in this country has been wedded to the elephantine Getty Center, now in construction on its hilltop site overlooking Los Angeles.


A One-Stop Superstore For Texas Travelers
It's a map store.
It's a travel agency.
Also a luggage store.
And a gadget shop.
A book and video store, too.
Not to mention a global newsstand.
No wonder Travelfest, in Austin -- billed as the first travel superstore in a nationwide chain -- looks more like a travel hodgepodge.
Super it's not.
It's about the size of a chain drugstore.
But it is inviting, combining several types of goods and services that usually require separate calls or stops.
A traveler carrying nothing but a toiletry kit, a passport and a change of clothes could get everything needed to go straight from Travelfest to Mueller Municipal Airport in Austin, and then on to Topeka or Tokyo.


University Officials Denounce Cutbacks
Administrators of New York colleges and universities said their students and institutions would be hit disproportionately by proposed cuts in student loan and grant programs at a time when New York college students may need financial help more than ever.
In 1994, New York State students received the largest number of the Federal grants and loans that might be cut or eliminated, according to an analysis by the office of Representative Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of Brooklyn.
Article, page 35.


Presenting . . . May, Mamet &amp; Allen Ink


Sound Bytes; Disney's Virtual Visionary
GROWING up on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, Bran Ferren traveled extensively with his parents, both artists inspired by exploration.
When he was 9 years old, he had an epiphany at the Parthenon -- an appreciation of architecture and engineering that would become a lifelong fascination.
In 1978 Mr.
Ferren founded his own design firm, Associates &amp; Ferren.
His work, which has won three Academy Awards for technical achievement, has included set design for the Broadway shows "Evita," "Cats" and "Sunday in the Park with George" and stage productions by Pink Floyd, David Bowie and Paul McCartney.
Mr.
Ferren also directed the special visual effects for the films "Altered States," "Little Shop of Horrors" and "Star Trek V: The Final Frontier."


When the Weather Calls for Earthy Fare
ON a brisk winter day, I'd much rather sit down to a plate of braised lamb shanks and beans than some chic new dish made with monkfish and cilantro.
At this time of year, I want solid, earthy food, like a good stew, which can be mopped up with boiled potatoes, rice or a chunk of peasant bread.
Lamb shanks are an inexpensive and underused cut, but they are showing up with increasing frequency on the menus of restaurants.
They are delicious baked in the oven with white beans and served under a crust of bread crumbs, rather like a cassoulet.
A dark beef stew is another favorite, flavored with orange and rosemary and served with baby carrots and mashed potatoes.


Ms. O'Connell, Mr. Goldbaum
Kathleen O'Connell and Marc Bennett Goldbaum, producers of the CBS News program "48 Hours," were married yesterday at Gedney Farm, an inn in New Marlborough, Mass.
The Rev.
Arthur Kaufman, a Methodist minister, officiated, and Rabbi Charles Davidson took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
O'Connell, who is 34 and is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from Arizona State University.
She is a daughter of Miriam B. O'Connell of North Belmore, L.I., and Dr.
Joseph A. O'Connell of New York.
Her father is the president of Personal Diagnostics, an H.I.V. testing and counseling laboratory in New York.
Her mother is a geriatric nurse at the United Presbyterian Residential Home in Woodbury, L.I.


Data Bank/February 26, 1995
Data Bank/February 26, 1995
New Orders for Durable Goods
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
Monthly percent change
0.6
1.8
3.2
3-Month Treasury Bills
Feb. 24
Feb. 17
Feb. 10
Rate in percent
5.71
5.68
5.78
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
5.91
6.98
6.10
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
7.52
7.58
7.67
Auto Production
In units, weekly total
150,060
148,380
145,044
Trucks Production
In units, weekly total
117,050
118,701
118,333
Weekly Jobless Claims
Feb. 17
Feb. 10
Feb. 3
In thousands
349
347
318
Coal Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
21,024
20,466
22,121


Swaggering In Thelma And Louise's Footsteps
LATE IN "BOYS ON THE SIDE," WHOOPI Goldberg interrupts a party scene to sing a tender a cappella love song to a dying woman in a wheelchair.
If that sounds like a cue to rush for the exits, it ought to be, but the moment works all the same.
The scene is heartbreaking without being cloying, an honest expression of the sentiments this story summons so well.
That song captures the warmth and frankness that give this three-woman road movie a strong taste of the unexpected.
In terms of surprise, "Boys on the Side" has a pedigree that promises nothing special.
Released by a major studio (Warner Brothers), it was directed by a workmanlike veteran (Herbert Ross, whose credits include "The Sunshine Boys" and "The Goodbye Girl"), and it owes a huge debt to "Thelma and Louise." Not surprising, "Boys on the Side" is sometimes derivative and messy, but it still finds affecting ways to explore love, friendship, homosexuality and sexual uncertainty in the shadow of AIDS.


The Training Of a Physician
In response to the Jan. 22 article "Physicians Setting Up 2 H.M.O.'s":
Dale Florio, counsel to the New Jersey H.M.O.
Association, talks of doctors' wanting full employment.
Such objections are inappropriate when one considers the cost and sacrifice that go into the training of a physician.


401(k) Withdrawals Can Mean Trouble
EVEN after being advised against it, people are often tempted to take the money out of their 401(k) retirement accounts when leaving a job.
A pressing need, like paying the mortgage, or a strong desire to have a cushion, say during a period of unemployment, can put long-term plans on hold.
The backlash, though, may be severe.


Toiling to Reduce Taxes in a Changing Environment
NO one expects the Supreme Court to declare the income tax unconstitutional, as it did after the Civil War, or Congress to spare so many people that the wealthy will take out newspaper ads to boast of paying, as they did early in the 20th century.
But practically any other change in the tax law seems possible these days.
First came a batch of proposals in the Republicans' Contract With America.
Then the Clinton Administration issued its response.
Now, momentum is growing for radical overhaul in the form of a flat tax or a consumption tax.


An English View
To the Editor:
"Can you think of a movie in the last 10 years that has shown the C.I.A. and the F.B.I. in a positive light?" asks Senator Fred Thompson  [ "Hollywood Presents: Government as Villain," Feb. 12 ] .


Evicting Pigeons: A Primer
SOME people feed them.
Some people eat them.
Some people keep them as pets.
But there are others, it seems, who would like nothing better than to render them extinct.
Pigeons. Scientific name: Columba livia.  Urban nickname: Rats with wings.


Tangled Romance in 'Prisoner of Zenda'
SO you thought the Paper Mill Playhouse was taking a breather from its annual foray into the contemporary dopey, frenetic English farce of the "Run for Your Wife" or "It Runs in the Family" kind.
Wrong.
The current show parades standard-issue sex jokes, bathroom jokes, mistaken identities, wretched puns, slapstick and other shtick.
Only the mix-ups take place in mythical Ruritania, a sequestered kingdom in 1875, and the tangled story goes by the name "The Prisoner of Zenda."


Teeing Off in Style
The attractive blond couple in their late 30's were spending their Saturday afternoon perusing stacks of plaid pants and chino shorts, colorful polo shirts and mini-length kilts in the golf department of Ralph Lauren's Polo Sport shop on Madison Avenue.
Leslie Coburn, a realtor from Park City, Utah, and her friend Jack Phillips, a lawyer from Delaware, were getting ready to go to golf school in South Carolina.
"Golf is the sport of the 90's," said Phillips.
"It not only has social status but is a fun way to take a vacation."


Carol E. Hastings, James Bradbeer Jr.
Carol Elizabeth Hastings and James Biddle Bradbeer Jr., executives for manufacturers of women's and children's clothing, were married yesterday in Palm Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas W. Kirkman, a Presbyterian minister, performed the nondemoninational ceremony at the Royal Poinciana Chapel.
Mrs.
Bradbeer, 30, is a sales director in New York for Eagle's Eye Inc..
She graduated from St.
Mary's College in Notre Dame, Ind.
She is a daughter of Carol and Peter J. Hastings of Wilton, Conn.
Her parents own John D. Hastings Real Estate, an agency in Wilton.


Should We Even Consider Such Questions?
To the Editor:
Your article on the value of a human life and risk analysis ignores a critical point: those who benefit from a risky activity are often not the ones who must bear its costs.
Therein lies the moral obtuseness of much cost-benefit analysis.


INSIDE
Ulster Talks Gaining Support
As Protestants and Catholics in Northern Ireland begin to digest new proposals on the province's future, they remain sharply divided.
But most say they want their leaders to sit down and negotiate.
Page 3.
Suburb vs.
Suburb
Lakewood, Ohio, typifies the bane of older suburbs: fighting what used to be urban problems while competing with newer, outlying areas.
Page 18.
Hard Luck in Long Beach
Long Beach, Calif., may soon suffer another economic setback, the closing of its naval shipyard.
Page 18.


Older Suburbs Struggle to Compete With New
The grand mansions along Lake Erie here are still splendid, and the modest homes farther from the lakefront still neat and well kept.
Even the affluent in this suburb next door to Cleveland send their children to its public schools.
But all is not as stable as it seems.
Like hundreds of older suburbs across the nation, Lakewood is fighting to maintain its middle-class manner.
But even as it struggles to fend off problems associated with cities -- rising crime, dwindling services and fading schools -- Lakewood finds that newer, more outlying suburbs are luring away middle-class home buyers and with them the tax base needed to stave off decline.


Technology; Driving a Computer Like a Car
TYPEWRITER keyboards were once pretty simple things: a key for each letter of the alphabet, numbers, some punctuation marks and a shift key.
But as they have been adapted to control computers, they have grown larger and increasingly complex: function keys often represent at least four different commands, depending on whether some combination of the shift, control or alt keys are pressed along with them.
The required contortions are thought to be one cause of the repetitive strain injuries to the arms and hands of people who spend long hours working at computers.
Various remedies have been offered, including new keyboards that have different key configurations or are even split in two to ease arm and wrist strain.
But now some former research scientists from Russia believe they have put their finger on the problem.
Their solution: add foot controls to the computer interface.


U.S. Will Monitor Airline Marketing
The Transportation Department will scrutinize airlines' marketing practices more closely under a new program that, among other things, will monitor "two for one" fare sales that require travelers to buy a ticket that costs more than advertised discount fares.
The agency said it would also examine the practice of advertising one-way fares that require travelers to buy a return ticket, as well as fare sales in which only a few seats are made available at the sale price.
Frequent flier programs and airlines' overbooking practices are two more areas that will be reviewed.


O'Sullivan Sets Pace, As Usual, and Younger Milers Never Catch Up
The young milers never seem to learn.
They let Marcus O'Sullivan, the 32-year-old Irishman, stay at or near the front and then, at the end, they lack the speed or strength to run him down.
It happened again today in the Mobil Invitational indoor track meet before a sellout crowd of 5,000 at the George Mason University field house.
O'Sullivan, running the last quarter-mile in 57.2 seconds, won by 4 meters in 3 minutes 56.48 seconds, the fastest in the world this year.


Catchy Tunes Laced With Danger
AT FIRST, JERRY LEIBER and Mike Stoller's songs may sound like nostalgic novelties.
They're full of droll gimmicks: high and low voices bouncing in the Coasters' "Yakety Yak" or the "ooh-wah, yah" that opens the Robins' "Smokey Joe's Cafe," the title song from the Leiber and Stoller revue that opens at the Virginia Theater on Broadway this week.
Leiber and Stoller could knock out pop fodder, but their best songs are something more than the work of hit-seeking craftsmen.
Whether they were comic, as in their long string of hits for the Coasters, or romantic, as in their songs for the Drifters and Elvis Presley, there was unflinching knowledge behind the joker's grin and the lovers' vows.
Today, their songs still matter because they didn't settle for pop illusions.


Gore Says U.S. Plans to Open Phone and TV To Foreigners
Seeking to accelerate deregulation of a global information network, Vice President Al Gore told ministers and business executives from Europe and Japan today that the United States planned to permit unrestricted foreign investment in American telecommunications markets this year, but only to investors whose countries have opened their telecommunications markets.
In a speech at the first meeting by Group of Seven major industrialized countries on global telecommunications, Mr.
Gore put France, Germany and Japan, in particular, on notice that they would have a hard time entering certain areas of the United States market without letting American companies compete in their countries.


L'Arlesienne
Jeanne Calment, who lives in southern France, turned 120 last week.
So great an age is a distinction in itself, but not as great as another granted Mme.
Calment.
She is the last person on earth who can claim to have seen Vincent van Gogh.
The painter was, she says, "very ugly, ungracious, impolite and not well." When the man she was to marry one day wanted to introduce them to each other, van Gogh "glanced at me unpleasantly, as if to say 'not worth bothering with.' That was enough for me."
That was 106 years ago when van Gogh, like Mme.
Calment, was living in Arles -- infatuated with its light, colors and costumes and les Arlesiennes.
"As for the women of Arles . . ." he wrote to his brother, "do you want to know my real opinion of them? They are, no question about it, really charming. . . . There are women like a Fragonard and like a Renoir. And some that can't be labeled with anything that's been done yet in painting."


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
JAMAICA  A Caribbean Beat For Mardi Gras
No need to go all the way to New Orleans to celebrate Mardi Gras.
On Tuesday the Jamaica Market in Queens will hold a Mardi Gras celebration complete with music, Caribbean food and a stilt dancer.


Paterson, Used to Struggling, Struggles for Control
A short walk from the spot where a young drug suspect was shot by a rookie police officer earlier this week lies a stretch of abandoned textile mills, one after the other, dozens of mottled brick carcasses that once nurtured this city and clothed the nation.
Most everyone here learns in school that Paterson was a workhorse of the Industrial Revolution.
There were so many thousands of looms earlier in the century that the din of machinery forever clogged the local air.
It was a sound -- thwack, thwack, thwack -- that meant jobs.


February 19-25; A Moment of Silence


The Unheralded Seniors Help UConn Clinch Tie
At the end, the ball belonged to Nantambu Willingham.
This has not been a frequent occurrence in his career at the University of Connecticut, so it didn't seem to matter that time had run out, the horn was sounding and his final game at Gampel Pavilion has just come to an end.
Tonight, when the Huskies clinched a tie for the Big East regular-season championship with a 75-61 victory over Seton Hall, Willingham provided an exclamation point that was as emotionally resounding as it was unofficial, even if he did not score a point.


DAREDEVILS
Drive throughthe night in diaphanous or dramatic black or white.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
TROUPE IN BENEFIT
The part that the Belfry Repertory is playing in a benefit concert for the Glen Rock-Ridgewood AIDS Ministry tonight may mark the first step in the theater company's comeback.
A small professional theater under an Actors' Equity contract, Belfry has been inoperative since losing its performing space at St.
Paul's Church in Nyack, N.Y., more than three years ago.
"There was no room for us," Joseph Verlezza, the company's artistic director, said.
"Ministries were changed, and the doors were padlocked."


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
BATTERY PARK CITY  $222,000
300 Rector Place  (Battery Pointe)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. condo in a 7-year-old building; 24-hr. concierge, gym, windowed kitchen, 2 exposures; common charge $942, taxes $4,141, listed at $249,000, 10 weeks on market (Broker: Regatta N.Y.)


When the Weather Calls for Earthy Fare
ON a brisk winter day, I'd much rather sit down to a plate of braised lamb shanks and beans than some chic new dish made with monkfish and cilantro.
At this time of year, I want solid, earthy food, like a good stew, which can be mopped up with boiled potatoes, rice or a chunk of peasant bread.
Lamb shanks are an inexpensive and underused cut, but they are showing up with increasing frequency on the menus of restaurants.
They are delicious baked in the oven with white beans and served under a crust of bread crumbs, rather like a cassoulet.
A dark beef stew is another favorite, flavored with orange and rosemary and served with baby carrots and mashed potatoes.


The World; Outside Hands Still Stir the Afghan Pot
IN the wasteland Afghanistan has become after 15 years of war, there are many memorials to the role played by foreigners.
The rusting hulks of Soviet tanks serve as roadside shelters for the Muslim fighters who helped drive the Soviet forces out, and who now man the innumerable checkpoints of a civil war.
Wrecked Soviet helicopters lie up every valley, some with their cannons still loaded.
Less obvious, but equally telling, are the traces of the United States, on whom the rival resistance groups known as mujahedeen, or soldiers of God, relied heavily for weapons and finance.
Even before the last Soviet troops withdrew six years ago, the mujahedeen were at war with each other, dividing the country into a jigsaw of lawless fiefs.
And after Kabul's Soviet-backed government collapsed three years ago, weapons that Washington had funneled in were used for a new round of bloodshed.


Will Steger
INSIDE WILL STEGER'S WOOD-BURNING SAUNA, at the edge of Pickett Lake in Ely, Minn., in January, it's 150 degrees.
Outside it's 10 below.
Steger splits the difference, lying silently on a bench next to the pulsing stove, then sprinting out onto the frozen lake and diving through a rough-cut hole in the ice.
After a roll in the snow, Steger re-enters the sauna, dripping wet and smiling.
At 135 pounds, he's not quite what you'd expect America's best-known polar explorer to look like.
Yet on March 5 he will again put his wiry, 50-year-old body to the test, leading a six-member team in an effort to be the first to dog-sled across the Arctic Ocean in one season, from Siberia to Canada by way of the North Pole.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 26, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
TOM CLANCY'S OP-CENTER, created by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik. (Berkley, $6.99.) The operations of a secret Government agency.
2
2
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
3
5
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Warner, $6.99.) A doctor stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
4
4
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $6.50.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her late son creates familial tension.
5
5
ICEBOUND, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The world's future is threatened by a tidal wave, storms and a psychopathic killer.
6
5
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $6.99.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a Vermont town.
7*
2
AMBUSH AT CORELLIA, by Roger MacBride Allen. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The first volume of a new "Star Wars" trilogy.
8
37
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
9
1
THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $5.99.) Jim Qwilleran and his cats investigate catastrophes.
10
1
HEARTSTONE, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) A New Hampshire detective and district attorney probe a seven-year-old murder.
11
6
LOVERS, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $6.99.) Romance, rivalry and fun as experienced by half a dozen couples.
12
24
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
13
5
PRINCE CHARMING, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $6.50.) A lady in Victorian London discovers the man of her dreams, a Montanan.
14
1
THE THRILL OF VICTORY, by Sandra Brown. (MIRA, $4.99.) A reporter's attempt to destroy the reputation of a tennis star leads to romance.
15
26
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
23
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
10
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of "Seinfeld."
3*
22
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) The reminiscences of two black sisters, both of them over 100.
4
5
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Vintage, $13.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
5*
59
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
6
11
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A discussion of love and relationships.
7
7
CONTRACT WITH AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich, Dick Armey, et al. (Times Books/Random House, $10.) The Republican program.
8
18
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
9
590
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
10
26
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
11
32
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
12
104
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
13
41
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
14*
55
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
15*
1
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
22
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
200
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
2
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY: An Experiential Guide, by James Redfield and Carol Adrienne. (Warner, $8.99.) Ways to apply the inspirational message of the novel "The Celestine Prophecy."
4
3
WHAT TO EXPECT THE TODDLER YEARS, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $15.95.) Counsel.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 11, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Upper-Upper West: Above 100th Street
BLUE COLLAR CAFE ++ (212) 864-9212; 940 Amsterdam Avenue, at 106th Street; $; no credit cards


World Markets; Emerging Markets Still Have Appeal
"POOR Mexico! So far from God and so close to the United States," said then-President Porfirio Diaz at the turn of the century when he sought sympathy for his country's predicament.
Today he would have to admit that being America's neighbor has its advantages.
Now, when Mexico's economic luck runs out, Washington promptly declares a "systemic crisis" that threatens to send a recessionary shock wave throughout the developing world and mobilizes a $50 billion rescue package.
The all-American $20 billion slice of that package was approved last week.
And in an immediate sign of reviving confidence, private investors Wednesday only sold back to the Mexican Government $1.4 billion of short-term bonds, called tesebonos, although it offered to redeem $2 billion worth.


GOVERNOR GET-A-JOB
In "Governor Get-a-Job" (Jan. 15), Norman Atkins writes that Tommy Thompson's "mother's kin migrated here during Ireland's potato famine to avail themselves of one of the most generous public-assistance programs in United States history, the Homestead Act of 1862, which gave settlers 160 acres of land for a song." If your author was referring to the financial obligation of those who took advantage of this opportunity, he was correct.
However, he failed to mention that these hearty souls were required to inhabit, clear and cultivate the land they claimed within two to three years, an enormous task.
Their efforts were of tremendous benefit, not just to themselves but to society.


POSTINGS: An $82 Million, Five-Year Face Lift; Sprucing Up Grand Central Subway Station
The Grand Central subway station, the city's busiest and -- according to the architect in charge of renovating it -- one of the dirtiest looking, is to get a complete face lift starting in November.
The $82 million project is financed by Federal and state funds and designed by Gruzen Samton Architects.
It will focus more on new surfaces than on reconstruction, said Peter Samton, the partner in charge of a 24-person design team.


The Man Who Keeps 'E.R.' 's Heart Beating
ANY VISITOR TO THE BURBANK production offices of "E.R.," the NBC medical drama series, could quickly discern who is the guiding force behind the biggest network hit in several years.
It is not Michael Crichton, the novelist and screenwriter, who created the show, wrote its pilot episode -- and departed almost immediately to write new novels.
It is not Steven Spielberg, whose Amblin Television company took the project to a big studio, Warner Brothers.
It is not Leslie Moonves, the president of Warner Brothers Television, which produces the show for NBC.


A Big Brokerage Set to Descend on Midtown South
CORPORATE paths sometimes cross in unpredictable ways.
Just as the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company was moving employees out of its imposing North Tower building at 11 Madison Avenue, at 25th Street, to make it available for general leasing, CS First Boston was facing a crucial decision.
It had to decide where to park itself once its principal midtown lease expires in 1996.
These coinciding circumstances led eventually to a momentous handshake in January.
CS First Boston, one of the city's largest brokerage and investment banking firms, agreed to lease 1.1 million square feet of space in the building for 20 years.
That's more than half the building's total space.


Straining to Scale Balanchinian Heights
NOT-SO-RANDOM reflections on the New York City Ballet, which ends its winter season today: Gone are the times when the company staged works like George Balanchine's "Opus 34" of 1954.
Whether it was art or not, it was full of victims, the choreographer's self-styled horror show.
The Schoenberg score was played and then repeated.
The first section was pure dance.
The second featured performers in stocking masks, walking corpses in an operating room with blood-soaked bandages.
Balanchine took his cue from the score's subtitles: "Threat," "Danger," "Fear" and "Catastrophe." Afterward he spoke of images evoking "terrible accidents, hospital emergency wards or what concentration camps might have been like."


Rebels Against the Rude
IT is a Thursday around noon, and an elderly blind man needs a seat on the No. 1 train in lower Manhattan.
But a man is sprawled out across four seats, despite the label that says "Priority seating for persons with disabilities." The blind man tries to sit, lands on the sleeping man's ankles and stands again.
Ralph Rivera, 43, a rough-complexioned defense attorney who grew up on the Upper West Side, narrows his eyes, decides.
A solid figure in his black coat, he shoots across the aisle, leans over and presses against the sleeping man's back.
"C'mon, buddy, get up," he says.


Monroe College May Not Have a Home, but Its Family Is No. 1
Five years ago, Monroe College had no basketball program -- or even a gym.
Four years ago, the school fielded a dismal team.
But in the last two seasons, still without a home court, Monroe has built a national power.
Nestled atop a Modell's sporting goods store in the Fordham section of the Bronx, Monroe resembles a drab high school, but is the No. 1-ranked junior college in Division III.


THE CONCILIATOR
Without trying to insult Carter, I find some of his actions remind me of a similarly minded British politician at a conference in Munich in the 1930's (although Carter seems much less naive).
To have one's heart in the right place is not enough.
Treating both sides equally, without regard to who is the good guy and who is the bad, is one step closer to forgiving those who committed the atrocities in Bosnia.
STJEPAN BALOG Warren, Mich.


Deanna Damiano, Joseph Bastianich
When it comes to food, Deanna Damiano, 25, and Joseph Bastianich, 27, are opposites.
Until they met through friends three years ago, Ms.
Damiano, who helps produce private-label handbags for the Associated Merchandising Corporation in New York, subsisted primarily on yogurt, popcorn, bagels and cereal.


Corrections
A chart in The Times Magazine last Sunday with an article about poetry misstated the family background of the poet and editor J. D. McClatchy.
He is not an heir to the McClatchy newspaper fortune or related to that branch of the family.
The chart also misidentified a book he edited.
It is "The Vintage Book of Contemporary American Poetry," not "Contemporary American Poetry." The chart also referred incorrectly to a work being translated by the poet and editor Richard Howard.
The translation, the introduction to a book on Dorothea Tanning, a patron of poetry, is from French to English, not into French.


Broadcasters' View On HDTV Debate
To the Editor:
As "The Fight for Digital TV's Future" (Jan. 22) reports, dramatic breakthroughs in digital technology will make it possible for broadcasters to deliver both vastly improved picture and sound quality and a host of broadcast and nonbroadcast services.
Broadcasters are eager to bring the benefits of these services to the public.
The following background deserves emphasis:


Prehistoric Garden


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


The Spy in the Cold
KOLYMSKY HEIGHTS By Lionel Davidson. 361 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press. $22.95.


Luggage Problems
To the Editor: I had an unfortunate experience using the kind of luggage carts often rented in airports and railroad terminals.
I have always looked on these carts as a boon, since it is often difficult and always expensive to get a porter, and the carts provide an inexpensive way of handling several heavy bags.


February 19-25; Frank Lloyd Wright Rides Again
In 1953, when Frank Lloyd Wright asked the voters of Madison, Wis., to approve his plan for the Monona Terrace civic center, he was uncharacteristically modest: "I'm only an old fool who would like to make a final contribution to my boyhood town."
The voters of Madison approved the bonds for the grand project on the shore of Lake Monona in 1954, but construction was blocked by Wright's foes.


Most Americans Would Restrict Abortion
To the Editor:
In "The G.O.P.'s Pro-Choice Majority" (editorial, Feb. 19), you use a recent poll to support your contention that most Republicans, like most Americans, are pro-choice.
In fact, I read the graphic on the page as showing that 65 percent of Republicans (and 58 percent of Americans) want to place greater restrictions on abortion.


What's Under is on the Outside
Boudoir looks for daytime wear are more popular than ever.


February 19-25: Civil Rights; Myrlie Evers-Williams Is Chairwoman of N.A.A.C.P.
Twice in the last year, Myrlie Evers-Williams, the 61-year-old widow of the slain civil rights leader Medgar Evers, has won improbable victories.
Last February, a Mississippi court finally handed down a conviction in the 1963 murder of her husband.
Last week, after a round of last-minute campaigning, she squeaked by with a one-vote victory over the in cumbent chairman, William F. Gibson, to take control of the board of directors of the N.A.A.C.P.


Broncos Sign Perry to Three-Year Deal
The Denver Broncos have quit talking about improving their pass rush and have taken to shelling out hard cash -- $12 million in two days.
The five-time Pro Bowl defensive tackle MICHAEL DEAN PERRY signed a three-year, $7.2 million contract with Denver late Friday.
Perry, who played seven seasons at Cleveland, was released by the Browns earlier in the month for salary cap reasons coupled with his history of knee and ankle injuries.
But he is a prime-time Pro Bowler regarded as one of the more talented defensive lineman available as a free agent this year.


Pataki's Plans to Lay Off Prison Chaplains Faces Opposition
Gov.
George E. Pataki's budget calls for laying off more than half the chaplains from the state prisons as part of cuts to education, recreation and drug abuse programs that prison advocates say could increase tensions in the correctional system.
While there are few protectors for some cuts -- to prisoner law libraries, for example -- supporters of the chaplains have begun pressing their case and are already finding a sympathetic ear among several key lawmakers.


Two Gifted Westchester Youths Earn Broader Recognition; Paul Bongaarts Seeks a Patent
FOR most high school students, lasers are the stuff of Star Trek commands or special effects at rock concerts.
For one Byram Hills High School senior, Paul A. Bongaarts, the county's only Westinghouse Science Talent Search finalist this year, the lasers that form holographic images are the stuff of a scientific quest.
Paul's designation as a Westinghouse finalist is an elusive if highly desirable prize for him and the 1,700 other high school students who compete nationwide.
About 300 students become semi-finalists, with 40 selected as finalists.
Those 40 then spend a few days in Washington in early March to defend their work before professional research and industrial scientists, who select the top 10 for scholarships in varying amounts.
Each finalist, however, is guaranteed at least $1,000.


Q. and A.
Barring Animals In a Condo Q In 1986 I purchased a condominium in Tenafly, N.J., and lived in the apartment with my cat until 1990.
From 1990 to the present I have rented out the apartment because I had to move for employment reasons.


Pueblo Nuevo: Housing Hero In Crisis
For two decades, on the frayed streets of the Lower East Side, Pueblo Nuevo was seen as a builder of dreams.
As the community's largest nonprofit manager of low-income housing, it transformed more than 40 troubled buildings into co-ops for the poor.
It kicked out drug dealers, rehabilitated buildings and gave people the pride of ownership.
But now, because of allegations of financial mismanagement and fraud made by several former employees, a number of Pueblo-managed buildings have opted to manage themselves, reducing the number operated by the agency by about 30 percent.


Sports of The Times; Strawberry Statement: More Denial
THIS is the terrible town where Darryl Strawberry was led astray.
I take that charge personally, since my family has lived in this Long Island suburb for many years, and none of us is facing three months for tax evasion, at least that I know about.
Of all the comments by Darryl in an extensive article in Sports Illustrated, this one really annoys me -- that New York dragged Darryl down.
As it happens, Darryl and at least half the 1986 Mets lived in Port Washington, about 30 minutes east of Shea Stadium.
And some of them lived it up here.
But whose fault was that?


RESULTS PLUS
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  Colorado's Perfect End  Shelley Sheetz scored a game-high 26 points as No. 3 Colorado ended a perfect Big Eight season by edging host Kansas State, 77-74, yesterday.
Kansas State's Shanele Stires missed a 3-pointer at the buzzer.
Carlene Mitchell hit a 3-pointer with 1 minute 11 seconds left to put the Wildcats (14-12, 6-8) ahead by 74-73, their first lead since an 8-6 advantage early in the game.
But Colorado's Erin Scholz grabbed an air ball by teammate Amy Palmer and put it in to give the Buffaloes (24-2, 14-0) the lead for good, 75-74.
Jen Terry hit both ends of a one-and-one with 9.8 seconds remaining to put Colorado ahead by 3 before Stires missed the potential game-tying shot. (AP) GOLF  U.S.
Seniors Triumph  Jim Colbert and Jim Dent won the first two singles matches of the day yesterday and the United States went on to recapture the Chrysler Cup, 11-5, from an international team of seniors in Acapulco, Mexico.
Colbert, the United States captain, beat Bob Charles of New Zealand by shooting a 69 to Charles's 72.
Dent then beat Harold Henning of South Africa, 71-76, over the 7,082-yard, par-72 Tres Vidas Acapulco Country Club along the Pacific Ocean.
Those victories gave the United States the 2 points it needed to reach 8 1/2, the necessary margin for victory in the Senior Tour's version of the Ryder Cup. (AP) AUTO RACING  Gordon Goes Distance  Jeff Gordon made a runaway of the Goodwrench 500 yesterday in Rockingham, N.C., starting on the pole and speeding to his third Winston Cup victory.
Gordon's Hendrick Motorsports Chevrolet Monte Carlo averaged 125.396 miles an hour and led 329 of the 492 laps on the 1.017-mile oval at North Carolina Motor Speedway, including the final 83 laps.
Gordon beat Bobby Labonte to the finish line by 1.19 seconds, about 20 car lengths. (AP) ALPINE SKIING  Kitt Is a Close Second  Peter Runggaldier of Italy won a World Cup Super-G by edging A J Kitt on a fast track at Whistler Mountain, British Columbia.
Runggaldier started second and covered the 53-gate, 2,449-meter course in 1 minute 35.97 seconds to beat the American by 13-hundredths of a second.
Kitt, who hadn't had a top-three finish since 1993, had a remarkable run considering he started 54th.
Tommy Moe, the defending champion, crashed early in his run and was taken to a hospital with possible broken ribs. (AP) SPEED SKATING  Hunyady Defeats Blair  Emese Hunyady of Austria won the women's 1,000-meter race in Inzell, Germany, at a meet that was troubled by freezing rain and snow.
Bonnie Blair, the five-time Olympic champion, caught the slowest track conditions and finished 13th.
Hunyady's winning time was 1 minute 22.33 seconds. (AP) YACHT RACING  Auguin to Arrive Late  The wind failed to cooperate yesterday for the intended arrival in Punta del Este, Uruguay, of Christophe Auguin.
The French competitor in the BOC solo yacht race around the world got caught in a high-pressure system off the South American coast.
In a message to race officials, he revised his estimated time of arrival to today.
Auguin is the first of 13 solo sailors expected to sail into Punta, the third port of call in the 27,000-mile race.
Jean Luc Van den Heede of France is about 400 miles behind Auguin.


For Endangered Species, Humans Present 'the Cooked Frog Problem'
NOAH'S CHOICE The Future of Endangered Species  By Charles C. Mann and Mark L. Plummer  302 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
The biblical Noah had it easy, write Charles C. Mann and Mark L. Plummer in their new book, "Noah's Choice: The Future of Endangered Species." He had clear instructions from God, the material to build the ark, a known number of animals to save and the right amount of space to keep them.
"He and his sons just stood on the gangplank and let everything in," the authors write.
"When no creature was waiting outside, he shut the door and waited for the rain."


Chemical Plant Fire Releases Fumes


Mayor Speeds Shift of Police Press Officers
In what appeared to be the final step in a shake-up of the Police Department's public relations office, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani ordered Police Commissioner William Bratton to transfer the remaining dozen uniformed staff members out of the office by the end of this week, officials said yesterday.
Police officials, who had trimmed the staff by more than half earlier this month, characterized the move as completely unexpected and said it will leave them scrambling to find replacements in time.


Financiers With a Real Place in History
The crisis at Barings, a British investment banking firm that has endured for nearly 230 years, is in keeping with its history.
More than most firms, it has shown a willingness to invest abroad, often in markets that its competitors had deemed far too risky.
It was Barings that arranged the financing for the United States' purchase of the Louisiana Territory from France in 1803.
It was a transaction that seemed far too dangerous to some.
"We all tremble about the magnitude" of the loan, a Barings executive wrote that year.


Tokyo Stocks Plunge on British Firm's Collapse
The jitters caused by the collapse on Sunday of the British investment bank Barings P.L.C. sent the Tokyo stock market plunging this morning, forcing the Nikkei index below 17,000 points for the first time since the end of 1993.
The Tokyo Stock Exchange and the Osaka Futures Exchange suspended trading by Barings Securities (Japan) Ltd. before the markets opened.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei index of 225 issues closed down 660.33 points, or 3.78 percent, at 16,812.61.


N.I.T. Is the Only Goal Left for St. John's
St.
John's search for a productive team chemistry has been long and arduous, and has encompassed most of the season.
Only in the last three weeks has the Red Storm gone from a team unsure of itself to a team playing with a sense of purpose.
But has this unified spirit come too late to salvage the season?
Only two games at Madison Square Garden, against Syracuse on Wednesday and Georgetown on Sunday, remain before the Big East tournament.
At 12-12 over all, St.
John's needs to win at least one of the two to finish .500 and keep alive its hopes for a bid to the National Invitation Tournament.


Pavin Puts His Stamp On a Demanding Course
There are certain givens in sports: You don't hang a curveball to Frank Thomas, you don't try to single cover Jerry Rice and you don't outduel Corey Pavin at Riviera Country Club.
This latest addition to the list of sports axioms was written today in the final round of the Nissan Open, when Pavin came from one stroke behind with a 67 that buried Kenny Perry and Jay Don Blake by three strokes and established him as the latest king of the old course on the hill.
For the first time since Arnold Palmer won consecutive Los Angeles Opens in 1966-67, someone has successfully defended his title here.
The major difference is that Pavin did it at Riviera, not Rancho Park, and he did it by putting on a shot-making clinic on a golf course that demands it.
In so doing, Pavin joined a very exclusive club.
Only Ben Hogan in 1947-48 had been able to defend at Riviera before today.


Making Haiti Safer for Democracy
Haiti's small and corrupt army was never much use against foreign invaders.
Its real function has always been to protect a tiny elite by intimidating the poor.
In recent years it has also gotten into the business of overthrowing governments, most recently in the September 1991 coup that forced President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to spend most of his elected term in exile in the United States.
Understandably, President Aristide, now back in power with help from the United States, would rather be rid of the army altogether.
But that idea makes Washington nervous.
It fears abolishing the army could create a power vacuum.
Washington wants to retain and retrain much of the old army, while creating a separate civilian police force.


On the Right to Bear Protests
Monmouth Battlefield State Park has been open to deer hunting for several years, and for several years deer hunters have been the targets of protests.
A 1993 state statute prohibits the harassment of hunters, but that has not stopped the New Jersey Animal Rights Alliance.
Five protesters were arrested at the park in Manalapan Township a year ago and fined a total of $1,160, including court costs.


The Hospitals Abdicate on Abortions
It is all very well that the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education has voted unanimously to require prospective obstetricians and the hospitals that teach them to include abortion training in their programs, unless they have moral objections.
But how do teaching hospitals train obstetricians in a procedure that not many hospitals -- in some states, no hospitals -- any longer do?
Fear of harassment and reluctance to alienate prospective donors have driven the hospitals to run for cover.
In New York City, where only 9 percent of abortions in 1993 were performed in hospitals, Planned Parenthood has taken up the slack by training residents in six programs, among them Columbia-Presbyterian's.
It has also taken up the financial burden of doing so.
A noble undertaking, but isn't there something perverse about Planned Parenthood having to do (with its own money, besides) what a medical school should have been doing all along?


Give Them a Bigger Allowance
Counting on money before you have it and not allowing for those unexpected expenses -- families get in financial trouble that way, and so do cities.
Property taxes went down in 1993 and 1994, and last August the folks who run Jersey City thought a small tax cut would be safe for the current fiscal year, too.
Nope.
About $18 million in unanticipated expenses, along with over-optimistic revenue projections, made it necessary to fine-tune the current budget.


Broad Review Of Bias Policy Gains Support
In a departure from their long-held, unqualified support of affirmative action, three prominent liberal Democrats -- two of them leading black legislators -- today endorsed a review of Government policies and programs that give preferences to women and members of minorities.
But while supporting the review, the three Democrats -- Willie L. Brown Jr., the Speaker of the California Assembly; Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, and Representative Kweisi Mfume of Maryland, who formerly headed the Congressional Black Caucus -- emphasized that some special efforts were appropriate to help women and members of minorities overcome the effects of past and current discrimination.


Victorian Mansion Stirs Melodrama
A classic Victorian house that was used in the movie "Ragtime" and has long been a landmark in this northern Westchester County village may be hauled away in pieces and rebuilt elsewhere because of a zoning dispute.
The company that makes a line of expensive dolls called the American Girls Collection wants to turn the house into a museum of life at the turn of the century.
But the building is in a residential zone, and the village Board of Trustees has refused to amend zoning regulations to permit such a use.


CS First Boston's Exit Leads to New Bond Firm
Just two weeks after the CS First Boston Corporation decided to get out of the public-finance business, some of its top employees said Friday that they were starting their own municipal bond house to be made up largely of former CS First Boston municipal bankers.
The new firm is starting with $25 million in capital and is headed by three top CS First Boston municipal bankers: Bradford Higgins, Thomas Barry and Donald Carey.
The firm, called Cambridge Capital Partners, plans to build on its relationships with former CS First Boston clients and will recruit extensively, but not exclusively, among former CS First Boston employees.


Regulatory Justice
To the Editor:
Re "And Now, Regulatory Reform (See Above)" by Gregory S. Wetstone (Op-Ed, Feb. 23): My, my, my -- Mr.
Wetstone is wringing his hands in despair over the effects of the regulatory reform proposed in H.R. 9.
Seems to me the House bill proposes that regulatory bodies jump through hoops and over hurdles no more onerous than those that citizens and businesses have been required to endure for many a year.
What goes around comes around.
PAUL C. HANS  Scottsdale, Ariz., Feb. 23, 1995


U.S. Business Favors Deal, With Caution
Some American business leaders yesterday praised the new agreement between the United States and China on protecting intellectual property, saying it would provide long-term benefits for both sides and further open the Chinese market to American products.
But some of those business people expressed caution about the accord, which was reached in Beijing, saying that China's resolve to enforce its tough anti-piracy laws was crucial.


Counseling Helps Family Mourn Death of a Mother
The young mother dashed out to buy medicine for her son.
As she hurried home on a snowy street, a car struck and killed her.
From that day in 1990, her husband, Victor C., has cared for their three children alone.
Despite his efforts to keep them together, however, the family has suffered.
"You don't realize the burdens of a mother's job until she is gone," said Mr.
C., 44, a Peruvian immigrant in Queens.
"I was trying so hard, but my kids needed more."


But Was it a Crash Course?
The vehicle was totaled, but the people walked away with hardly a scratch.
That happens now and then in car crashes, but a plane crash?
An instructor and his student were taking a scenic cruise over the Hudson River on Saturday afternoon when the engine of their Cessna 152 conked out three miles south of the George Washington Bridge.
The police said the pilot spotted open land just south of a hospital on the New Jersey side and headed for it.


Lebanon Protests as Israel Blockades Its Coast to 'Send a Message'
For more than two weeks, the Israeli Navy has blockaded a long stretch of Lebanon's Mediterranean coastline, keeping many hundreds of Lebanese fishermen from making a living at sea.
Lebanon's Prime Minister, Rafik al-Hariri, accused the Israelis of engaging in "political, military and economic terrorism."


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Crossing Cultures And Blending Textures  Music From Japan The Asia Society
Music from Japan is celebrating 20 years of concerts in the Americas, and one of the New York events was a late-afternoon chamber music program on Saturday.
The six pieces demonstrated the felicities and disappointments of trying to express one's own sensibilities through the cultural means of others.
The composers were Japanese, but with the exception of the sho (a distant relative of our harmonica) used in Toshi Ichiyanagi's "Music for Violin, Sho and Piano," here was Japanese culture forcibly filtered through instruments embodying European ideas of tuning, interval and sonority.


CHRONICLE
A big-money book deal has landed a well-known sex crimes prosecutor in the ranks of rookie novelists who become rich quickly by scaring, puzzling and tickling the public.
LINDA A. FAIRSTEIN , chief of the sex crimes unit of the Manhattan District Attorney's office, recently signed with Scribner to write two mystery novels for $500,000, The Associated Press reported.


Bridge
Here is a difficult trivia question: What international trophy has had the same winner on a number of occasions, and no other winner?
The answer is the Solomon Trophy to the country doing best in the quadrennial world championships.
When begun in 1966 it was won by the United States, which won for the eighth straight time in September.
Americans won both major team titles, and Poland, the runner-up, won the open and mixed pair titles.


A One-Store Bookseller Challenges the Giants
While the big story in book retailing for the last decade has been the relentless spread of giant chains like B. Dalton, Barnes &amp; Noble and Borders, the quirky subplot has been the flowering in some communities of large independent stores.
The new pacesetter among these independents, at least in terms of space under one roof, is the Library Ltd., which recently added a cafe, reading rooms decorated with different themes and 20,000 square feet of selling space.
With a total of 53,000 square feet, the Library now dwarfs the nearest large chain outlet in this wealthy St.
Louis suburb, a 20,000-square-foot Barnes &amp; Noble store about a mile away.
The biggest bookstore in the country -- about three times the size of the Library -- is the Barnes &amp; Noble store on Fifth Avenue at 18th Street in Manhattan.


How One U.S. City Lends a Hand to Russia
To the Editor:
Your article on the growing health problems of Russians (front page, Feb. 19) describes just one of many areas of difficulty in Russian life.
Illustrative of all of Russia, the focus of the article was Tula, the sister city of Albany.


DANCE
Doing All the Work So an Audience Can Just Relax K-Broadway Kaye Playhouse
K-Broadway, a Japanese jazz-dance troupe from Tokyo, got off to a heart-sinking start on Friday night.
But the chill, hard look of the opening "Bolero" was not at all typical of the troupe, founded in 1984 in Tokyo.
And by the end of the evening, one wished devoutly that these endearing dancers would set up shop in New York City.


Green Blasts the Union Over Minor Leaguers
Dallas Green has never been a big fan of Don Fehr, the head of the players' association.
Green did not like what he heard when he attended a union meeting in Orlando last week.
He got angrier when Fehr and the union put pressure on minor league players not to participate in spring training games.
And today, Green was downright furious when discussing the union's decision to hold meetings in Tampa on Monday and West Palm Beach on Tuesday in order to brief minor league players on the union's stance in regard to them.


'Hound Dog' Team, Nearly 62, Has Revue Opening on Broadway
When Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller began writing songs together in 1950, they were 17-year-old rhythm-and-blues fans, and the songs they wrote came in explosive bursts that Mr.
Stoller calls "spontaneous combustion."
"I'd be banging on the piano, and Jerry would be yelling and pacing," recalled Mr.
Stoller, the composing half of the team.
"It all happened simultaneously."


Two-Day Symposium On Women in Music
A two-day symposium on women in music is planned from 10 A.M. to 10 P.M.
March 9 and 10 at the New School for Social Research, 66 West 12th Street, Manhattan.
It is called "Reverberations: Women and Music," and is to include panel discussions, lectures and concerts by scholars, composers, performers and music-business professionals.
Among the participants are the composers Joan Tower and Tania Leon; the president of the Harlem School of the Arts, Betty Allen; the musicologist and author Susan McClary, and Laura Kaminsky, the New School's director of music and theater programs.


Budapest Journal; The Mayor's Political Recipe: Goulash a la Koch
When Gabor Demszky lived in New York City briefly in the 1980's, the Hungarian dissident and publisher of anti-Communist material observed some techniques of Mayor Edward I. Koch: go to the scene, show up at subway stops, inform the public, keep hustling on behalf of the voters.
As Mayor of Budapest, Mr.
Demszky, who displays a shy charm instead of Mr.
Koch's ebullience, followed the New Yorker's pattern.
In his last campaign, he visited pensioners in their delapidated apartments and walked the streets, showing off the new underground water pipes his administration had laid, all in the company of television cameras.


Let Iraqis Return To a Normal Life
To the Editor:
William Safire's colorful essay "Iraq's Threat: Biological Warfare" (Feb. 16) suggests that sanctions on Iraq should stay forever despite its compliance with Security Council resolutions.
Further, Mr.
Safire wants the world to believe that the mere selling of oil by Iraq is a dangerous precedent because, as he thinks, it will automatically translate into manufacturing of weaponry.
One would wonder what is the purpose of the rigid and comprehensive long-term monitoring system of the United Nations Special Commission, operating since October.


Vacation From Grunge, On a Nostalgia Trip
Fans were swaying, not slam-dancing, when the Dave Matthews Band played on Thursday night at Roseland.
It was the first of two sold-out nights for a triple bill that included Big Head Todd and the Monsters along with the Ugly Americans.
Mr.
Matthews, who was born in South Africa and lives in Virginia, leads the most idiosyncratic group to emerge so far from what might be called Deadhead rock, the wave of neo-hippie bands led by Blues Traveler and the Spin Doctors, who sprang up to provide dance music for Grateful Dead fans between Dead tours.


A Sony Account Goes to Chiat/Day
The Sony Computer Entertainment of America division of the Sony Corporation has selected Chiat/Day in Venice, Calif., to handle advertising for a new video game system, the Sony Play Station, which will compete with systems by Nintendo and Sega.
The billings were estimated at $40 million to $50 million.
Chip Herman, vice president for marketing at Sony Computer Entertainment in Foster City, Calif., said on Friday that Chiat/Day was awarded the account after an eight-week review that began with seven California-based agencies and was narrowed to three finalists: Chiat/ Day, Goldberg Moser O'Neill in San Francisco and Team One Advertising in El Segundo.
The review was managed by Select Resources International in Los Angeles.


It's Another TV Thorn for Fo; From an F.C.C. Official, New Questions About Foreign Ownership
The long-running, contentious drama involving Rupert Murdoch, the Fox network and the Federal Communications Commission took yet another twist late last week, one that had many of those who had taken an interest in the case believing for the first time that Mr.
Murdoch might be in for some real trouble.
The twist came in the form of a brief but highly significant declaration by an important F.C.C. staff member.
He said that contrary to testimony given by Mr.
Murdoch and other Fox executives and lawyers, the staff member was not aware in 1985 that Mr.
Murdoch's Australian company, the News Corporation, controlled 99 percent of the equity in six television stations that Mr.
Murdoch acquired that year.


Political Memo; Seizing on Pataki's Budget as Issue, Democrats Begin Assault on Cuts
As they struggle to rebuild their party from the ashes of last year's electoral defeats, New York State's Democrats have seized on an issue they believe will rally their demoralized troops: Gov.
George E. Pataki's state budget.
In speeches across the state, in political literature, in television and radio commercials, Democratic leaders and their allies have begun a full-scale assault on the deep cuts in Mr.
Pataki's budget, calling them a boon for the wealthy but devastating for the middle class.


How One U.S. City Lends a Hand to Russia; Scoffing at Nutrition
To the Editor:
Regarding your article on Russian attitudes toward disease prevention and nutrition (front page, Feb. 19): In Moscow last summer, I lived for more than two weeks with a couple whose son is a prominent surgeon, and who themselves have doctoral level training in scientific fields.


Pirate's Bazaar Thrives in Hong Kong
Bill Gates, America's maestro of software, may be having trouble shipping his long-awaited new computer operating system Windows 95, but here in Hong Kong at the corner of Fuk Wa and Kweilin Streets, where sidewalk chefs stir woks filled with squid and kettles simmer with white-skinned ducks, Windows 95 is selling briskly.
"It's the newest thing," said a smiling salesman at the Golden Arcade Computer Center, two stories crammed with shops busily selling pirated computer programs, disks and video games.
"This is the latest version, only 300" Hong Kong dollars, or about $40.


Focusing on Domestic Violence
Domestic violence is getting more attention in Bergen County Family Court (an average of 20 minutes per case in 1993, up from less than 6 the year before), and judges awarded more comprehensive protective orders in 1993 than in 1992, a group of volunteer observers says.


Clinton to Order a Crackdown On Child-Support Obligations
President Clinton will sign an executive order intended to help states track down members of the military and other Federal workers who do not pay child support or have avoided efforts to establish their paternity, Administration officials said today.
The directive, to be issued on Monday, will affect at least 105,000 Federal employees, including 74,000 in the military, whose names have been provided to the Government, the officials said.
It will give the Government more power to assist states in finding Federal workers wanted in child-support or paternity cases and in garnishing the wages of those who are delinquent in making court-ordered payments.


Beneficial Order Denied
A United States District judge in Wilmington, Del., denied on Friday a request by Beneficial National Bank, a unit of the Beneficial Corporation, for a temporary restraining order to prevent the Internal Revenue Service from mailing refund checks directly to taxpayers who had taken loans from the bank secured by the expected refunds.
Finn M. W. Caspersen, chief executive of Beneficial, has said the delinquency rate on the loans could rise to 40 percent from less than 1 percent unless the agency continues its practice of directing the refunds to the bank.
Judge Joseph J. Longobardi sided with the I.R.S., which said that requiring the agency to send checks directly to the bank could create chaos in its operations.
Beneficial, based in Wilmington, said it would seek a court hearing in the next few weeks for a preliminary injunction against the I.R.S.


Where the Lights Aren't Bright
Want bright lights?
Leave this quiet community and go back to the big city.
That's the message from Mayor Spiro Koutsogiannis, explaining why township officials are enforcing a long-dormant law.
"Neon signs were popping up right and left," he said.
"We have an ordinance on the books going back for years that prohibits neon signs, but it wasn't enforced to the fullest."


British Justice, No Longer a Beacon
Britain's new crime law is a dangerous retreat for a nation that pioneered the concept of individual legal rights, but has in recent years steadily eroded those rights.
The Criminal Justice and Public Order Act allows police to use a suspect's silence as evidence of criminality even while ostensibly confirming the right to remain silent under questioning.
The classic police warning that "anything you say may be used against you" now becomes, in Britain, a warning that failure to talk to police may count against you at trial, if you wait until then to offer your defense.


Thanks to Courtnall, Canucks Start Off on Right Foot
Canucks 5, Sharks 1
Geoff Courtnall scored on a power play just 51 seconds into the game and four other Vancouver players added goals last night to lead the visiting Canucks over the slumping San Jose Sharks, 5-1.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Signed Lance Blankenship, infielder-outfielder, to a minor-league contract.
National League  NEW YORK METS -- Signed Alberto Diaz, infielder, and Kevin Carroll, catcher, to minor-league contracts.
Basketball National Basketball Association  NBA -- Suspended Shaquille O'Neal, Orlando Magic center, for one game without pay and fined him $5,000 for an altercation with Boston Celtics center Eric Montross in a game played Friday night.
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Signed Darrick Martin, guard, to a second 10-day contract.
NEW YORK KNICKS -- Activated Charles Oakley, forward, from the injured list.
Placed Anthony Bonner, forward, on the injured list.
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Activated Clarence Weatherspoon, forward, and B.J.
Tyler, guard, from the injured list.
Placed Jeff Malone, guard, on the injured list.
Football National Football League  JACKSONVILLE JAGUARS -- Named Joe Baker special teams assistant coach.
Hockey National Hockey League  BUFFALO SABRES -- Recalled Viktor Gordiouk, left wing, and Doug Macdonald, center, from Rochester of the American Hockey League.
DALLAS STARS -- Assigned Peter Zezel, center, and Richard Matvichuk, defenseman, to Kalamazoo of the International Hockey League for conditioning.
HARTFORD WHALERS -- Recalled Jim Storm, forward, from Springfield of the American Hockey League.
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Sent Jaroslav Modry, defenseman, to Albany of the American Hockey League for conditioning.
Recalled Sergei Brylin, forward, and Kevin Dean, defenseman, from Albany.
SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Recalled Vlastimil Kroupa, defenseman, from Kansas City of the International Hockey League.


Nets Are Still Fuming Over Officiating
Butch Beard, still boiling over the officiating, intends to send the league a tape of the game.
So incensed was Derrick Coleman, he could not bring himself to discuss it nearly 24 hours later.
Kenny Anderson went even further, saying today that the combination of losing and personal travails has led to the lowest point in his four-year career.


As U.N. Girds to Leave Somalia, Renewed Fighting
In the heaviest clashes here in weeks, Somalis fought each other just outside the airport gates today, spraying the runway with antiaircraft rounds and mortar and automatic-weapons fire as United Nations peacekeepers prepared to pull out.
The fighting, which began in the early afternoon, continued sporadically into the evening.
One mortar shell landed about 200 yards from a 747 jumbo jet that was picking up Pakistani troops serving in the United Nations force.
Another round hit the compound of the United Nations special envoy, Victor Gbeho, wounding a Somali policeman.
At least one Somali was killed in fighting just outside the airport gates.


Corporations Have Little to Teach Schools
To the Editor:
What is most intriguing about a new survey showing that "employers are divorcing themselves from the schools" is the reaction to this finding on the part of those who conducted the survey and you (front page, Feb. 20).
Both take it for granted that the "divide between the schools and the workplace" is "troubling" and even "alarming."


Sports of The Times; West Outlasts a Legend and Outsmarts a League
THE Friday night attendance was 17,505, a sellout, the signal that Jerry West was waiting for.
In Hollywood, the Lakers were again a box-office smash.
"I think people were interested, but they hadn't been showing up," West was saying from his office at the Great Western Forum.


The Packaging of Personal Care; In the New Cluster Concept, One Attendant Serves Many
Jacqueline Griffin begins her workday as a personal care attendant at 8 o'clock in the morning, helping bathe and dress Lisa Horowitz, a 97-year-old woman who is legally blind.
She then fixes Mrs.
Horowitz's breakfast and straightens out her studio apartment on the third floor of Kittay House, an apartment building for seniors in the Kingsbridge section of the Bronx.
By 9 o'clock, Ms.
Griffin is heading up six flights of stairs to help Mrs.
Horowitz's 85-year-old neighbor, Rose DeWolfe, who has diabetes, arthritis and heart problems, with the same chores.
At 10, she's down on the second floor, doing the morning routine with Ruth Leuff, a frail 89-year-old retired teacher.


Clinton's Support for Unity Pleases English Canadians
In French Canada, he hardly caused a ripple.
But in English Canada, where he spent two remarkably sunny days in the wintry national capital, President Clinton won high praise this week for his unambiguous support of Canadian unity.
His toast at a gala dinner on Thursday -- "Long live Canada!" ("Vive le Canada!") -- was a reply to de Gaulle's rallying cry for separatists during a 1967 visit to the province -- "Vive le Quebec libre!" -- and music to the ears of Prime Minister Jean Chretien and other federalists.


Accounts
*
Aladdin Industries, Nashville, to the Buntin Group, Nashville, to handle its account, including consumer thermos products, previously at Gish, Sherwood &amp; Friends, Nashville.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $5 million.


Steinbrenner More Involved
George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' owner who has been uncharacteristically passive throughout the baseball strike, next week will move into a position that will place him closer to the seat of power than he has been in years.
Steinbrenner, the only owner who has served suspensions under two commissioners, will be named to the major league executive council at the owners' meeting in Palm Beach, Fla.
In replacing Jackie Autry of California, whose four-year term has expired, Steinbrenner will join Bud Selig, Jerry Reinsdorf and Carl Pohlad as the other American League members of the eight-owner council.


'Lyric Suite,' Modern but Mature
In the kingdom of the string quartet, which Haydn founded some 250 years ago, Berg's "Lyric Suite" is modern music.
In the kingdom of 20th-century composition, it has achieved old-master status, and that is how the Arditti Quartet presented it at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday night.
If the first half of this interesting if elusive program seemed exploratory, Berg's six movements after intermission represented a culture at rest: relaxed and confident in both its message and language.
The "Lyric Suite" has dark moments (the ending is marked "Largo desolato"), yet it is perhaps the happiest piece of music ever to come out of the Second Viennese School.
The blanket description, "Lyric," is accurate; the music literally spills over with a hopeful effusiveness.
Berg's passionate heart is never headlong and rarely wild.
Immense technique and taste have grounded his emotions, set them in graspable limits that can be admired as well as loved.
The Arditti played this music beautifully.


A Tennessean Quietly Prepares To Make His Move for President
After a recent national television interview, Lamar Alexander invited his advisers to pick him apart in a New Hampshire hotel room.
But he was his own toughest critic, conceding that he needed to punch up his meandering presentation and remarking dryly, "After awhile I get to the point."
The mild-mannered Mr.
Alexander -- a Tennessee stalking horse of sorts -- lacks the caustic tongue of the two other leading and far better known contenders for the Republican Presidential nomination, Senators Bob Dole and Phil Gramm.


'Sexual Predators' Finding Sentence May Last Past Jail
Having completed a 10-year sentence for brutally raping teen-age sisters at knifepoint, Mitchell Gaff awoke last October at a state penitentiary here to what he thought was his day of freedom.
His mother had even arrived that morning to pick him up.
But Mr.
Gaff wasn't going anywhere.
Rather, prison officials, citing the state's ground-breaking "sexual predator" law, informed him that prosecutors had decided to seek his indefinite confinement at a nearby maximum-security prison used for child molesters and rapists deemed too dangerous for release.


Critics Honor 'Stone Diaries' and 'Europa'
"The Stone Diaries," a novel by Carol Shields that presents an unconventional history of the 20th century through the life of one apparently unexceptional woman, has won the National Book Critics Circle award for fiction.
The choice was made by the organization's 24-member board on Saturday from a final group of novels that also included "A Frolic of His Own" (Poseidon), by William Gaddis, which won the National Book Award in November.
Although the deliberations were not described in detail, Art Winslow, a board member, said Ms.
Shields's novel narrowly defeated Mr.
Gaddis's after "a stiff argument."


As the Pendulum Swings at PBS
Until five years ago, public television stations literally voted on the shows they wanted to buy.
The Public Broadcasting Service in Washington would circulate a catalogue of various possibilities and screenings would be held.
Then, on a certain date each year, about 200 programming executives in station offices around the country sat down at teletype machines and tapped out their message: "Nova," YES; "Sesame Street," YES, "Eyes on the Prize, NO" and so on.


Clinton, Using Old Hands and New, Slowly Creates a Re-election Team
Unlike his Republican rivals, Bill Clinton has not yet trekked to the coffee shops and hotel ballrooms of New Hampshire this winter.
But in the warrens of the West Wing, the corridors of Capitol Hill and the suites of Democratic consultants and pollsters, his 1996 re-election campaign is showing its first springlike stirrings.
Bit by bit since the disastrous midterm elections, the President has begun assembling a team -- some old, some new, some borrowed and none, he hopes, blue -- to help him through the complex and potentially contradictory challenge at hand: how to shore up his base among traditional Democratic liberals while wooing back the moderates who helped elect him in the first place.


Press
ACCORDING to Frank Denton, the editor of the morning paper here in the capital of Wisconsin, people are sick of old-fashioned journalism that simply points out problems.
He says he has found a solution.
"Our journalism is not here to fry people -- although we fry people all the time," Mr.
Denton said.
"Our main goal is in helping the public find the solutions to problems."


For Calhoun, The Fires Still Burn Title-Bright
The definitions were not made in the luxury of warm summer afternoons at the shore.
They were forged during moments of intense personal and professional pain.
When Jim Calhoun was 15, and his father's sudden death robbed him of a best friend and a demanding influence, the boy turned to his mother.
"I said, 'I'll take care of you,' " he remembered.


Educated Risk's Last Race Displays Her Winning Style
Gulfstream Park said goodbye to another major race horse today when, less than a week after Holy Bull was piped into life as a stallion, the great mare Educated Risk ran the final race of her career.
And it was a textbook performance.
Educated Risk, the 5-year-old daughter of Mr.
Prospector, owned by Ogden Mills Phipps, trained by Shug McGaughey, ridden by Mike Smith -- what more could you ask?
With all this going for her, she won the $200,000 Rampart Handicap by two lengths over her stablemate Recognizable.
She romped regally from starting gate to winner's circle without flinching, and quit with a winning streak of five races.


CHRONICLE
CHUCK BARRIS , the producer of such television programs as "The Newlywed Game," "The Dating Game" and "The Gong Show," has a romantic image of the police.
"There are certain things in life that attract your attention and your sense of adventure, like flying planes or being a spy, and the police were always one of that bunch for me," he said the other day in explaining why he wouldn't think of missing the New York City Police Foundation's annual gala at Police Headquarters tonight.


DANCE
Two Choreographers, Together and Apart  Mary Abrams and Nami Yamamoto Danspace Project
The program of dances presented by Mary Abrams and Nami Yamamoto on Saturday night at St.
Mark's Church was a troubling one.
There were things to admire, certainly, and each choreographer clearly has a good deal of imagination.
But by the end of the evening one wondered what exactly the two believed they were conveying to their audience.


Funeral for Ellen S. Straus
A funeral for Ellen Sulzberger Straus, who built the volunteer organization Call for Action and was a former president and general manager of the radio station WMCA in Manhattan, will take place at 2 P.M. on Wednesday at the Stephen Wise Free Synagogue, at 30 West 68th Street.
Mrs.
Straus, a niece of Arthur Hays Sulzberger, the publisher of The New York Times from 1935 until 1961, died on Friday.


INSIDE
New Hampshire Horizon
The White House has begun organizing for the 1996 campaign, with Harold M. Ickes and James Carville at the center of things.
Page B6.
Pressure on Mexican Leader
The arrest of a second suspect in the slaying of a presidential candidate in Mexico raises suspicions of a cover-up.
News analysis, page A4.
Renewed Fighting in Somalia
Rival Somali clans battled outside the airport as the U.N. prepared to pull out.
Page A3.
A2 Arts


CLASSICAL MUSIC
The Brahms Piano Quintet: Once More, With Brio  Joseph Kalichstein, pianist Emerson String Quartet 92d Street Y
Joseph Kalichstein and the Emerson String Quartet should drop whatever they are doing and record the Brahms Piano Quintet.
Not that their performance on Tuesday evening was perfect.
Far from it: the work rocked precariously in rough intonational seas late in the first movement and did not entirely stabilize in the second.


White House Appeals to Senate to Maintain U.S. Role Overseas
Having failed to block foreign policy changes approved by House Republicans, the Clinton Administration is mounting a campaign to persuade the Senate to reject measures like cutting contributions to the United Nations on the ground that they would undermine the nation's credibility abroad by forcing it to renege on longstanding commitments.
Senior officials in the White House, State Department and Pentagon point to half a dozen measures that they say would break pledges to the United Nations, NATO partners, former Soviet republics and countries in the Middle East, made not just by President Clinton but by previous Presidents.


Service Business
Revenue from service business in the United States rose to $1.6 trillion in 1992, up 59 percent from 1987, according to a report recently released by the Commerce Department.
The service business industry includes the non-manufacturing establishments of the economy.
The largest area of growth occurred in the prepackaged computer software business, a segement of business services, with revenues up 253 percent.
Next was another computer-related business, information retrieval services, which include on-line services, and increased by 229 percent.
In New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, service business revenue was up 49 percent.
Health services led the way at an average revenue increase of 71 percent for the region.
The home health care boom is largely responsible for the overall explosion in health services.


All of Shakespeare (Sonnets, Too) at Warp Speed
"The Compleat Works of Wllm Shkspr (Abridged)," a revue that hopes to do to the entire Shakespearean canon what the Marx Brothers did to "Il Trovatore," speaks, quite loudly, to the sophomore in all of us.
This genial, determinedly goofy production, performed by three collegiate-looking, unceasingly energetic young men at the Westside Theater, compresses Shakespeare's 36 plays (as well as the sonnets, in the evening's most inspired act of dismissal) into two hours of broad burlesque.


New Housing for Hurricane's Last Victims
Two and a half years ago, winds of 150 miles an hour yanked the roof off Mack Johnson's apartment and sent him tumbling into homelessness.
Finally, on Friday morning, he moved from Trailer No. 299 in a trailer park to a one-bedroom apartment and officially got on with his life.
Mr. Johnson could barely contain his glee: "I'm out of this rock pit."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A new campaign will try to build the buzz for trade publications that may inform but lack glamour.
THE force behind campaigns that helped build ardor among advertisers and agencies for some of the newest media properties like MTV, USA Today and ESPN will now promote some of the oldest.
George Lois, the colorful chairman and chief executive of Lois/ USA in New York, is completing work on print advertisements and promotional materials aimed at increasing circulation and ad pages for business-to-business publications.
The campaign is his agency's first assignment from the American Business Press, the association representing 100-plus companies that publish more than 700 "trade books," newspapers, magazines and journals ranging from Iron Age and Modern Baking to Jewelers' Circular-Keystone and Pork '95.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Piracy Accord With China
China and the United States signed an agreement on intellectual property rights that narrowly avoided the imposition of trade sanctions on more than $1 billion of Chinese goods.
But the pact's success depends upon its enforcement in China.  [ Page A1. ]


TV Children Don't Reflect Reality, Study Says
A study of how children are portrayed on television, to be released today by Children Now, an advocacy group in California, finds a world of children, mostly white, with no apparent family ties and little interest in school, a world in which religion, financial concerns and social issues like homelessness are almost entirely absent.
"Television shows children's lives that are tremendously easier than most kids' real lives, much more exciting and more affluent," said Katharine E. Heintz-Knowles, the author of the study and an assistant professor of communications at the University of Washington.
"Even though it's entertainment, television influences children's expectation and tells them what society values. If you watch a number of the teen shows, the lack of awareness of a larger world is striking."


Angry Calm At Services For Teen-Ager Slain by Police
Community leaders and civil rights advocates told hundreds of worshipers at a Sunday memorial service for a 16-year-old who was fatally shot by the police that the case left too many unanswered questions about how police officers are trained and how they are assigned.
The nearly three-hour service for the teen-ager, Lawrence Meyers, at Calvary Baptist Church on East 18th Street included calls for calm by church leaders, a threat by high school students to take action if the shooting is not thoroughly investigated and a sermon by the Rev.
Al Sharpton demanding that the housing police officer involved be tried for opening fire on Mr.
Meyers.


Salmon Were Fished Out Before Dams
To the Editor:
In "The Last Salmon Run" (Op-Ed, Feb. 18), Katherine P. Ransel would have us believe that big dams are responsible for the destruction of the fish population in the Pacific Northwest's Columbia River.


MARKETS SHAKEN AS A BRITISH BANK TAKES A BIG LOSS
The abrupt collapse late on Sunday of a venerable British investment bank set off a chain reaction of steep losses in financial markets halfway around the world early today in a stark illustration of the global financial system's interdependency.
The bank, Barings P.L.C., the oldest investment firm in Britain and one of the most illustrious, was left with no choice but to seek bankruptcy protection after a frantic rescue effort by the Bank of England, the nation's central bank, came up short.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  CHINA PIRACY DEAL
China and the United States signed a copyright enforcement agreement, narrowly avoiding scheduled trade sanctions on more than $1 billion of Chinese goods.
A1


Woodrow Williams, Baseball Player, 82
Woodrow Wilson Williams, who had 10 straight hits as a Cincinnati Reds infielder in 1943, tying a National League record that still stands, died Friday at Appomattox Health Care Center, a nursing home in Appomattox, Va.
He was 82 and had lived in Pamplin, Va.
He was suffering from a severe virus infection, said his daughter Martha Ferguson.


Knicks Legends Win Easily
Dave DeBusschere was asked about having to find playing time for everybody in last night's sixth annual Sharp Electronics Knicks Legends game.
"That was the easy part," DeBusschere said.
"Most of the guys didn't want to play that much anyway."


Funds Flock to Venture Of Hollywood Powerful
Dreamworks SKG, the entertainment company started last year by David Geffen, Jeffrey Katzenberg and Steven Spielberg, is close to raising $900 million to finance its film, television and record business.
An announcement is expected within the next several weeks.
The three men have reportedly been talking with a number of large investors.
Paul Allen, one of the original owners of the Microsoft Corporation and the holder of a fortune estimated by Forbes magazine at $3.9 billion, is said to be interested and could well end up as one of Dreamworks' largest backers.
The California Public Employees Retirement System is also said to be an eager and potentially large investor in the venture.


This Week's Issues of Debt
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to bills, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
On Thursday, the Treasury will auction 52-week bills.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.71 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 5.91 percent.
The rate on the one-year bill was 6.09 percent.


A Man-Made Pancreas for Diabetes Would Be Wrapped in Plastic to Block Rejection by the Body
A small plastic cylinder filled with cells taken from a pig may one day become an artificial pancreas for some diabetics.
Scientists and medical researchers have created plastic hearts, artificial livers, pancreases and lungs.
Yet none match the efficiency, reliability and lifespan of the organs people are born with.
Even if they come close, the body's immune system often rebels against implants.


Union Files Grievance
The major league players' union has filed a grievance charging that the San Francisco Giants improperly released DARRYL STRAWBERRY after he tested positive for cocaine.
The Giants say Strawberry signed an addendum to his contract that said the team could release him if he tested positive.
The case eventually will be heard by an arbitrator.


Japan's Ghost In China Pact; U.S. Tries to Avoid Old Trade Mistakes
The deal struck at the last minute yesterday between China and the United States may well turn out to be a major victory for both the Clinton Administration and American business, proof that the right mix of bluster and economic incentives can convince China's leaders that their only choice is to operate by the world's trade rules, rather than their own.
But just beneath the surface, the argument over China's piracy of Whitney Houston's songs and Microsoft's MS-DOS was just the first big skirmish in a struggle that will probably last for years.
It is a fight to make sure that the United States does not make the same mistakes with China that it made for decades with Japan.


POP
Songs About Astrology From a Thrift-Store Singer  Harvey Sid Fisher Fez
It's a well-known pop-music axiom that audiences respond well to songs in which they can see themselves or their relationships with others.
Harvey Sid Fisher, a self-styled lounge-music singer, exploited this premise to its fullest when he performed on Wednesday night.
For each of the 12 signs in the zodiac, he sang a song filled with his opinions about the astrological personality type.
"Pisces, the water sign," he sang, "the magical mind, so gentle and kind."


Knicks Welcome Oakley Back With a Victory
All you needed to know about last night's Knicks game at Madison Square Garden against the Philadelphia 76ers is that Charles Oakley was back.
Back just in time for tomorrow night's showdown against the Magic in Orlando.


The News (Good) From Newark
This city has had plenty of bad times and bad news over the years.
Here is some good news: Car thefts dropped to 9,464 in 1994, from 11,028 in 1993, a decrease of 14 percent.


As Balanced-Budget Vote Looms, Several Senators String Out the Suspense
Senators get to be senators because they are good politicians, and so it is not unheard of for one of them to withhold some pronouncement on an issue until the last moment, seeking to increase influence or hog the spotlight.
But seldom has a circle of attention been so crowded as the one surrounding the vote scheduled in the Senate for Tuesday.
The vote is on the adoption of a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution, almost certainly the most important vote of the year.
Sixty-seven votes, or two-thirds of the Senate, would send the current version of the amendment to the states for ratification votes and, advocates say, set the stage for a profound reshaping of Federal spending priorities.


Resignation Adds to Mystery In Bludgeoning Of Rabbi's Wife
Rabbi Fred J. Neulander has been surrounded by silence and unanswered questions for nearly four months, since the day he returned home from the synagogue M'Kor Shalom in November and found the bludgeoned body of his wife, Carol.
Across months of speculation about the motive for the unsolved murder, about reports the rabbi had a string of marital infidelities, about incriminating leaks from police placing the rabbi among the suspects -- quickly, but only partly denied by investigators -- the founder of the temple called Source of Peace has maintained his innocence in the crime, but not his innocence in other things.


U.C.L.A. Cements Claim to No. 1 Rating
U.C.L.A. 100, Duke 77
Ed O'Bannon scored a career-high 37 points as No. 2 U.C.L.A. positioned itself to claim the nation's top ranking with its ninth straight victory, 100-77, over Duke yesterday.


Good Seats Still Available


Nyack Nurses Strike Over Care of Patients
To the Editor:
Regarding your Feb. 22 news article on the declining market power of registered nurses and the issues in our strike at Nyack Hospital in Nyack, N.Y.:


No Headline
"You can understand that a parent wants to know if the next-door neighbor is a child molester if your daughter is going over to sell them Girl Scout cookies. But by the same token it's a real dilemma in terms of rehabilitation to stick a sign on a person's lawn that says 'Sexual Predator."' -- JOHN MONAHAN, law school professor.  [ B8:1. ]


Equity Offerings This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Apple South Inc., Madison, Ga., 2 million shares. Raymond James &amp; Associates.


Abroad at Home; Visigoths at the Gate
At this early date the new Republican leadership has pushed an extraordinary volume of legislation through the House of Representatives or its committees.
In that mass of bills, can a theme -- a common purpose -- be identified?
States' rights might be one.
Newt Gingrich and his colleagues have talked a good deal about the need to shift power and responsibility from the Federal Government to the states.


Group of 7 Defines Policies About Telecommunications
The Governments of the seven largest industrialized countries, seeking to find common ground on the future of the global information network, today backed broad concepts of competition, deregulation, the protection of intellectual property rights and security of data.
The statement came at the end of a three-day meeting of officials of the so-called Group of Seven countries who were trying to prepare a common policy on how to approach the future of telecommunications.


Yanks' Newest Office Worker Is Stamping, Not Speaking
Steve Howe, the most controversial office assistant in Yankee history, today was given flexible guidelines in his new job responsibilities.
The Yankees will use Howe in the ticket office and to address local groups about avoiding drugs, but not as one of their pitchers.
He is still on strike.
The strange arrangement in which Howe is receiving $772 a week from the team he is striking against entered its second day.
Showing that he was already in midseason form in his relationship with the news media, the 36-year-old reliever declined to discuss his bizarre situation.
"I ain't talking," snapped Howe.


Young America Sailing Toward a Pair of Goals
Andrew Gustin, sitting alone at the side of the PACT 95 office building in San Diego, had an earnest look about him.
After all, how many 15-year-old kids from New York get to ride as the only outsider -- the 17th crew position -- in an America's Cup trials race?
Was he nervous?
"No, just very excited," said the student from the Buckley School at 73d Street and Park Avenue.
And then, as if struggling for a vestige of reality, he added: "But I've got school tomorrow, believe it or not."


Unbalanced Amendment
Tomorrow's vote in the Senate on the balanced-budget amendment is crucial for the Republican agenda to chop Government programs into bits.
The outcome is also crucial to the nation because the pernicious amendment would do enormous fiscal damage.
Proponents are alarmingly within three votes of winning.
The core of the amendment would require the Government to balance its books unless three-fifths of the House and Senate vote to run a deficit.
To the wavering Democrats -- John Breaux of Louisiana, Sam Nunn of Georgia, Wendell Ford of Kentucky, and Kent Conrad and Byron Dorgan of North Dakota -- here are five unassailable reasons to vote no.


Revolts on Ulster and Europe: Trouble for Major
The problematic search for peace in Northern Ireland and the vexing question of Britain's integration into Europe have combined to form another challenge this week to the leadership of Prime Minister John Major.
The key moment will come in Parliament Wednesday evening when there will be a debate and a vote on a motion from the opposition Labor Party that declares: "This House does not support Government policy towards the European Union and does not believe it promotes the interests of the British people."


Seagram Gives Grey G. H. Mumm Work
The Seagram Company has further expanded its relationship with Grey Advertising as Seagram's global brands division, based in Paris, awarded Grey's London office worldwide responsibilities for G. H. Mumm champagnes.
The billings were not disclosed.
The Mumm's account had been unassigned since last summer, when Seagram ended its relationship with DDB Needham Worldwide in New York.
Grey was previously awarded other responsibilities formerly handled by DDB Needham to advertise Crown Royal Canadian whisky, Captain Morgan Original Spiced Rum and Myers's rums in the United States.
Grey also handles Seagram brands like Glen Grant whisky and Cacique rum overseas.


U.S. Force Steps Up Haiti Arms Seizures
With responsibility for the security of Haiti scheduled to be transferred to the United Nations late next month, American troops here are accelerating efforts to seize weapons and quash threats that might interfere with the "seamless transition" they have promised worried Haitian officials.
During the last month, the number of military street patrols here has multiplied, and their scope and visibility has expanded.
Searches for weapons appear to be more aggressive.
In another show of force, two former officials who are widely known as leaders of the Tontons Macoute, the paramilitary militia of the former Duvalier family dictatorship, were summoned to American military headquarters where -- in the words of one diplomat -- an American general "read them the riot act."


Virginia Votes 2-Year Limit On Welfare
In a vote along racial lines, the Virginia Legislature this weekend enacted sharp welfare restrictions that will cut off benefits after two years, force recipients to work and deny aid for children who are born to mothers already on relief.
Sponsors of the bill said they hoped to discourage out-of-wedlock births by requiring teen-age mothers who receive welfare benefits to live with a parent or guardian.


Woolward Awarded Computer Accounts
Woolward &amp; Partners in San Francisco was awarded three computer accounts last week, with combined billings estimated at $7 million to $8 million.
The Claris Corporation, the desktop computing software subsidiary of Apple Computer in Cupertino, Calif., awarded the agency its worldwide account, which was previously handled in-house.
The billings were estimated at more than $3 million.
Syquest Technology, a maker of removable cartridge hard drives in Fremont, Calif., named Woolward to handle its account, which had been at Pagliaro/Kuhlman in San Jose, Calif., for the last two and a half years.
The billings were estimated at more than $2.5 million.


CHRONICLE
It is not so often, perhaps, that the Carlyle Hotel is the scene of events that attract guests with green hair and leather, but that was the case on Friday night at a party for RANDY SHARPE to celebrate her new theater company, Axis.
The company, which will produce plays with themes usually found in horror films, was founded by Ms.
Sharpe and MICHAEL GUMP , her longtime buddy from Rhode Island, where she began her theater career.
The first play, "Down There," written by Ms.
Sharpe and Mr.
Gump, tells the tale of a 15-year-old torture victim in Indianapolis in the 1960's.
It will open in Greenwich Village on Thursday.


Church Rebuilds From Twister's Torment
The congregation stood not in a church but inside the promise of one, singing "Amazing Grace" in a green field specked with red anthills.
They bowed their heads more often than usual, to pray and to check their feet.
Grown men hoped no one would see them cry.
Patricia Abbott played the church organ that had been trucked out to the field, but her husband, Earl, was not there to sing along.
Donna New sat surrounded by five of her children, but a little boy, Eric, was missing.
In every row, in almost every extended family, someone was gone.


Death, and Destruction, Continue in Chechnya


1980 Games, Revisited
The United States Olympic hockey team that beat the Soviets almost 15 years ago reunited yesterday for a game against a Boston Bruins alumni team.
The game ended in a 6-6 tie, but it was more than an exhibition for the former Olympians.
It was a chance to remember.
MIKE ERUZIONE, who scored the goal that beat the Soviets 4-3 in 1980, scored the first and last goals yesterday.
"I wanted to score a goal to show my kids I could still do it," Eruzione said.  (AP)


Zubov Gives Rangers a Farewell Present
After scoring tonight's first goal on a wicked wrist shot, setting up Mark Messier's winning goal with a long, floating pass and sinking the insurance goal with a wrist shot that traveled the length of the ice into an empty net, Sergei Zubov of the Rangers went home to prepare for surgery on -- but of course -- his wrist.
"It hurts," he said after the Rangers beat the Sabres by 4-2 in Memorial Auditorium.
"I'm not joking."


Murder Inquiry Is Pressed
A prosecutor from Jordan's Ministry of Justice arrived in Morristown, N.J., on Saturday to prepare for a trial against Mohammed Abequa, a naturalized American citizen who the authorities said has confessed to killing his wife in her Parsippany apartment last summer.
The prosecutor, Khalid Darwish, will visit the murder scene, speak with witnesses and review other evidence, the Morris County Prosecutor, Michael Murphy, said yesterday.


Top Pick Arrested
ED JOVANOVSKI, the first player taken last year in the National Hockey League draft, and two other members of the Ontario Hockey League's Windsor Spitfires were charged yesterday with two counts of sexual assault.
Jovanovski was drafted by the Florida Panthers, but has not signed with the club.
A 24-year-old Windsor woman reported to the police on Feb. 19 that she had been sexually assaulted by three men in her home. (AP)


When Welfare Is Gone: A Cautionary Message
EVER since Gov.
George E. Pataki announced his plan to put a 90-day limit on Home Relief benefits for childless, "employable" adults, observers of the welfare system have tried to foresee the consequences.
Alarmists predict a precipitous rise in homelessness; supporters foresee a cadre of newly productive workers.
But most admit they don't know what to expect.
Now comes a glimpse into the future from Michigan, which eliminated its entire home relief program -- called general assistance -- in October 1991.
That made Gov.
John M. Engler a role model for Republicans everywhere; Mr.
Pataki even hired Michigan's budget director, Patricia W. Woodworth.


Felix Ermacora Is Dead at 71; Austrian Human Rights Expert
Felix Ermacora, an Austrian human rights specialist whose scathing reports for the United Nations on human rights abuses in Afghanistan in the 1980's gained wide attention, died on Friday in a hospital in Vienna.
He was 71 and lived in Vienna.
The cause was a disease he caught on a United Nations mission in Afghanistan and Pakistan in December, the Austria Press Agency reported, citing a report from his family.
The nature of the illness was not disclosed.


Essay; Balance That Budget
Back in 1972, when the Federal budget reached $245 billion, Congress took a look at that year's deficit -- $15 billion -- and decided the budget was out of control.
Wilbur Mills, chairman of House Ways and Means, took emergency action: he rammed through a bill delegating to the President the power to cut the budget any way he wanted when it exceeded $250 billion.


Enqvist Perks Up and Defeats Chang in Final
Thomas Enqvist overcame a horrendous start before defeating Michael Chang, 0-6, 6-4, 6-0, in the final of the Comcast United States Indoor tournament yesterday in Philadelphia.
The 20-year-old unseeded Swede, who had surgery on both knees last year, picked up $110,000 for his fourth career title and will move from No. 43 to No. 24 when the ATP ranking comes out today.


Harrington Makes the Difference For Hoyas
Othella Harrington came to Georgetown from Jackson, Miss., three years ago surrounded by great expectations.
He would be the Hoyas' next big performer in the manner of Alonzo Mourning and Patrick Ewing.
Not a lot happened.
Until today, Harrington fell short of those expectations and so did his team.
But before a loud crowd of 31,143 in the Carrier Dome this afternoon, "O," as his teammates call him, came through in a big way.


Subway Conductor Badly Hurt Leaning Out Window
A subway conductor was in critical condition last night after he apparently slammed his head against a metal pillar on the Manhattan Bridge while leaning out of his cab window.
The conductor, Michael Sliworski, 30, was at first reported to have been shot, but investigators said later that his injury appeared to have been caused when he leaned out the window of a B train after it left the DeKalb Avenue station in Brooklyn and had proceeded about a third of the way across the bridge.


What to Expect This Week
SENATE -- The center of attention will be the proposed balanced-budget amendment, with a vote scheduled for Tuesday.
There are 23 amendments to the amendment awaiting roll-call votes before the balanced-budget measure itself comes up.


METRO DIGEST
HOSPITAL AGENCY STRIVES TO SURVIVE
Faced with losing more than 25 percent of its budget, the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation is moving as fast as it can to transform itself from a loosely organized collection of somewhat frayed charity hospitals to a tightly run business able to hold its own in the competitive New York health care market.


Hospital Agency Is Striving To Adapt in Competitive Era
Faced with losing more than 25 percent of its budget, the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation is moving as fast as it can to transform itself from a loosely organized collection of somewhat frayed charity hospitals to a tightly run business able to hold its own in the newly competitive New York health care market.
Even as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced last week his plan to sell 3 of the 11 public hospitals, H.H.C. members were trimming budgets and eliminating departments and jobs in ways that would have been unthinkable two years ago.
Then, such cuts were seen as politically impractical and contrary to a corporate culture that treated these hospitals as much as symbols of neighborhood pride as sites for health care.
Last year, the Health and Hospitals Corporation cut 300 beds and 3,500 of its almost 50,000 jobs.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY  American Precision BRE Pptys Inc Detroit Edison Manufactured Home PHH Corp United Illum Co TUESDAY  First Miss Corp Gap Inc Ipalco Enterprises Morgan Stanley Gr Westvaco Corp WEDNESDAY  Browning-Ferris Inds Helmerich &amp; Payne LG &amp; E Energy Corp Quanex Corp Stanhome Inc Stanley Wks Starrett L S Co THURSDAY  Allegheny Pwr Sys Brown Group Inc CCP Ins Inc Conseco Inc Engelhard Corp Potlatch Corp Times Mirror Co Witco Corp


A Springtime Windfall of Art at Auction
Fate has dealt Sotheby's and Christie's lucky hands.
In May, both auction houses are to sell some of the most outstanding examples of Impressionist and modern art that either auction house has seen in five years.
So far, more than $100 million worth of Impressionist and modern art will be up for sale over a four-day period beginning on May 8.
The collections are so large that there are to be four consecutive evening sales, twice the amount regularly scheduled.
Besides a Picasso, a Renoir and a Matisse that Christie's is selling for Pamela C. Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France, both Sotheby's and Christie's have secured art from prominent New York estates.


U.S. AND CHINA SIGN ACCORD TO END PIRACY OF SOFTWARE, MUSIC RECORDINGS AND FILM
The United States and China signed an agreement today to end a long-running dispute over how to protect intellectual property like movies, compact disks and computer software.
The countries avoided a trade war and announced a plan to make life in China harder for pirates and easier for American investors.
The agreement includes an intensified six-month crackdown on copyright violators beginning on Tuesday, a series of task forces to collect evidence, expanded search-and-destroy powers for Chinese customs officers and the immediate removal of quotas on imports of American films.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week:  Monday  Existing-Home Sales . . .
Jan.
Tuesday  Consumer Confidence . . .
Feb.
Wednesday  G.D.P. . . . 4th Qtr.
Revised  Construction Spending . . .
Jan.
Thursday  Personal Income . . .
Jan.
New-Home Sales . . .
Jan.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Leading Indicators . . .
Jan.
Factory Orders . . .
Jan.


Mexican Chief's Gamble: Where Will Chips Fall?
With the arrest of a second suspected gunman in the assassination of the former presidential candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio, the embattled Government of President Ernesto Zedillo has made a perilous commitment to solve the crime.
Should murder charges be upheld against the second suspect, Othon Cortez Vazquez, 28, it would suggest a conspiracy involving some of the more violent and corrupt elements of Mr.
Zedillo's own party.
Mr.
Cortez was jailed on Saturday, as was a former campaign security aide accused of lying to investigators.


White House Is Joining in Efforts To Loosen the Limits on Banking
The Clinton Administration plans to call this week for legislation that would allow commercial banks, securities firms and insurance companies to merge, forming giant financial services companies that would offer everything from checking accounts to mutual funds and life insurance, Federal officials say.
In a speech prepared for delivery in New York on Monday and in Congressional testimony scheduled for Wednesday, Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin will urge Congress to repeal the Depression-era Glass-Steagall Act, the officials said.
For more than 60 years, the law has forced financial concerns to choose between owning commercial banks or owning securities companies like brokerage firms and investment banks, but not both.


I.R.A. Leader Conciliatory on Pace of Talks
Gerry Adams, the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, indicated today that he wants to allay fears that the I.R.A. might resume its campaign of violence if progress toward peace negotiations in Northern Ireland falters.
Although Mr.
Adams said in an interview on national radio that he wants peace negotiations between Britain, Ireland and the various political parties of Northern Ireland to begin immediately, the Sinn Fein leader said he could accept a delay of several months "if the issues are being discussed with urgency."


Sondheim's House Burns
A fire on Friday night badly damaged the Manhattan town house owned by Stephen Sondheim, the composer and lyricist, but it spared his collection of original manuscripts, his agent said yesterday.
Mr.
Sondheim's poodle, Max, was killed in the blaze, which was apparently caused by an electrical overload on the second floor of the five-story town house on East 49th Street near Second Avenue.


Management Shifts At Two Agencies
Two agencies are making changes in top management.
Philip L. Juliano, 41, president and principal at Genova Hartwick Juliano in Greenwich, Conn., has left the agency he co-founded five years ago to join Clarion Business Communications, the business-to-business marketing division of Clarion Marketing Communications in Greenwich.
He will have the new position of executive vice president and managing director.
Joseph Genova, chairman and chief executive at Genova Hartwick, said last week that his agency was in the final stages of selecting an executive to succeed Mr.
Juliano.


Sports of The Times; A Way Out of Nowhere Through Baseball
FOR some fans, the worst part of the baseball strike is not being able to watch a favorite team fight for a pennant or a revered player hit towering home runs or make breathtaking catches.
Others mourn the loss of a family trip to the ball bark, sitting under sunny skies, grabbing autographs, waiting for a foul ball.


Few Can Avoid Harsh Glare Of Murder Trial's Spotlight
Every day, it seems, another reputation is smeared.
Last Friday, it was Rosa Lopez's turn to take the witness stand in the O. J. Simpson murder trial, and under relentless questioning from a prosecutor, Christopher A. Darden, she broke down in tears.


How One U.S. City Lends a Hand to Russia; Let Aid Into Azerbaijan
To the Editor:
As Azerbaijan's Ambassador to the United States, I have spent two years trying to persuade Congress to repeal Section 907 of the Freedom Support Act, which prohibits United States assistance to Azerbaijan.
Thus far, the Armenian-American lobby has prevented Congress from even modifying this provision, to allow direct assistance for the one million refugees caused by Armenian offensives.


Hardaway Saves Day for Orlando
Magic 105, Bulls 103
Anfernee Hardaway's breakaway dunk with less than a second remaining capped a career-high 39-point performance as Orlando, playing without Shaquille O'Neal, rallied yesterday for a 105-103 victory over visiting Chicago.


American's Brain Injury Spurs Calls to Ban Sport
The boxer Gerald McClellan remained in "very critical" condition in the Royal London Hospital today after suffering a vicious pounding during Saturday night's supermiddleweight title fight with Nigel Benn.
The neurosurgeon who operated through the night to remove a blood clot on the right side of the brain was cautiously optimistic this afternoon that the 27-year-old American would pull through.


But Without Its All-Night Trains, Might A City Sleep?
At 3 A.M. on any given day, a New Yorker who works the night shift can head to a subway station and reach any point in four boroughs as surely as during the daytime.
In Boston, Washington and Philadelphia, where the subways close for several hours at night, such a scenario, so commonplace in New York, is impossible.
Like the buses that operate all night -- often along the same routes as subway lines -- the 24-hour subway system has long been a politically sacrosanct feature of life in New York.
But Friday's vote by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority board to trim subway and bus service for the first time since the mid-1970's demonstrated how the terms of the debate have changed.


Hot-and-Cold Isles a Team in Search of a Streak
In the dressing room at Nassau Coliseum on Saturday night, Ray Ferraro was asked which were the real Islanders: the team that had just dominated league-leading Pittsburgh, 3-1, or the group that had been rolled over by Tampa Bay two nights earlier.
"Obviously, we think it's tonight," said Ferraro, who scored his 10th goal of the season against the Penguins.


Crime: Graffiti. Punishment: Anti-Graffiti.
To graffiti writers, the sound barriers along the Hutchinson River Parkway are an almost irresistible target.
Now, however, the barriers have five new guardians.
As part of a plea agreement after being arrested for writing graffiti themselves, five prep-school students have pledged to spend 120 hours each cleaning up the barriers and other spots in town.
And they will be responsible for keeping four panels of the barrier -- those they defaced -- free of graffiti for a year.


Times Cable Venture
The New York Times Company said yesterday that its television station in Fort Smith, Ark., KFSM, had started two local cable news channels that each carry advertising aimed at a specific region.
The two cable channels, each known as News Channel 5, provide news around the clock by simulcasting live news programs from KFSM and replaying them until the next live news broadcast.
One channel appears on a Fort Smith cable system, while another appears on a northwestern Arkansas cable system.
Advertisers can reach viewers in either or both areas.
"This is the first television station in the country to launch two local cable news channels with separate advertising zones," Nancy Nielsen, the spokeswoman for the company, said yesterday.


Spend More on Solving Cancer Mystery
To the Editor:
For three decades, we have been repeatedly assured that the War on Cancer is about to reach the light at the end of the tunnel.
A recent report by the National Cancer Institute indicates that this light may well be an oncoming train.


Foreign Aid Budget: Quick, How Much? Wrong.
As Congress moves to cut foreign aid and overhaul the apparatus that delivers it, supporters of such assistance are gathering evidence that Americans have little or no idea how small the aid budget actually is.
When confronted with figures, poll takers are discovering, American voters often seem to be instinctively more generous than their representatives in Washington.


A Helicopter's Day at the Beach
It might not seem like hazardous duty, but a helicopter used by the Environmental Protection Agency to look for trash and chemical spills along New Jersey beaches, and to pick up water samples, has been knocked out of action.
The problem: corrosion caused by exposure to salt spray.
Representative Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of Bergen County, asked the Army, which supplies copters to the agency, to lend another.
Sure, the Army said last week.


Market Place; Investor Gala May Shrink Viacom Acquisition Bill
Viacom Inc. is betting that when it comes to bolstering its stock price, whooshing 50 institutional investors, some by leased private jets, to a three-day gala at a California hotel can't hurt.
The party, which began yesterday and ends tomorrow at the Four Seasons Santa Barbara Biltmore hotel, is hardly the first time a company has wooed Wall Street for the benefit of its stock.
But few companies in the entertainment business have gone to such lengths.
Viacom offered to pay for the trip and all hotel-related costs of the attendees.


Mavs' Jackson Says He Is Out for Season
Guard JIM JACKSON of the Dallas Mavericks said he expects his ankle injury to keep him out of the rest of this season.
Jackson, the league's highest-scoring guard and fifth-best over all at 26 points a game, severely sprained and partly dislocated his left ankle in Friday night's 114-104 loss to the Nets.
The Mavericks' trainer, DOUG ATKINSON, called it "a very uncommon, severe injury." (AP)


Apple Settles Lawsuit on Repetitive Stress Injury
Faced with a damaging blunder by its lawyers, Apple Computer Inc. has dropped its effort to fight a claim by a former high school secretary that the company was partly to blame for disabling injuries to her hands and wrists.
The tactical misstep leaves I.B.M. as the sole defendant in the case, which has been closely watched by lawyers for thousands of clerical workers who believe that poorly designed data processing equipment has led to a wide variety of neck, shoulder, arm and hand ailments collectively known as repetitive stress injuries, or R.S.I.


In Beijing, Dissidents File New Petitions
For the second time in recent days, a group of Chinese dissidents has petitioned China's top parliamentary body, the National People's Congress, this time calling on its members to investigate specific cases of alleged injustice to insure that "fundamental human rights" and "social justice" are upheld.
Another Government critic issued a statement calling for democracy.


Weld Says He Won't Run in '96 Campaign
Saying that he did not want to be an absentee father or an absentee Governor, Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts announced today that he would not seek the Republican nomination for President in 1996.
"It may be possible to be a Governor, a father and a Presidential candidate all at the same time, but I think at least one of those roles would suffer," Mr.
Weld said in an interview today.
"Probably all three."


Murdoch Defends Fox In Minority Challenge
Rupert Murdoch made an aggressive and personal response yesterday to the regulatory challenge to his Fox television network, saying that Fox had fully informed the Federal Communications Commission of all details of its ownership structure in 1985 when it bought the stations that make up the foundation of the network.
The N.A.A.C.P. has challenged Fox at the Federal Communications Commission, saying that Fox did not make clear to the commission that the amount of foreign investment in its core stations would greatly exceed the 25 percent limit that has always been enforced by the F.C.C.


Congressional Roundup; Budget Amendment Slipping Among Senate Swing Votes
Prospects that the Senate would adopt a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced Federal budget, a measure most recently predicted to be a vote or two short of a sure thing, seemed to take a turn for the worse today, just hours before a scheduled vote on the proposal on Tuesday.
In rapid succession, three undecided Democrats -- Senators Sam Nunn of Georgia and Byron L. Dorgan and Kent Conrad, both of North Dakota -- indicated that they would oppose the amendment unless the Republicans agreed to major changes that they had so far resisted.


CHRONICLE
STEPHEN FRY, the actor who walked out of a starring role on the West End of London 11 days ago and vanished, has surfaced, sort of.
Though his whereabouts are still unknown, he sent a fax to his agent, Lorraine Hamilton, that was printed in several British newspapers over the weekend.
In it, Mr.
Fry denied that he had left the play, "Cell Mates," because of poor reviews he received, or because he had suffered an emotional collapse, as had been rumored.


Another Cut In Production By Chrysler
In another signal that demand for new vehicles may be weakening, the Chrysler Corporation plans to idle the Canadian assembly plant that produces its midsize and full-size sedans for a second week, beginning Monday.
The plant, in Bramalea, near Toronto, had operated two shifts continuously since Chrysler introduced its LH sedans in 1992.
But last Wednesday, Chrysler said it would shut the plant this week, because too many unsold vehicles had accumulated on dealers' lots.


Thomas Signs 3-Yeal Deal With Lions
HENRY THOMAS, a two-time Pro Bowl defensive tackle who played with Minnesota for eight seasons, signed a three-year deal with the Detroit Lions yesterday.
Thomas, 30, who made $2.386 million with the Vikings last season, signed with the Lions for a reported $7.35 million over three years.
Thomas, 6 feet 2 inches and 277 pounds, led Minnesota's line with 65 tackles last season.
The Lions hired JOHN TEERLINCK as assistant head coach-defense last month.
Teerlinck was the Vikings' defensive line coach for the last three years. (AP)


Congressional Memo; Tales From the 104th Congress: Watch Out, or the Regulators Will Get You!
These days horror stories about regulatory abuses are the hit songs that enliven the legislative theater.
Amplified first on C-Span and then stored among the archives of The Congressional Record for instant revival, the same refrains keep recurring in the 104th Congress -- how bureaucrats abolished the tooth fairy or required buckets to have holes in the bottom.


Some Hostility to Bond Funds Fades
American mutual fund investors are not nearly so hostile to bond mutual funds as they were last year -- which is not to say they are very positive.
Fund managers said yesterday that although a lot less money was flowing out of the funds, sales remained tepid.
That would seem to mean that investors who stayed with bond funds through last year's losses were not inclined to pull out now.
But relatively few investors have been persuaded by signs of stabilization in the market that now is a good time to buy bond funds.


U.S. Stocks Get Caught in the Barings Downdraft
The collapse of the British investment bank Barings P.L.C. weighed heavily on stock markets around the world yesterday, and investors' nervousness cut short some early gains on Wall Street, pulling the Dow Jones industrial average back below the 4,000-point mark.
"In the morning, the stock market wanted to show that the world's market problems were not our problem," said Bernard Spilko, senior vice president of Bank Julius Baer.
"But around 2 P.M., computer selling programs kicked in and the U.S. market got caught in the downdraft that hit everywhere."


Giuliani Backs Trimming More Hospitals
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who announced plans last week to sell 3 of New York City's 11 municipal hospitals, said yesterday that it would be better for the city to own even fewer hospitals -- or none at all.
"The city would be much better off not being in the business of owning and operating health care facilities, or many of them," Mr.
Giuliani said, speaking at a luncheon of lobbyists at the McGraw-Hill Building on the Avenue of the Americas.


Four Telescopes in Neutrino Hunt
NEUTRINO astronomy was given a strong push in 1987 when a supernova in a galaxy only one-quarter of a million light-years away from Earth flared into view -- the closest supernova in 400 years.
At almost the same time the supernova appeared as a moderately bright dot in the sky over the Southern Hemisphere, a burst of neutrinos was detected in both Japan and the United States, confirming predictions that the supernova explosions of massive stars must produce vast swarms of these elusive particles, some of which could reach the Earth.
The construction of high-energy neutrino observatories gained financial backing and four neutrino telescopes are currently under development.
Three of them use huge volumes of water as their detectors -- one of them at the bottom of Lake Baikal in Siberia, another (called Nestor) 12,500 feet deep in the Mediterranean Sea off the coast of Greece and a third (called Dumand) nearly 16,000 feet deep in Hawaiian waters.
The fourth neutrino telescope, the South Pole's Amanda array, uses ice as its detector.


Soccer Report
United States
The national team will play its first game of 1995 when it meets Uruguay in the Cotton Bowl in Dallas on March 25 in a game that will set a milestone for an American player.


Tribute to 4 Trumpeters, One Still at It
The Carnegie Hall Jazz Band's "Trumpet Tribute" to four of jazz's greatest trumpeters on Thursday was a good example of how the institutional repertory movement can self-destruct under good intentions.
The show did something admirable: it commissioned two suites, one as a tribute to Louis Armstrong, the other for Miles Davis.
And it featured Lalo Schifrin's "Gillespiana Suite," a tribute to Dizzy Gillespie, recorded in 1960.
It was all workmanlike and long-winded.
The fourth trumpeter, who happens to be alive and playing exquisitely, was Clark Terry, who came on at 10:40 for a short 15 minutes.
Finally, the music rose above the level of the tribute.
Mr.
Terry, playing fluegelhorn and backed by the Carnegie Hall orchestra, spread out a series of stunning solos that by their rhythmic complexity would have ended any discussion at a jam session.
Mr.
Terry's technique allows him an extraordinary fluency, and on several improvisations he easily jumped registers; on a ballad of his the melody shimmered with emotion.
Then suddenly, the show was over.
A birthday cake celebrating Mr.
Terry's 75th birthday arrived, as did three other trumpeters, including Doc Cheatham.


Fox Gears Up for Its Shot at Hockey
Fox Sports is in a quiet period, an interregnum between clubbing us into realizing that FOOTBALL IS ON FOX and telling us that HOCKEY IS ON FOX.
There are only 33 shopping days until HOCKEY WILL BE ON FOX, so Fox marketers are on an extended road trip, shooting quirky player promotions.
Islander Benoit Hogue slapped around a variety of puck-hard garlic and raisin bagels, and asked, "Care for a schmeer?" Buffalo Sabre Dale Hawerchuk's magical stick out-sliced a sushi chef's knives.
Los Angeles King Wayne Gretzky mocked his camcorder commercials.
Vancouver Canuck Pavel Bure slap-shot a hoagie.


It's Hot At Carnival In Trinidad; For New Yorkers, A Search for Roots (And a Party, Too)
When Roxanne Aming left here for the United States 22 years ago, she was a 19-year-old dancer with dreams of performing for Alvin Ailey and going to acting school.
But when she arrived in Brooklyn to live with her mother, there were no lessons, only struggle.
"I scrubbed floors and cleaned toilets," she said.
"I ironed clothes for $10 a day in a hotel on Park Avenue. I never thought I'd be doing something like that."


Mets May Give Ticket Refunds
The Mets said today that season-ticket holders can receive a full refund for any homestand played entirely by replacement players without losing the rights to their seats for future games in the 1995 season.


Galanos: Simple Drama
To James Galanos, fashion is all about making women look beautiful, and he has devoted 44 years of his life to designing clothes to that end.
He's distressed by the whole dressing-down of America, refusing to give up his quest for the most luxurious fabrics to make into the most flattering styles he can envision.
And he's pleased that a new generation of women is discovering him.
"A lot of the daughters of my Park Avenue ladies are wearing my clothes now," he said.
"They're going into their 30's and are established and ready to dress up."


Cotabato Journal; Son Leads Marcos Family Into the Sunlight Again
The campaign rally was over, and the women in the audience -- hundreds of them -- descended on the cherubic 37-year-old candidate they all still know by his boyhood nickname.
"Bong-Bong!" one teen-ager in the audience in this southern Philippine city screamed between giggles.
"Bong-Bong, we love you!"


Foote, Cone Leaves A Review by Sony
The Sony Electronics division of the Sony Corporation of America said yesterday that Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in San Francisco had withdrawn from the review of its estimated $50 million account, leaving three finalists.


Devils Follow Up Trade With Best Game of Year
Sparked, perhaps, by the acquisition earlier in the day of 35-year-old Neal Broten from Dallas, the Devils tonight played their most effective and productive game of the season in handing the Montreal Canadiens a 6-1 defeat at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Broten was acquired from the Stars in a one-for-one deal for 30-year-old Corey Millen, the speedy center who came to the Devils from Los Angeles for a fifth-round draft choice on draft day in 1993.
And although Broten didn't arrive in time for the game, his mere presence on the roster seemed to inspire the Devils.


Ailing Fighter Overshadows Whitaker's Bid for Record
Pernell Whitaker talked about Gerald McClellan yesterday until it hurt.
Finally, Whitaker, who will try to win his sixth world title in four different classes on Saturday, said he had to stop the conversation.


South Pole Outpost Is Desired Spot For Probing Heavens
THE South Pole lies in the coldest, driest, highest desert in the world, above most of the Earth's turbulent atmosphere, and with a continuous unpolluted nighttime view of the heavens during nearly five months of winter darkness.
It is an astronomer's paradise.
But the South Pole is not yielding its favors to science without a struggle.


Getting It Right on China
Tough bargaining by the Clinton Administration, backed by a credible threat of trade sanctions, has produced a good agreement with China to crack down on piracy of copyrighted items like films, compact disks and computer software.
If China lives up to its word, America's cutting-edge industries will finally receive fair treatment in the world's biggest emerging market.
Enforcement remains a serious issue, because China has promised intellectual property protection before.
But this time, American companies will have more to go on than legal formalities that even Chinese state enterprises felt free to violate.
The agreement will create a new customs enforcement system to be set up with American assistance.
It will also bring more clearly worded regulations and better access to Chinese courts for American copyright holders.


Congressional Roundup: School Lunches; Democrats Dig In On Grants to States
Democrats vowed today to preserve the national school lunch program as a Federal program, and they said that Republicans would pay a political price for trying to dismantle it.
Gov.
Howard Dean, Democrat of Vermont, the chairman of the National Governors' Association, and Democratic members of Congress denounced the Republican proposal to replace the lunch program with a lump-sum payment of Federal money to the states.
Child nutrition, they said, is a national responsibility.


Novel Approach to Speeders?
Traffic circles have been part of the state's roadscape since the 1920's.
But they were never designed to handle the traffic of the 1990's.
The Somerville traffic circle, a mid-1930's landmark where Routes 28, 202 and 206 meet at the borders of Somerville, Bridgewater and Raritan, got a $14.8 million facelift last year, including an overpass to handle traffic on Routes 202 and 206.


Corrections
A report in the Guide column of the Long Island Weekly on Sunday about a reading by John Updike at Adelphi University misstated the date.
It is tonight at 7:30, at the university's Harley Center, in Garden City; it was not last night.


Whitman on Welfare Reform
The New Jersey Commissioner of Human Services, William Waldman, is to testify today before the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee.
The Commissioner has met with the state's Congressional delegation to explain that Governor Whitman doesn't like provisions that would deny Federal welfare benefits to legal aliens and unwed teen-agers.
DAVID STOUT


The Midlife Crisis Strikes Again
In the 1960's, as the first fusillades of the sexual revolution were opening libidinous horizons for aging males, light comedies built on the new promiscuity enjoyed a certain popularity.
Murray Schisgal's "Luv" was funnier and more imaginative than most of the genre and provided a comic vehicle for Eli Wallach and Anne Jackson.
Now Mr.
Schisgal, who is listed as co-author with Larry Gelbart for the movie "Tootsie," is back with "Circus Life," a dull and humorless variation of the theme of male midlife crises that gets stuck in its own sexual time warp.
"Circus Life" is a contemporary three-character piece, in which Nick and Howard, law partners and in-laws, find themselves, one after the other, seduced by a tall, leggy blondenamed Bobbie, who is totally devoid of inhibitions and prefers having sex in movie houses.


Management Shift For Kirshenbaum
Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York is making a series of top management changes as part of a reorganization under the new name of Kirshenbaum/Bond/Partners.
Richard Kirshenbaum, chairman and executive creative director, confirmed a report of the changes this week in Adweek; under the reorganization, Mr.
Kirshenbaum, who is 33, takes the new title of founder and chief creative officer.
Rosemarie Ryan, 32, will rejoin the agency in April as president, succeeding Jonathan Bond, 37, who continues as founder and chief executive.
Ms.
Ryan has served as planning director at Angotti, Thomas, Hedge in New York for the last year; she was a vice president and brand planner at Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond from 1991 to 1994.
Also, Robb High, 48, managing director, is being named to the new position of chief operating officer.


Panel Chief Calls for Special Prosecutor on Brown
The House Republican who is leading the investigation into the financial dealings of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown today urged Attorney General Janet Reno to ask a special Federal court panel to appoint an independent counsel.
But he added that he did not plan to hold hearings any time soon.
At a news conference, Representative William F. Clinger, the Pennsylvania Republican who heads the House Committee on Government Reform and Oversight, said his committee had found evidence that Mr.
Brown might have committed up to 16 violations of four Federal laws.


A Delicious Yet Disappearing Apple?


Boston Market Begins a Review
Boston Market Inc., formerly Boston Chicken, said yesterday that it had begun a formal review on its account, with billings estimated at $30 million to $35 million.
The account has been handled by Bayer Bess Vanderwarker in Chicago since November 1992, though the company indicated in December that it was informally talking with other agencies.


ADC
Shares of ADC Telecommunications, a manufacturer of transmission and networking systems, jumped in Nasdaq trading yesterday.
The company, based in Minneapolis, announced a contract of as much as $185 million with an Australian consortium.


The Birthplace Celebrates Film's Big 1-0-0
The French love cinema and they love anniversaries, so what better excuse for celebration than this year's 100th anniversary of the invention of movies by the Lumiere brothers, who first drew a crowd -- 33 people, to be exact -- on Dec. 28, 1895, to see their short films in Paris.
The movie world, which in France means the Government as well as the industry, has responded with appropriate reverence, organizing exhibitions, television debates and festivals of old films, publishing tomes weighty with nostalgia and, in the case of the director Agnes Varda, making a feature film as her own personal retrospective.


Experts Are Critical Of Flight Standards For Icy Conditions
Two experts on icing testified today before the National Transportation Safety Board that the Government's standards for flying in icing conditions are inadequate and that all twin-engine propeller planes are vulnerable to a certain unusual form of frigid precipitation -- not just the ATR-72 that crashed last October near Roselawn, Ind.
In the opening day of testimony before the Federal safety board, one of the experts, Dr.
John Marwitz, a professor of meteorology at the University of Wyoming, argued that the design of the ATR-72 did not make it particularly vulnerable to the rare precipitation known as "super-cooled drizzle drops." The drops can form at high altitudes at below-freezing temperatures but remain liquid until they come into contact with a surface and crystallize, he said.


CUNY Professors, Fearing Worst, Rush Out Their Resumes
Tenured professors, both young and old, already had begun frantically sending out resumes and scrambling to seek jobs at academic conventions, as anger and anxiety escalated about the effect of proposed budget cuts on the City University of New York.
But yesterday, their worst fears began to take shape when the board of trustees met and declared a financial emergency for CUNY's senior colleges -- a step that paves the way to lay off tenured faculty.


Babylon Glamour Is Elegance Now
Such is this era of style reinvention that even weekly magazines can't keep up.
By the time it was on the cover of the Feb. 20 Newsweek, Brad Pitt's picture resembled the evil twin of the cropped-hair, clean-shaven actor himself, seated for dinner at the Buffalo Club in Los Angeles.
As the New York fashion press does its usual pre-Oscar moaning about the lack of style in Los Angeles (the March issues of both Vogue and W magazine have such articles), the city, like an ingenue taking on a new name, is in the midst of reinventing itself.


Sports of The Times; The Reality Of a Teen's Fantasy
IT'S too late now for Lawrence Meyers.
Too late to learn, or to be told, that his fantasy was a fraud.
At a memorial service Sunday in Paterson, N.J., hundreds mourned 16-year-old Lawrence Meyers, who died Friday, shot in the head by a housing officer's bullet three nights earlier during what the police described as a narcotics arrest.


Web of Business Connections Haunts Commerce Secretary
Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown has traveled to Belgium, Spain, India and the Middle East in the last month, working to broker complicated deals on behalf of American businesses.
But back at home, his new role as global rainmaker has been overshadowed by Justice Department and Congressional investigations into the complicated deals he set up when he was a private lawyer, a lobbyist and the Democratic Party chairman.
Friends say he is being pilloried for the same kind of networking skills that led President Clinton to call him "the best Commerce Secretary we've ever had." Republicans counter that evidence is emerging of fast and loose practices that go beyond the wheeling and dealing that long ago earned Mr.
Brown a reputation as someone who skirts the ethical line.


Kenneth M. Spang, 83, Economist and Banker
Kenneth Merwin Spang, a New York economist and banker who played a leading role in persuading many nations in Latin America and elsewhere to resume repayment on defaulted international loans, died Feb. 20 in Greenwich, Conn., his widow, Florence Twiford Spang, said Friday.
Mr. Spang was 83. The cause was cardiac arrest, Mrs. Spang said.


For CK, a Big Step In a New Direction
Three years ago, Calvin Klein declared that "the future is in bridge." He has been trying ever since to come up with a satisfying formula for a bridge collection.
Since there is probably no designer who so relentlessly stirs the cultural stew in search of what's young, hot and sexy, the various recipes he produced in the last few years of course included odes to all three.
While this has been a winning combination for Mr.
Klein's jeans, underwear and fragrance businesses, in bridge, the price level below designer, it has had limited appeal.
So, the more mature and restrained fall collection he presented last week was a big step in the right direction.


Zubov Has Surgery as His Bosses Ask Why
Sergei Zubov was at Lenox Hill Hospital instead of practice today, having a bone chip removed from his left wrist.
That decision has been criticized by Ranger management, but Zubov's teammates have little reason to doubt the severity of his injury.
"I don't think Neil Smith knows what he's talking about," said fellow defenseman Brian Leetch, responding to recent comments made by the Rangers' president and general manager concerning Zubov's physical condition.
"He's not going to get surgery for no reason, and I think if you ask other guys that have had it, like Adam Graves and Mark Messier, they will tell you that it is very painful."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-15  COLLAPSE OF A BRITISH FIRM
How could one rogue trader bring down a venerable British investment firm?
An audacious strategy by the 28-year-old trader led to more than $1 billion in losses for the firm, Barings P.L.C.
A1


House Considers Bill to Impose Extensive Review Process on New Rules for Health and Safety
The House moved toward passing the most far-reaching piece of anti-regulatory legislation on the Republican agenda today, opening debate on a bill to make it difficult for Federal agencies to impose new rules on health, safety and the environment.
The risk-assessment bill would require a proposed regulation to survive an elaborate series of scientific studies, reviews and appeals in which its backers would have to demonstrate that it would be the most effective way to reduce risks to the public.
The legislation would substitute economic calculations for health considerations as the determining factors in setting standards for toxic wastes and clean air and water.


Frank L. Schaub, 73, Former Florida Prosecutor
Frank Layton Schaub, a former Florida state prosecutor who drew national attention with two cases he tried in the 1960's, died on Thursday at Cypress Memorial Hospital in Inverness, Fla.
A former resident of Bradenton, Fla., he was 73 and had recently lived in Inverness.
He had suffered from heart problems and cancer for several years, his family said.


Conseco Wants to Buy All of 2 Insurers
Conseco Inc., which tried unsuccessfully last year to acquire the much larger Kemper Corporation, said yesterday that it wanted to spend almost $728 million to buy shares of two life insurance companies it controls but does not own entirely.
Because the shares of the two affiliate companies -- Bankers Life Holding and CCP Insurance -- have been depressed along with many other insurance stocks, analysts saw the move as way for Conseco to buy cheaply shares that could help improve its faltering earnings and perhaps be sold at a profit some day.
Conseco, a insurance holding company, knows the operations of the two companies inside out, as it reorganized them in the early 1990's and continues to provide much of their management.


Borbon, 48, Coming Back for Reds?
PEDRO BORBON, a 48-year-old pitcher who hasn't played in the major leagues in 15 years, was introduced yesterday as the Cincinnati Reds' first replacement player.
But even after MARGE SCHOTT, the team owner, accompanied Borbon to a news conference, there was doubt about whether he would ever get in uniform.
General Manager JIM BOWDEN said Borbon had to pass a physical before he could sign a nonguaranteed minor league contract.
Borbon has a double chin and a protruding belly. (AP)


CHRONICLE
When her young daughter showed symptoms of learning disabilities 18 years ago, ANNE FORD said, "I found it very hard to find anyone who had a child with a learning disability, let alone a pediatrician who knew much about it. They told me she was slow and immature but would be fine and I had nothing to worry about. But as a mother, you know when something's not right, and she has been in special schools most of her life."
Mrs.
Ford also found a mission: she became involved with the National Center for Learning Disabilities, an organization that serves as an information and referral conduit and works to educate officials and the public.
She is now chairman of its board and co-chairwoman of its benefit dinner tonight at the New York Marriott Marquis Hotel.


Killing of Immigrant Likely to Hurt Far Right at French Polls
The killing of a 17-year-old African immigrant in Marseilles last week by a supporter of the far-right National Front may also have killed whatever slim chances the group's leader had of winning France's presidential elections this spring.
Jean-Marie Le Pen won 14.5 percent of the vote in the first round in the last elections seven years ago on a platform of France first, and foreigners out.


Let's Break the Drab Dollar Bill Habit
To the Editor:
John F. Heimerdinger (Op-Ed, Feb. 20) sensibly argues for a modest change in the design of our dollar-denominated bills to assist the blind.
It is time that our bill design be dictated by logic -- not sentimental tradition -- to serve the needs of the seeing as well as the blind.


For Rogue Traders, Yet Another Victim
Rogue traders have wounded some pretty big financial prey over the last year.
But Barings P.L.C. was the quickest and biggest kill yet.
Last month, Chemical Bank said it had lost $70 million because a foreign exchange trader, who people close to the bank said was Victor Gomez, entered fake trades to hide losses on the Mexican peso.
Last April, Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company said Joseph Jett, then 36 and the head of its government bond desk, had racked up $350 million in fake profits by entering nonexistent trades into the company's computer system.


Shell and Exxon in North Sea Oil Venture
Two of the world's largest oil companies, the Royal Dutch/Shell Group and the Exxon Corporation, announced yesterday that they had received approval from the British Government for an $800 million project to squeeze more oil and gas out of developed fields in the North Sea.
A series of such projects has helped keep the flow of oil in the North Sea at much higher-than-expected levels over the last several years -- a trend that has made it more difficult for the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to force world oil prices higher.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Collapse of Barings
How could one rogue trader bring down Barings P.L.C.?
An audacious strategy by the trader, Nicholas W. Leeson, 28, led to more than $1 billion in losses for Barings, a profitable and well-regarded British investment house.  [ Page A1. ]


Patterns
For Bill Blass, Onward
If Bill Blass has one more season as outstanding as his last two, he will have earned the right to be called the Tina Turner of the fashion industry.
The 72-year-old designer's work is undergoing a renaissance, showing up more frequently in stores and magazine editorials and on the backs of fashion-conscious women beyond the Blass standard-bearers like Barbara Walters, Casey Ribicoff and Nan Kempner.


Finishing Touches on Denver Airport


Ida Krebs, 86, Founder of School For Learning-Disabled Children
Ida Gertrude Krebs, whose lifelong interest in children with learning disabilities led her to found a school where she could implement a highly individual approach to such problems, died on Feb. 11 at Alexandria Hospital in Virginia.
She was 86 and had lived in Lexington, Mass., until about three years ago.
The cause was respiratory failure, said her son, Roy R. Krebs Jr. of Alexandria.


INSIDE
Opposing Views of Tapes
Prosecutors and defense lawyers say secretly recorded telephone tapes support their arguments in the case of Qubilah Shabazz.
Page A17.
Driving Lesson Is Fatal
The son of the lawyer Thomas P. Puccio drowned when he drove off an embankment as his father was teaching him to drive.
Page B1.
Mexican Stocks Tumble
Mexican stocks fell sharply as investors continued to flee the market, fearing the impact of Government austerity measures.
Page D2.
Giuliani Creates Police Panel
Ignoring a City Council law creating an agency to monitor police corruption, Mayor Giuliani appointed his own panel to do the job.
Page B1.


Finding (Illegal) Uses For Vacant City Lots
David Caba did not have a high-paying job with the city.
Even so, according to the city's Department of Investigation, he had a lot to offer.
He had one in the Bronx, one in Brooklyn and two in Queens, the Department of Investigation said yesterday.
The trouble was, Mr.
Caba did not own the lots.
They belonged to the city.


No Headline
Once the loss goes to about $100 million, you figure they would have known about it.
It didn't go from $100 million to $750 million overnight, but no one said to the boss, 'Hey, do you want to cut the guy off?' LEO MELAMED, former head of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, on the collapse of Barings.  [ D8:5. ]


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A young shop finds another voice of experience by hiring the co-chairman of Rosenfeld, Sirowitz.
ONE of New York's younger agencies, for the second time in a year, is trying to spur growth by grafting on an older generation of creative talent.
Ryan Drossman &amp; Partners, a small shop that opened in 1990, is hiring Len Sirowitz, co-chairman and chief creative officer at Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss in New York, in the new position of vice chairman.
The appointment comes as Rosenfeld, Sirowitz makes plans to close after 24 years, the victim of a debilitating series of account losses.


Accounts
*
Viacom Inc., New York, to the Los Angeles and New York offices of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, as the first agency to handle a corporate branding campaign.
Carl Folta, a spokesman for Viacom, confirmed a report of the appointment this week in Adweek, adding that Ogilvy's New York office would handle most of the creative duties.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $5 million to $10 million.


Arts Audiences Are Up, Thanks to Endowment; No Room in Academia
To the Editor:
Re "N.E.A. Hysteria, on Both Sides" (Op-Ed, Feb 21): Alice Goldfarb Marquis fails to mention one function of the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities.
This is the generous and needed support of these organizations for the work of independent scholars, poets, composers and artists who once looked forward to the possibility of attaining secure positions in academia.


Looking, Apparently Anywhere, for a Cure
THE HIPPOPOTAMUS  By Stephen Fry  292 pages. Random House. $22.
The title of Stephen Fry's rollicking new novel comes from T. S. Eliot's poem "The Hippopotamus," an early satirical poem, which suggests that natural man for all his weaknesses (i.e., the hippopotamus) is more welcome in heaven than an idolatrous clergy.
But while Mr.
Fry takes Eliot's theme and gives it a clever spin, his voice is decidedly his own: slangy, frantic and enthusiastically ribald, closer in spirit and style to Monty Python than anything Eliot ever dreamed of.


A First for the Assembly
Nilsa Cruz-Perez has nursed hospital patients, soldiered with the Army and helped run a medium-size city.
She has even been a welfare mother.
And yesterday, she became the first Hispanic woman to sit in the New Jersey Assembly.
Ms.
Cruz-Perez, 32, a licensed practical nurse and former Army supply sergeant, was appointed by the Democratic Party to fill the seat of Wayne Bryant of Camden, who is now in the Senate.
The new assemblywoman has also served as the executive assistant to Mayor Arnold Webster of Camden.


Picking Up the Pieces Of a Shelter and a Family
ON Sunday, Kenny Orzechowski was hit with one of those sudden pangs of panic that he used to watch his wife get.
His little girl, Carly, was glued to the television, watching a Knicks game.
The apartment was clean and quiet.
All seemed well.
Then it hit him: "Pataki budget cuts."
Ah, the thrills and chills of running a nonprofit.
Two months ago, when his wife, Terry, died of breast cancer, Kenny promised to take care of Our Lady of Comfort, the 19-bed women's shelter Terry founded in 1980.
"I think with all the cuts Governor Pataki is proposing, there'll be a lot more homeless people," Kenny said.
"We could get swamped."


The Nuclear Wedge Issue
Citizens should not be deceived about the real motivation behind the gathering crusade against affirmative action.
The rhetoric about reverse discrimination is the 90's equivalent of blue smoke and mirrors.
Everyone in American politics knows what is going on, and if three decades of racial progress are to be abandoned, let us at least be candid about it.
Republican strategists and the party's Presidential candidates have spotted a nuclear-strength wedge issue for the 1996 election.
By concocting a fantasy that white males are a new victim class in the world's richest nation, they see a highway to a pre-emptive lock on the electoral vote.
The tipoff came from the 1994 Congressional election, when 62 percent of white males voted for G.O.P. candidates.
By sustaining those numbers the Republicans can seal off President Clinton, or any other Democratic nominee, from victory in the nation's Southern tier, including the mega-states of Texas and California.
Absent a vote drain from a third-party candidate, a Democratic victory becomes virtually impossible.


Corrections
A report in the Currents column of The Home Section on Feb. 16 about the designer and decorator Mary Vinson misstated the nationality of the pop musician King Sunny Ade, whose colorful costumes inspired her.
He is from Nigeria, not Mali.


U.N. Investigator Tells of 'Heinous' Rights Violations in Iraq
A former Foreign Minister of the Netherlands who has been monitoring human rights in Iraq told a United Nations Commission today that over the last year President Saddam Hussein made an already grave situation "heinous" for Iraqis through officially sanctioned amputations, maiming and branding of dissidents and military deserters.
"It is simply shocking that near the end of the 20th century, any state should so publicly and unashamedly incorporate heinous practices into its law," said the former Dutch Foreign Minister, Max van der Stoel.
He said that such practices, which threaten many thousands of Iraqis arrested for both petty crimes and political opposition are "absolutely outlawed" under international conventions.
The series of laws mandating physical punishment was enacted in the summer and fall of 1994.


Connecticut Takes Wrong Turn at Wrong Time
They felt the one-sided loss to Villanova was an aberration.
The sluggishness in their last two victories had reasonable explanations.
This Connecticut team was a year more mature than the unit that set out a year ago on a mission to win the Big East, and never again was able to perform at the same level.
The Huskies were confident they would benefit from last year's tournament experience and this year's recent imperfections.
But tonight, Connecticut found itself headed in the wrong direction at the wrong time.
In the last week of the regular season, a time for refinement before tournament play, the Huskies had to escape the swarm of joyous fans celebrating a 72-70 Providence victory that threatened Connecticut's potential No. 1 seeding and raised the possibility of changes.


Pataki's Budget Could Lift Bond Rating, Agency Says
Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposed budget received unusual support today from a leading state credit agency, which suggested that it would raise New York's bond rating if the Governor's budget is passed on time and if it is in balance for half a year.
Standard &amp; Poor's, which rates New York's general obligation bonds at A-, the lowest of any state, said in a report that passage of Mr.
Pataki's budget by April 1, the start of the fiscal year, "could provide the impetus for a rating upgrade." But with a month to go before the deadline -- and a 10-year record of failing to pass a budget on time -- negotiations between Mr.
Pataki and the Legislature are in only a nascent stage.


Firefly Leads Scientists to the First Biological Clock Gene Found in a Plant
IN another step toward understanding the daily rhythms of life, scientists have identified the first biological clock gene in plants.
The common firefly helped light the way.
Dr.
Steve A. Kay, who led researchers at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville and Rockefeller University in New York, said that locating the timekeeper gene in Arabidopsis thaliana, a member of the mustard family, was the first step in a process that might lead to important agricultural uses.
The findings are reported in the current issue of the journal Science.


A Balanced-Budget Amendment Is Approved in Trenton
Over the advice of its own lawyers, the New Jersey Assembly voted today to ratify a Federal balanced-budget amendment that has not been passed by Congress yet.
The Democratic minority called the vote premature, warning that it might have to be repeated.


Man's World, Woman's World? Brain Studies Point to Differences
DR.
RONALD MUNSON, a philosopher of science at the University of Missouri, was elated when Good Housekeeping magazine considered publishing an excerpt from the latest of the novels he writes on the side.
The magazine eventually decided not to publish the piece, but Dr.
Munson was much consoled by a letter from an editor telling him that she liked the book, which is written from a woman's point of view, and could hardly believe a man had written it.
It is a popular notion: that men and women are so intrinsically different that they literally live in different worlds, unable to understand each other's perspectives fully.
There is a male brain and a female brain, a male way of thinking and a female way.
But only now are scientists in a position to address whether the notion is true.


Bursting Population Overwhelms Italy's Prisons
The overcrowding crisis in Italian prisons set a record this weekend, when the San Vittorio prison in Milan literally ran out of room.
For three days, starting last Friday, local police had to ship an estimated 400 new prisoners out of town, some to jails outside the city and some as far away as the island of Sardinia.
With space for 1,100 prisoners, the 19th-century prison hit overload last week with 2,450 inmates.
The freeze on new admissions, which ended this morning, alleviated the situation somewhat, but according to the warden, Luigi Pagano, "It is not an optimal situation."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY CAR THIEF WOUNDS WOMAN AT MALL
A gunman opened fire in the parking lot of the Staten Island Mall, shooting a woman in the chest and fleeing in her car, the police said.
The shooting left the woman fighting for her life.
A 27-year-old man was arrested.
B3.
OWNER OF STORE CHARGED IN FATAL ARSON
Three years after a New York City fire lieutenant was killed battling a blaze in Queens, the owner of a store in the building and two other men were arrested.
B3.
CUNY PROFESSORS FACING LAYOFFS
The board of the City University of New York declared a financial emergency for CUNY's senior colleges -- a step that paves the way to lay off tenured faculty.
B3.
MAN ACCUSED OF LEASING CITY LOTS
David Caba, 31, of the city's Department of General Services, has been accused of leasing city-owned lots to people who wanted to operate parking lots on them.
B3.
Giuliani backs fewer hospitals.
B2.
REGION ALBANY 2-STEP IS TODAY'S DANCE
The New York State Senate passed a bill reinstating the death penalty, knowing that the Assembly would not accept it.
The Assembly passed legislation that would cut income taxes, knowing the Senate would reject it.
This is Albany in the early days of Governor Pataki's term.
B4.
PATAKI BUDGET GETS SOME SUPPORT
Governor Pataki's proposed budget received support from a leading credit agency, which suggested that it would raise New York's bond rating if the budget is passed on time and if it is in balance for half a year.
B4.
ASSEMBLY PASSES BALANCED-BUDGET BILL
Over the advice of its own lawyers, the New Jersey Assembly voted to ratify a Federal balanced-budget amendment that has not been passed by Congress.
B5.
ACCUSED SNIPER PLEADS NOT GUILTY
Peter Sylvester, the man accused of terrorizing Suffolk County last summer by firing a high-powered rifle through the windows of restaurants and a gas station, was charged with murder, rape and other crimes in Suffolk County Criminal Court.
B5.
PATERSON STUDENTS SEEK DRUG-FREE DAY
Four students at Eastside High appealed for a halt in drug use in Paterson on Thursday, during the funeral of Lawrence Meyers, the 16-year-old killed by the police last Tuesday.
B5.
FEARS FOR THE HOMELESS
Two months ago when his wife, Terry, died of breast cancer, Kenny Orzechowski promised to take care of Our Lady of Comfort, the women's shelter his wife founded.
But budget cuts planned by Governor Pataki have him worried.
"We could get swamped," he said.
Our Towns, by Evelyn Nieves.
B5.
PRIEST GETS 4 YEARS IN PRISON
The Rev.
Patrick Moloney, the Catholic priest caught with $2 million from a $7.4 million Brink's armored-car robbery, was sentenced in Federal District Court in Rochester to four years and three months in Federal prison.
B5.
A man was wounded in a feud over the leadership of the Seneca Nation.
B6.
Neediest Cases B2 Chronicle B20


Mexican Market Dives Nearly 7%
Mexico's stock market suffered its worst percentage loss of the year today, and the peso again drifted lower, as investors continued to await a tough new austerity plan promised by the Mexican Government.
There was also dark news from Banamex, the blue-chip Mexican bank, which announced that it was letting go up to 35 percent of its 33,000 employees.
Investors fear it could signal the beginning of a wave of layoffs by other banks and many businesses crippled by the country's economic crisis.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
5.87
3.49
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.71
3.40
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.90
5.91
3.61
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.21
7.29
6.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.47
7.52
6.65
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.34
8.40
7.49
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.42
6.43
5.77
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Can You Really Eat All You Can Eat?
THE computer industry calls them "integrated application suites," but a better name might be "smorgasware." Install one of these all-in-one behemoths, and you may suddenly feel as overwhelmed as if you had stepped into the world's largest all-you-can eatery.
Thousands of options as mundane as hot dogs and as sophisticated as foie gras suddenly assail you, along with the possibility of inventing your own dishes, perhaps hot dogs on a bed of foie gras.
Life, you suddenly realize, is too short.
And then, in the distance, you spy choices as obscure as the Far Eastern delicacy unhatched chicks in their shells, which will undoubtedly appeal to somebody somewhere, but probably never to you.


Young Trader's $29 Billion Bet Brings Down a Venerable Firm
At the epicenter of Sunday night's spectacular collapse of a leading British investment bank stands a 28-year-old trader named Nicholas W. Leeson, a Briton who in the course of a month put $29 billion of the firm's money on the line and lost more than a billion of it.
Working in Singapore for Barings P.L.C., an investment house that had survived nearly two and a half centuries of ups and downs, Mr.
Leeson eluded detection by his own firm and by outside regulators as he made an ever-mounting and ill-fated gamble on Japanese stock prices and interest rates.


Supreme Court to Decide Case On Bias Against Legal Aliens
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether a Reconstruction-era civil rights law, originally intended to protect the legal rights of former slaves, also bars discrimination against aliens.
While the issue reaches the Court in the context of the refusal by an insurance company to write homeowner's insurance for people who are not American citizens, the case could have considerably broader implications.


Mexico's Gain, Our Loss
To the Editor:
"Still the Right Deal for Mexico" (editorial, Feb. 24) says it all.
The bailout package is a good deal for Mexico and absurd for the people of the United States.
Can anyone seriously believe that Mexico will surrender its oil revenues in case of a loan default?


Ex-Colleague Says Clinton Nominee Knew of Syphilis Study in 1969
The former president of the medical society in Macon County, Ala., said today that he was certain Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. was present at a 1969 meeting in which a small number of local doctors were informed of the infamous Tuskegee experiment, in which black men were denied treatment for syphilis in order to study the disease.
Dr.
Luther C. McRae said in an interview that Dr.
Foster, an obstetrician-gynecologist who is President Clinton's choice to be Surgeon General of the United States, learned some details of the experiment at the 1969 meeting.
Dr.
McRae said that like all the doctors present that day, including himself, Dr.
Foster did not express any moral qualms about the study.
At the time, Dr.
Foster was chairman of the department of obstetrics and gynecology at Tuskegee University.


Neediest Fund Faces $250,000 Challenge
The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, with one day left in its 183d campaign, must raise another $250,000 to match last year's total of $4.59 million.


Men Who Shook the Foundations
Barings P.L.C. is not the first institution to be shaken by a single, aggressive trader.
In recent years, banks, securities firms and even county governments have suffered billions of dollars in losses all attributed to bad judgment -- or misfeasance - by one employee.
Nicholas W. Leeson -- A 28-year-old trader from the Singapore office of Barings, has been accused of making trades that have led to at least $950 million in losses, causing the collapse of the venerable British investment bank.
Mr.
Leeson used futures contracts to bet heavily that the Japanese stock market would stay level.
When the earthquake in Kobe caused the market to tumble instead, Mr.
Leeson tried doubling up his bets, only to sustain further losses.
Mr.
Leeson disappeared last week, and is now being sought by authorities.
Victor Gomez -- Another trader felled by the overseas markets.
In January, when Chemical Bank announced that it had suffered $70 million in losses in trading Mexican pesos, the bank blamed a trader, which people close to the bank identified as Mr.
Gomez, a vice president in its foreign exchange group.
The bank said the trader had loaded up on more pesos than he was authorized to purchase.
Those holdings suffered staggering losses after the sudden devaluation of the peso on Dec. 20 and its subsequent further fall.
Robert L. Citron -- As the treasurer of Orange County, Mr.
Citron won plenty of fans for his aggressive and daring financial style that produced hefty profits for the county investment pool.
But the fund was borrowing heavily to speculate on interest rates staying low or declining.
As the rates rose last year, Mr.
Citron's trading strategy collapsed in disaster.
Losses reached into the billions, and Orange County filed for bankruptcy.
Now, Mr.
Citron is out of a job.
But the fault for the catastrophe does not lie with him, he has said.
After 24 years of trading billions of dollars in the county fund, Mr.
Citron said he was an unsophisticated investor.
The fault, he said, lay with his brokers at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
Joseph Jett -- The former chief Government bond trader at Kidder Peabody &amp; Company was celebrated by the firm for his profit-making ability.
Then, in April 1994, Kidder made a stunning announcement: Mr.
Jett's profits were all a fraud.
The firm said that, by using an accounting loophole, Mr.
Jett manufactured phony bond trading profits totaling $350 million.
In truth, Mr.
Jett's real trading had lost $100 million, the firm said.
The phantom profits not only improved the performance of Mr.
Jett's Government trading desk, but brought him a $9 million bonus in 1993.
Mr.
Jett has denied any wrongdoing.
Earlier this year, Mr.
Jett was notified that the enforcement staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission had recommended civil charges against him.
Kidder, Peabody, which at the time was a subsidiary of the General Electric Company, has since been sold to the Paine Webber Group.
Paul W. Mozer -- The former head of the Government trading desk at Salomon Brothers, Mr.
Mozer had the reputation of being the most aggressive trader in the business.
In 1991, when the Government imposed rules limiting the amount of securities that a single dealer could purchase in a Treasury auction, Mr.
Mozer elected to side step the rules.
Using the names of Salomon customers who had not authorized any purchases, he submitted false bids in a number of Treasury auctions.
Using the other names allowed Mr.
Mozer to purchase far more of the Treasury securities than he was allowed.
The scheme was disclosed by the firm in August 1991, and Mr.
Mozer was dismissed.
Salomon's senior management, including John H. Gutfreund, then the chairman, was forced to resign.
The firm ultimately paid a $290 million fine.
Mr.
Mozer was sentenced to four months in prison and was banned from the industry for life.
Howard A. Rubin -- The former head of mortgage securities trading at Merrill Lynch , Mr.
Rubin was accused by the firm of causing a $377 million loss in 1987.
The firm said that Mr.
Rubin failed to disclose that he had taken a $500 million position in a risky form of mortgage-backed securities called "principal only," while selling the corresponding "interest only" to Merrill clients.
The firm said that they had instructed Mr.
Rubin not to take such positions, and only learned of it when the losses were mounting.
In 1990, the S.E.C. suspended Mr.
Rubin from the industry for nine months.
Merrill Lynch responded to the crisis by establishing a risk management group that reports directly to the firm's senior management, rather than through the trading managers.
KURT EICHENWALD


Day 200: Negotiators Begin New Round of Talks in Changed Atmosphere
Negotiators for baseball's owners and players began a new round of talks today, but remained uncertain whether the presence of Bud Selig or his peace talks with Donald Fehr last week would have any impact on their effort to end the 200-day-old strike.
Two small groups led by Selig and Fehr met for four hours, spending much of their time on the core economic issues of payroll tax, salary arbitration, free agency, revenue sharing and an industry growth fund.
When they emerged, they acknowledged that they remained far apart, but emphasized that the atmosphere had changed.


In Chicago, a Gang Tries to Show Political Muscle
Alderwoman Dorothy Tillman, who rose to fame in Chicago by denouncing the strong-arm tactics of the old Democratic machine, now faces opposition from an organization of another sort: a street gang.
A group called 21st Century Vote, which has ties to Chicago's largest gang, the Black Gangster Disciples, is trying to oust Ms.
Tillman, who represents the South Side neighborhoods of the Third Ward, and elect Wallace (Gator) Bradley, who has served prison time for armed robbery.


Dr. Joseph Wortis, an Editor And a Psychiatrist, 88, Dies
Dr.
Joseph Wortis, a psychiatrist analyzed by Freud and the longtime editor of the journal Biological Psychiatry, died on Wednesday in White Plains Hospital.
Dr.
Wortis, who lived in Brooklyn and on Shelter Island, L.I., was 88.
The cause was prostate cancer, according to his companion, Dr.
Katherine Halmi of White Plains, a professor of psychiatry at Cornell University Medical College.


Gold Rush, Gunplay, Geography
SEARCHING for gold on the Yukon Trail is not the worst way to pass a Sunday afternoon, especially when you do not even have to leave the computer.
With my partner Sadie, who had already found a small fortune in gold in Colorado but lost it at poker, I got outfitted in Seattle and then we sailed on the Rosalie to Skagway, Alaska, to begin our adventure.
The Yukon Trail is "edutainment," a game from MECC of Minneapolis that unavoidably mixes in a fair amount of geography and history.
The artwork is striking, and the dialogue of the many characters is both shown in balloons on the screen and spoken aloud in what sound like genuine Western accents.
Along the way, the player keeps a journal, in which the program can also write things like the amount of cash the player is still carrying.


Windfall of Housing Dollars
This city has received some $4 million to build or renovate about 205 housing units, Mayor Joseph Vas announced yesterday.
The windfall came from Tewksbury, Bernardsville, East Amwell, Warren, Peapack and Gladstone -- towns that have decided to fulfill their affordable-housing obligations under court decisions of 1975 by providing money for housing in another community.


A Killing in a Parking Lot
Twice, the authorities say, the manager of the International House of Pancakes here had been confronted by two men in the parking lot after the restaurant closed.


On My Mind; The Road Not Taken
See them smile and toast each other before their little Chinese Communist and American flags.
The negotiators from Beijing and Washington are celebrating their happy day of commercial accord.
And why not?
They have done their job well.
The Americans said that unless the Communists stopped stealing United States intellectual property like movies, compact disks and computer software, Washington would retaliate with sanctions on more than $1 billion of Chinese exports to the U.S.


U.S. Arts Agency Announces Grants
The National Endowment for the Arts has announced $12.4 million in challenge grants to 44 arts organizations in 21 states and Washington.
Under the terms of the grants, each organization must match each Federal dollar with $3 raised from private sources.
The grants, established in 1978, are intended to help arts organizations increase their endowments or establish new programs.
The largest single grant, $800,000, went to the Arts and Science Council of Charlotte-Mecklenburg in Charlotte, N.C., to help support the council's endowment fund.


Giuliani Names His Own Panel to Monitor Police Corruption
Ignoring a new city law that established an independent agency to monitor police corruption, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani appointed his own panel yesterday to perform the same function.
The Mayor's move once again puts him in a direct confrontation with the City Council, which passed the law creating an agency with wide-ranging authority to investigate corruption.
Although the Mayor would have two appointments to the five-member agency, he objected to the sweeping powers the agency would have and to the Council's role in appointing members.


Man Pleads Not Guilty on 24 Counts, Including Sniper Killing
The man accused of terrorizing Suffolk County last summer by firing a high-powered rifle through the windows of restaurants and a gas station was charged with murder, rape and other crimes today.
The suspect, Peter Sylvester, 24, pleaded not guilty to 24 counts in Suffolk County Criminal Court, where he came face to face with Sharon Chaifetz, the wife of the man who was shot to death, as she sat in the front row in the courtroom.


Islanders Lose Lachance to Broken Ankle
The condition of the Islanders' blue line has now reached the critical stage: A magnetic resonance imaging test yesterday revealed that defenseman Scott Lachance has a broken left ankle, not a sprain as originally thought.
"Al Arbour just jumped to sixth on our depth chart," joked Islander General Manager Don Maloney, referring to the 61-year-old team vice president and a former coach, who was a 12-year National Hockey League veteran on defense.


Chess
It's going to be Anatoly Karpov of Russia and Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn in the International Chess Federation's world championship next fall.
Karpov defeated Boris Gelfand of Belarus by 6-3 and Kamsky defeated Valery Salov of Russia by 5 1/2-1 1/2 in a best-of-10-game qualification match that took place Feb. 6 to 18 in Sanghi Nagar, India.


A Thursday Without Drug Use Is Urged by Students in Paterson
Four students at Eastside High appealed today that drug use and sales be halted in Paterson on Thursday during the funeral of Lawrence Meyers.
The 16-year-old was fatally shot last Tuesday when an undercover narcotics squad tried to arrest him.
"Thursday will be a drug-free day in memory of Lawrence," said Angel Gonzalez, a junior.
"The streets will be quiet in memory of Lawrence to show we care."


Led Zeppelin Redux, In Spirit, Not Name
The bludgeoning stop-start riffs, the histrionic oohs and ahs, the borrowed blues lyrics, the Celtic modalities and Middle Eastern drones -- could it be Led Zeppelin, on tour again after nearly 15 years?
Yes and no.
On Sunday night here at the Pensacola Civic Center, the band leaders were Led Zeppelin's main songwriters, the guitarist Jimmy Page and the singer Robert Plant, and most of their set was songs they wrote for Led Zeppelin.
But they were out to rethink the music that made Led Zeppelin one of rock's most influential bands.
Led Zeppelin officially disbanded when its drummer, John Bonham, died in 1980.
Since then, the surviving members have steadfastly refused the lucrative temptation to tour as Led Zeppelin, though they used the name again for one-time appearances at Live Aid in 1985 and at Atlantic Records' 40th anniversary concert in 1988.
But its presence lingers.
Led Zeppelin's old songs remain staples on rock radio stations, and its music has been the blueprint for numberless hard-rock bands.
When this Page-Plant tour was announced, the shows quickly sold out, including the New York City area stop on April 6 at Byrne Arena in East Rutherford, N.J.
An album recorded last year by the Page-Plant band, "No Quarter" (Atlantic), has sold a million copies.


Bonds Gain On Failure of British Bank
Government securities gained in thin trading yesterday, after the collapse of a venerable British investment bank helped to attract funds to the market as some investors sold stocks to buy short-term securities.
Early in the day the failure of Barings P.L.C., the 228-year-old British investment house, sent ripples through the world's financial markets amid fears that the crisis would spread.
While trading steadied in Europe, the United States bond market still benefited from a flight to quality as investors sought a safe haven.


Gay Show Broadens Beyond Parochial Views
With public television needing all the success stories it can muster these days, one of the more unlikely is being provided by "In the Life," a monthly magazine devoted to gay and lesbian issues and culture.
It got off to a tentative and unfocused start three years ago on WNYC/Channel 31.
Other stations in the system either wouldn't touch it or scheduled it well outside prime time.
Now it is carried prominently by some 70 affiliates, including major markets like Boston and Dallas.
Tonight at 10, it can be seen on WNET/Channel 13, immediately after, as it happens, a profile of Rush Limbaugh.
The remarkable survival of "In the Life" has happened without public-television funds.
Money comes from a national membership network and the H. van Ameringen Foundation.
The series is thus insulated from the hordes of ideological accountants who have been threatening public television with reprisals, strictures or worse.


Kotite's Job Requires Selling Desirable Free Agents on Jets
Rich Kotite plans to meet today with three free agents who could strengthen the Jets: Eagles backup quarterback Bubby Brister, Cowboys safety James Washington and his Dallas teammate Alvin Harper, a wide receiver.
All three players are on the Jets' priority list, but Washington and Harper would have an immediate impact on the shaky secondary and wide receiving corps.


Inept Nets Hit Highs In Futility Vs. Bulls
The first clue should have told Butch Beard something.
He was standing with his arms folded across his chest, a guarded man, after the team's morning shoot-around.
"I'll be curious to see how they come out and play," he said.
"I couldn't put my finger on them today."


Donations Lag as Campaign Nears End
With one day left in its 83d campaign, The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund still has a chance to match last year's total of $4.59 million.
It would have to collect another $250,000, a task that is formidable but not impossible.
Contributions dated no later than March 1 and received by March 8 will be included in this year's appeal.
The total today -- $4,346,550.81 -- is the lowest since 1989, when the fund raised $4,039,728.75.
The number of donors this year -- 11,820 as of last Friday -- is also unusually low.
Last year, 13,500 individuals and foundations sent money to the fund.
In 1993, almost 14,000 did so.


Critics Say G.O.P. Cuts Put Unfair Burden on the Needy
The $17 billion in midyear spending cuts proposed by House subcommittees last week are either the first step toward the nation's fiscal salvation or the first blow in a Republican plan to gut protections for needy Americans, according to the rounds of charge and countercharge that have followed the announcements.
"I suppose that the truth lies somewhere in the middle," said Representative Robert L. Livingston, the Louisiana Republican who, as chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, is Speaker Newt Gingrich's budgetary axeman.


Orangutan Hybrid, Bred to Save Species, Now Seen as Pollutant
IGNORE the absurd nickname Junior: this scowling, hulking he-ape, his fur like flame and his belly like Buddha's, his face ostentatiously swollen with the fatty cheek flaps and throat sac of a fully mature male, is not the sort to elicit clucks and kootchie-koos from the human primates who watch him through the Plexiglas of his zoo enclosure.
As the oldest male orangutan at the National Zoo (29 years old in April), and the father of five other orangutans here, Junior looks the perfectly feral ambassador for his species, the Great Red Ape, a piece of the jungle caged but never conquered.
In fact, Junior, or Atjeh as he is more formally named, is an entirely zoo-made creation, a version of orangutan that almost certainly would never be found in the forests of Indonesia, the ape's native home.
He and about 80 other orangutans in captivity around the country are zoo-bred crosses between two subspecies of orangutans, those originating in Borneo and those from the neighboring island of Sumatra.
They are called hybrids, or "cocktail orangutans," or simply mutts, and they are history.


Rice Beats Farrell To Gain in Playoffs
Gary Saunders scored 28 points and Tarik Kirksay chipped in 18 to lead Rice (19-4) to a 76-66 victory over Monsignor Farrell (15-8) in the opening round of the Archdiocese of New York Catholic High Schools Athletic Association playoffs at Mount St.
Michael in the Bronx yesterday.
Rice led by 11 points at the half and by as many 18 midway through the third quarter.
John Olsen was Farrell's leading scorer with 25 points.


On Firing Line in Mexico, Attorney General Tackles 'a Very Heavy Load'
After practicing law for almost half of his 41 years, Antonio Lozano Gracia was hardly a stranger to the dark side of the Mexican judicial system.
But if he had any questions about what he was getting into as Attorney General, it did not take long for them to be answered.
On Christmas Eve, the man whom Mr.
Lozano had appointed director of the Federal Judicial Police failed to show up for a meeting about their plans to fight corruption and drug-trafficking interests within the force.
Aides to Mr.
Lozano later concluded that the official, who fell briefly into a coma, had been poisoned by his own bodyguards.


Both Sides in Shabazz Case Say Tapes Prove Their Point
In dueling motions filed yesterday in Minneapolis, Federal prosecutors and lawyers for Qubilah Bahiyah Shabazz released excerpts from secretly recorded telephone conversations she had last year with a former classmate she is accused of trying to hire to kill Louis Farrakhan, the head of the Nation of Islam.
The tapes were made by the Federal Bureau of Investigation with the cooperation of the former high school classmate, Michael Fitzpatrick, a longtime Government informant with legal troubles of his own who was posing as a hit man.
The arrest last month of Ms.
Shabazz, the second oldest daughter of Malcolm X, has stirred ghosts of the 1960's and resurrected some of the passions of that era.


More Hints That Montana Will Retire
Safety DAVID WHITMORE, who came to the Kansas City Chiefs from San Francisco in the JOE MONTANA trade, said he thinks the 38-year-old quarterback is through.
"He's probably done, that's all I can say," Whitmore told WIBW-TV in Topeka, Kan.
"I talked to him last night. There's a lot of things he's real unhappy about with the organization and things of that nature." Montana has been the subject of several reports quoting unidentified sources as saying he intends to retire. (AP)


At Home (That's Prison) With Medellin's Ochoas
Behind the green camouflage watchtowers and the glinting coils of barbed wire, life at the gray cinder-block jail here seems unremarkable.
A Cindy Crawford poster hangs in the weight room.
In the workshop, three convicts in beige smocks sew saddles by hand to earn some cash.
At lunchtime, one of the three, a heavyset man with a mustache, ladles bean soup from a steaming pot, announcing with a sincere smile, "Mom cooks all our food."


Top Prospect's Bottom Line Is No Replacement Games
The request to play in replacement exhibition games has never been made, according to Derek Jeter, so he has not needed to respond.
That is not surprising because the Yankees were expected to leave their premier prospect in minor league camp to protect his reputation.
What is surprising and a bit confusing is that General Manager Gene Michael insisted that the Yankees did invite the 20-year-old shortstop to work out with replacement players at the major league camp here.
The discrepancy is irrelevant because Jeter, invitation or not, is not budging.


I.R.S. Plans a Refund Delay In a Crackdown on Fraud
Cracking down on fraud, the Internal Revenue Service will delay refunds for as many as seven million American taxpayers this year to allow time to check Social Security numbers and verify claims for the earned-income tax credit, Commissioner Margaret Milner Richardson told Congress today.
The agency has already held up refunds for at least 1.5 million taxpayers, causing hardship for many who counted on receiving the money promptly to pay rent, child care or other pressing expenses.


Witness Testifies Bronco Was at Simpson House
The maid who lived at the estate next to O. J. Simpson's mansion, testified today that she saw Mr.
Simpson's white Ford Bronco parked outside his home at the precise time prosecutors say Mr.
Simpson became a double murderer.
But even before the maid, Rosa Lopez, took the stand, her credibility, battered last week, came under renewed attack.
As video cameras rolled but the jury remained banished from the court, Mrs.
Lopez said she saw Mr.
Simpson's car as she walked her employers' golden retriever around 10:15 P.M.
She said she saw the same car -- she called it the "Bronco blanco" in Spanish -- parked at the same crooked angle she had noticed two hours earlier.
Her testimony was translated by an interpreter.


Silence Imposed in Paris Espionage Affair
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur told his top Cabinet ministers today to stop making public comments about expelling officials of the United States Embassy who had been accused of political and economic spying against France.
After a 30-minute meeting with the American Ambassador, Pamela Harriman, Mr.
Balladur's office said he had expressed the desire to see French-American relations continue to be based on "mutual trust" and "mutual respect for each other's legitimate national interests."


Keep the Board of Regents, and Keep Politics Out of Education
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 22 editorial on the New York State Board of Regents should be read for what it is: an endorsement of a political grab for power over the state education system.
School achievement in New York is improving.
For all the continuing shortcomings, the dropout rate is the lowest it has ever been; more students are taking and passing Regents exams than 10 years ago; the number of students taking and passing Advanced Placement exams has doubled; the college-going rate among high school graduates is among the highest in the nation.


Fans May Stay Home
If the 1995 baseball season is played with replacement players, owners can expect a sharp drop in attendance, though many fans will watch on television, a New York Times/CBS News poll shows.
Article, page B9.


Clubs May Just Have To Replace Fans, Too
If the baseball strike continues beyond opening day and the 1995 major league season is played with replacement players, a new poll suggests that owners can expect a sharp drop in stadium attendance while two-thirds of the fans will continue to watch games on television.
Those were among the findings of a New York Times/CBS News poll that also found broad fan support for the owners' quest for a salary cap, a narrow preference for continued negotiations over forced arbitration, a resounding rejection of Government involvement and an indication that the strike has caused an erosion of interest in a sport that had been losing fans for years.


New Picture of Who Will Get AIDS Is Dominated by Addicts
THE AIDS epidemic, continuing its demographic evolution, is becoming ever more closely tied to the drug epidemic, a new study shows.
Not only are intravenous drug users becoming infected, but so are crack addicts and other drug abusers, many of whom are women.
An extensive, unpublished analysis by researchers at the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta has found that nearly three-quarters of the 40,000 new infections with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, last year were among addicts.


Still No Budget in Jersey City
It will be at least another week before this city has a budget.
The City Council had been expected to pass its $288 million budget last night, but action was deferred after the Council eliminated $550,000 in merit raises, mostly to city workers in management jobs.


Big East Breakthrough for UConn Women
For the Connecticut women's basketball team, it's one milestone down and two to go.
Tonight, the Huskies routed Villanova, 79-54, and finished their regular season with a 26-0 record, 18-0 in the Big East.
Connecticut is the first Big East team to go undefeated in the regular season.
The Huskies' next goal is to win the conference tournament, which begins Friday night in South Orange, N.J.
Then comes the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, in which Connecticut, the nation's top-ranked team, and Tennessee, ranked second, will be the favorites.


By Design; Leather, Shapely and Pretty
Leather was hot fashion for fall and looks to be equally popular this spring.
Lots of leather jeans can be seen on the streets these days, but what's different about this clothing is that it has been feminized.
Instead of black biker jackets, these shapely styles in pretty colors can be worn into warm weather.


Arrests Made In '92 Blaze That Killed A Firefighter
Three years after a New York City fire lieutenant was killed battling a blaze in Queens, the owner of a women's clothing store in the torched building and two other men were arrested yesterday and charged with setting the fire to collect insurance money.
Officials said the difficulties of following the "paper trail" and developing evidence that would stand up in court caused the delay in bringing the indictments in the Feb. 24, 1992, blaze, in which Lieut.
Thomas A. Williams fell or was blown from a second-story window while trying to escape a sudden blast of hot smoke and gases.


Spotting Trouble, in Bulk
Thomas Blomquist can't get elected, but he still has an agenda.
Mr.
Blomquist, the founder of the New Jersey Conservative Party, who has run for governor, likes to make trouble for the Democratic and Republican state committees.
He has succeeded in making $250,000 worth for each of the parties.


Trades That Destroy Institutions
Nicholas Leeson, a 27-year-old trader, bets that Japanese stocks will rise and bankrupts a 227-year-old British investment bank, Barings, in a few weeks of unauthorized trading.
Joseph Jett, a 36-year-old trader for Kidder Peabody, fools accountants into believing that his trades of Government bonds were fabulously profitable; in fact, they were fictitious.
Treasurer Robert Citron single-handedly drives Orange County, California, into bankruptcy by betting taxpayers' money that interest rates would drop.
They rose -- and now the county is forced to cut education, medical and other services.
What allowed individual rogues to destroy, harm or humiliate venerable institutions nearly overnight?
What allowed sophisticated managers to sleep while underlings brought organizations to, or over, the brink of extinction?


Congressional Roundup: Term Limits; Republicans Trying To Find Consensus
Trying to solve a thorny political problem, House Republican leaders are quietly considering yet another proposal for some sort of term limits.
The newest measure would limit the terms of members of Congress by constitutional amendment, but it would not replace limits already enacted by a state.


Ewing Is Guaranteeing Victory Over the Magic
When he was asked about Tuesday night's showdown against the Orlando Magic, Patrick Ewing's response was as strong as his recent play.
"It's going to be a physical game," Ewing said.
"The only thing is, this time we're going to win."


Q&amp;A
Popcorn, Etc.
Q.  Why does popcorn pop? Do other foods pop?


Woman Badly Wounded By Thief at Staten I. Mall
A gunman opened fire yesterday in the parking lot of the Staten Island Mall, shooting a woman in the chest and fleeing in her car, the police said.
The midafternoon shooting left the woman fighting for her life and a quiet section of the city shaken by violence.


The Albany 2-Step: Passing Bills the Other House Hates
The New York State Senate today passed a bill reinstating the death penalty, knowing that the Assembly would not accept it.
At the same moment, the Assembly passed legislation that would cut income taxes, knowing the Senate would reject it.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BASF A.G., Ludwigshafen am Rhein, Germany, has acquired Du Pont Co.'s stake in a plastics venture in Chiba, Japan, half-owned by Idemitsu Petrochemicals, Tokyo.
The venture will be renamed Idemitsu BASF Co.


U.S. Still Presses China on Prisoners
To the Editor:
"U.S. Eases Pressure on China to Release Data on Prisoners" (news article, Feb. 21) is seriously misleading.
The United States is firmly committed to seeking a full accounting for and release of any and all prisoners incarcerated in China for nonviolent expression of their political, social or religious beliefs.


Very New York Story, Made Mostly in Toronto
Before O. J. and Nicole and not too far removed from Joey and Amy, there were Woody and Mia.
The public, it seems, must have its circuses.
And Fox Broadcasting is ever eager to meet that need.
Tonight Fox begins its presentation of "Love and Betrayal: The Mia Farrow Story." The four-hour movie ends on Thursday.
With the character of Woody Allen, this might be a quintessential New York story but, budgets being budgets, it was filmed mostly in Toronto.
It's cheaper that way, even if considerably less authentic.
And, of course, viewers are warned that certain characters have been "fictionalized and composited" and that any similarity of minor characters to real people or events is, as the lawyers say, "purely coincidental."


Marines Cover U.N.'s Pullout From Somalia
In an operation reminiscent of another landing two years ago, 1,800 United States marines began coming ashore in the moonless early morning to evacuate the last 2,500 members of a United Nations force that tried and failed to bring stability to Somalia.
The marines who landed in December 1992 as part of an American force that peaked at 26,000 troops came ashore to the glare of television lights on a beach adjacent to this one.
There was no lack of publicity because the United States was confident that a force of that size would insure the security necessary to get food to thousands of Somalis who were starving.


S.E.C. Accuses Investor Of Fleecing His Brokers
In an unusual case of an investor accused of fleecing his stockbrokers, the Securities and Exchange Commission sued an Atlanta man yesterday whose trading is said to have led to $13.5 million in losses for Wall Street.
The investor, Michael J. Morse, 52, placed orders to sell shares of stock at nine big brokerage firms, hoping that when it came time to deliver the shares to the firms, they could be acquired at lower prices, according to the complaint by the S.E.C.'s Northeast Regional Office in Manhattan.
But when the market moved against him and the stocks went up, he left the brokers with losses that should have been his own, the complaint said.


Acceptable Failure Not Seen as a Threat to Financial Systems
In closing down Barings, Britain's oldest investment banking group, the Bank of England made a difficult judgment call, analysts and economists say, deciding in effect that its failure would not threaten the health of either the British or the international financial systems nor cause heavy losses to small depositors.
This is the exact reverse of the decision taken by the United States Treasury and the International Monetary Fund in December when they organized an international rescue package for Mexico after agreeing that the peso's collapse threatened to set off a huge withdrawal of capital from emerging market economies that could slow the world's economy.


Rubin's Plan For Banking Spurs Fight
Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin touched off a vigorous lobbying and political fight today by proposing the elimination of legal barriers that have separated the nation's commercial banks, securities firms and insurance companies for decades.
Big businesses in the three industries welcomed the Administration's call for Congress to pass legislation essentially abolishing the Glass-Steagall Act that forbids banks and securities firms to merge.
They said it would help to make them more efficient and more internationally competitive.
But small banks and insurance agents strongly criticized the plan as a threat to their operations and bad public policy.


Doubleday-Disney Accord
Doubleday Book Clubs has acquired exclusive home book club rights to all new children's books published by Disney Press and Mouse Works, two lucrative imprints of Disney Publishing, the companies announced yesterday.
Until now, Disney's books have been sold to the book clubs, like Doubleday Book Clubs and Book-of-the-Month Club, on a book-by-book basis.
The clubs sell books to members at discounted rates.


POLL FINDS PUBLIC DOUBTS KEY PARTS OF G.O.P.'S AGENDA
Eight weeks after Republicans assumed control of Congress and vowed to make the Government more responsive, Americans are dubious about central elements of the party's legislative agenda on issues that include welfare, crime, military spending and the Federal budget deficit, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
Republicans are generally more supportive than Democrats and independents of what the new leadership in Congress is trying to do.
But Republicans, too, express misgivings about the course taken by Speaker Newt Gingrich and his loyalists.
Most Americans believe that Congress should stress jobs and crime -- issues that have not been top priorities for Republicans this year -- and health care, which has not been on the agenda of the new Congress at all.


Uncovered Short Sales in Modest Rise on Nasdaq
The total number of shares sold short in Nasdaq trading but not yet covered rose a modest 1.3 percent in the month that ended on Feb. 8, the National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday.
During the same period, uncovered short sales on the New York Stock Exchange rose 5 percent.
The number of shares borrowed and sold short but not covered rose to 749.9 million, from 740.4 in January.
Short interest in small stocks peaked last August at 849.1 million, and had declined steadily until last month.


Uncovered Short Sales in Modest Rise on Nasdaq
The total number of shares sold short in Nasdaq trading but not yet covered rose a modest 1.3 percent in the month that ended on Feb. 8, the National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday.
During the same period, uncovered short sales on the New York Stock Exchange rose 5 percent.
The number of shares borrowed and sold short but not covered rose to 749.9 million, from 740.4 in January.
Short interest in small stocks peaked last August at 849.1 million, and had declined steadily until last month.


CHRONICLE
CHARLIE WATTS, the Rolling Stones drummer, has paid $740,000 for an Arabian stallion from Australia, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Marion Atkinson of the Simeon stud farm in Sydney said the price was a record for the breed in Australia.
She said Mr.
Watts and his wife, Shirley, bought the horse, Simeon Sadik, after seeing him on a video.
Mr.
Watts will see him live next month when the Stones tour Australia, and then the stallion will be shipped to his stud farm in England. ?&gt;NADINE BROZAN


Sullivan Advances in High Court
The Supreme Court cleared the way yesterday for a new trial in the antitrust lawsuit by WILLIAM H. SULLIVAN, the former owner of the New England Patriots, against the N.F.L.
The court turned down the N.F.L.'s argument that it could not be sued for refusing to let Sullivan sell stock in his team to the public. (AP)


How France Shaped New Africa
When Jacques Foccart, one of France's most secretive statesmen, broke his legendary silence with a newly published memoir, one of his main goals, it seems, was to shed the image that he had long headed a potent network of informants, henchmen and spies in former French territories in Africa.
Instead, for all his denials, what emerges from the book about the man who was among Charles de Gaulle's top aides is a picture of a master puppeteer.
The account indicates that his seemingly unchecked powers in shaping the former French empire in Africa in the postcolonial era surpass even those imagined by ardent critics of French behavior in the third world.


Suspension Ended for Rockets' Maxwell
Houston guard VERNON MAXWELL was reinstated by the N.B.A. yesterday after a 10-game suspension for going into the stands and striking a fan.
Maxwell can play tonight at Dallas. (AP)


A 'Rosenkavalier' as Mature as the Marschallin
The Metropolitan Opera's near-ancient production of "Der Rosenkavalier" wears well.
The scuff marks are apparent; one notes paint that was certainly brighter 26 years ago.
But listeners at Friday night's revival may have actually noted something new in this worn-at-the-edges decor.
In other words, time adds, not subtracts.
Patina serves as metaphor.
Implied seediness of scene signals a kind of knowing cynicism toward an 18th-century German culture that had a lot of trouble separating pomp from vulgarity.
I would dare to guess that other aspects of Friday's performance were brighter and fresher than they were in the 1969 original.
Have the Met orchestra and its conductor James Levine, for example, ever made more elegantly sensuous music than this?
Strauss's score scarcely conceals the carnal luxury and self-indulgent tenderness beneath its thin layers of decorum.
The soaring trumpet figure at the end of a long evening did grate to a screech, but noting the orchestra's four and a quarter hours of heavy-duty playing, the listener was prone to forgive.


Arts Audiences Are Up, Thanks to Endowment
To the Editor:
Re "N.E.A. Hysteria, on Both Sides" (Op-Ed, Feb. 21): Alice Goldfarb Marquis attempts to present herself as the moderate voice of reason in the Federal arts financing debate.
She presents an argument that the National Endowment for the Arts is "waning in relevance."


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


Shaken American Investors Leaving Investment Pools
The collapse of the British investment bank Barings P.L.C. shook some American investors yesterday, as shares of two investment pools managed by Barings dropped sharply in early trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
And the Vanguard Group, which had planned to open a new mutual fund later this week that would have been advised by Barings, delayed the introduction.
Vanguard will wait until spring, "just so we can get clear how things shake out with the whole Barings situation," said John J. Brennan, Vanguard's president.


What Makes Rush Limbaugh Tick So Loudly
It is the time of the Limbaugh in the land, and tonight "Frontline" offers a portrait of the biggest thing on talk radio.
The hour begins with a lonely lad in Cape Girardeau, Mo., and ends with the Republican Party victory in November, which is here credited largely to the host with the most: 20 million listeners a week plus a television show, two best-selling books, his image lording over Times Square, a commercial for The New York Times and the courtship of aspiring Presidential candidates.
Given the left-leaning reputation of "Frontline" and the muckraking programs the producer, Stephen Talbot, has done for the Center for Investigative Reporting, one might have expected a good old hatchet job.
But this chronicle of Rush Limbaugh's career, though far from celebratory, is appreciative of the man's broad appeal and his talent with a microphone.


Meggett Gets Giants' Offer And Hampton Urges a Deal
On the day the Giants made their latest contract proposal to the unrestricted free agent David Meggett, one of the most respected players on the team made a plea to the Giants.
Running back Rodney Hampton said the Giants must sign Meggett.
"It would be a big loss for us not to have him," he said.
Meggett received a proposal from the Giants last night.
No specifics were available since Giants General Manager George Young doesn't comment on negotiations and Meggett's agents would not talk about any offer.
However, the deal is probably in the four-year range and worth $1.6 million to $1.8 million a season.
Meggett is looking for about $2 million a year.


Results Plus
N.H.L.
Penguins Score 7 in Period The Pittsburgh Penguins blew apart a matchup of the National Hockey League's best teams with seven goals in the second period last night.
Luc Robitaille had two goals and two assists as the Penguins beat the Quebec Nordiques, 7-5.
The Penguins erased a 2-0 deficit with their second-period blitz, which set a team record for goals in one period of a road game.
John Cullen, Shawn McEachern, Larry Murphy, Len Barrie and Jaromir Jagr had the other goals for the Penguins. (AP) BRUINS 2, SENATORS 0: Boston's rookie goalie, Blaine Lacher, stopped 28 shots to record his second N.H.L. shutout in 11 career games and Cam Neely and Dave Reid scored in the visiting Bruins' victory over Ottawa. (AP) N.B.A.
Hornets Edge SuperSonics  Alonzo Mourning had 34 points and Muggsy Bogues scored 4 of Charlotte's last 5 points in the Hornets' 116-114 victory over the Seattle SuperSonics last night in Tacoma, Wash.
Gary Payton led the Sonics with 32 points, while Shawn Kemp added 23 points and 8 rebounds. (AP) JAZZ 101, LAKERS 95: Karl Malone had 30 points and 10 rebounds as the Utah Jazz beat the injury-riddled Los Angeles Lakers to become the only N.B.A. team to reach 40 victories each of the last 12 seasons.
John Stockton had 19 points and 14 assists in Utah's 18th road victory.
Elden Campbell led Los Angeles with 25 points and Vlade Divac finished with 16 points and 11 rebounds. (AP) HIGH SCHOOLS Mortimer Wins Two-Mile John Mortimer of Londonderry, N.H., won the two-mile run in 9 minutes 11.6 seconds, his fastest time indoors, at the 59th annual Eastern States Interscholastic Indoor Track and Field Championships last night at the 168th Street Armory.
Mortimer, the national indoor 2-mile titleholder, ran away from his New Hampshire rival, Matt Downin of Pinkerton, the national cross-country champion, over the final three laps.
RICE, ALL HALLOWS WIN PLAYOFF GAMES: Gary Saunders scored 28 points and Tarik Kirksay chipped in 18 to lead Rice (19-4) to a 76-66 victory over Monsignor Farrell (15-8) in the opening round of the Archdiocese of New York Catholic High Schools Athletic Association playoffs at Mount St.
Michael in the Bronx yesterday.
John Olsen was Farrell's leading scorer with 25 points.
Rice will take on St.
Raymond in the archdiocese semifinals tomorrow.
In the second game of the doubleheader, All Hallows (9-14) beat Cardinal Hayes (9-14), 60-57.
Ken Harley scored 21 points and Rhese Gibson 16 to propel All Hallows into the archiocese semifinals against top-seeded LaSalle.
YACHTING Frenchman Sets Record It was a triumphant finish yesterday in Punta del Este, Uruguay, for the French solo sailor Christophe Auguin.
Not only had he arrived first among 13 solo sailors in the third leg of the BOC race around the world, but he had done it in a record 29 days 16 hours from Sydney, Australia.
With one leg left to go, a 6,000-mile passage back to Charleston, S.C., Auguin is in first place over all.


Lawyer's Son Drowns During Driving Lesson as Car Plunges Into Water
The deserted parking lot at Compo Beach is a favorite practice ground for beginning drivers in winter, and on Sunday morning it attracted Thomas P. Puccio, the prominent defense lawyer, and his 16-year-old son, Matthew, who was visiting him for the weekend.
But a misturn during the lesson apparently led to a common beginner's mistake -- stepping on the accelerator instead of the brake -- and their Mercedes-Benz station wagon plunged down an embankment into the waters of a yacht basin.
Mr.
Puccio, not wearing his seat belt, escaped when pressure blew out a window of the sinking car.
His son, wearing his seat belt, was trapped behind the steering wheel and drowned.


Russia Reveals More Art Taken From Nazis
Russia today revealed another small but stunning portion of the artistic booty plundered from Nazi Germany by the Soviet army and hidden away for half a century, including major works by El Greco, Goya, Tintoretto, Veronese, Renoir, Degas and Lucas Cranach the Elder.
The exhibit of 63 paintings and drawings at the Pushkin Museum of Fine Art, which is open to the public until July 16, was prepared in secrecy, and not even the German Embassy had any idea of its contents until it was opened to the press today.


A Cowgirl Explores Wider Cultural Territory
Pat Cannon, a tap-dancer in love with square dances, Western two-steps and the disco dances of her own generation, offers a creative mix of American folk forms and Broadway pizazz with her Foot and Fiddle Dance Company.
The troupe's latest program, seen on Saturday night at Playhouse 91, is typically warm-spirited and distilled.
Capsule versions of country dances alternate with show-stopping solos by an exuberant cast, and a witty self-mocking touch comes from the fine musicians.
An evening with Foot and Fiddle guarantees a good time for dancers and audiences alike.


Japanese Use English To Say the Unsayable
To the Editor:
One of the practical uses of the adaptation of English words in the Japanese language is that it allows the Japanese to discuss subjects that are awkward or that have had little relevance to Japan's traditional, Confucian culture ("Japan's Favorite Import From America: English," news article, Feb. 21).


